24/03/2025 Covert policing - Guidance overview https://www.college.police.uk/guidance/covert-policing/covert-policing-guidance-overview Page


Covert policing - Guidance overview


This page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published
14 July 2015 Covert policing 0 mins read
There are currently two modules of APP that sit within the covert area of policing:  undercover policing
 assisting offender debriefing

Tags

Covert policing
Journal of Affairs
Cornell Policy Group
























Issue XXII, Fall 2024. Cornell University
Table of Contents
FALL 2024 CORE EXECUTIVE BOARD MEMBERS	3
FALL 2024 EDITORS	4
FALL 2024 CENTER DIRECTORS	5
EDITOR’S NOTE	7
DOMESTIC POLICY	8
Pre-Release Earnings Program: Providing Incarcerated Individuals a Financial Safety Net for Reintegration	Amani Agrawal 9
De-escalating the War on Terror: Governing “Secret Wars” and Expanding Veteran Treatment	Rachel Baron 13
The Right to Read: Combatting Book Bans in the Federal Prison System	Elizabeth Fine 17
Federally Mandating Insurance for Firearms	Celia Holden 20
Cutting the Head off the Snake: Decentralizing the House of Representatives	Cole Laudenslager 23
Reducing Recidivism Rates Through Mandatory Rehabilitation Programs	Pari Patel 27
Banning Checkpoint Stops to Reduce Racial Profiling and Enhance Privacy	Avery Prince 31
Family First: A Call for Mandatory Paid Family Leave	Emily Snider 34
Guaranteeing Flexibility for Employees on Election Day	Samuel Stille 37
ECONOMIC POLICY	40
A Structure to Dig On: Transitioning to Underground Direct Current Power	Carson Appel 41
Using Shared Appreciation Mortgages to Improve Homeownership Trends	Nathaniel Cain 45
Future-Proofed! Federal Automatic IRA for an Easy Retirement	Simone Chan 48
Community Development Financial Institutions and Economic Growth in New York’s I-90 Corridor	an Gilenson 51
Expanding the Internal Revenue Code to Foster Employee Ownership in Private Equity and Venture Capital Pranav Jaganathan 55 Pathways to Mobility: Affordable Public Transportation for Low-Income NYC Residents	Aryan Shah 58
EDUCATION POLICY	62
Eliminating Mandated Seniority-Based Teacher Layoffs in New York State to Ensure Educational Equity	Reagan Allvin 63
Revamping Federal Mentorship Programs to Address ‘Hidden Curricula’ in Higher Education	Danielle Berkowitz 66
Combatting the School-to-Prison Pipeline: Removing Police Presence from New York City Public Schools..Jaiden Fisher-Dayn 69 How Universal Pre-K Threatens Child Care Accessibility: A Case for Mixed Delivery	Claudia Nesin 73
Securing Financial Futures: A Proposal for Financial Literacy Education	Ben Nusbaum 77
Incorporating Culturally Responsive Teaching into School to Increase Academic Success	Sejal Sekhar 81
Addressing the Special Education Teacher Shortage: Retention, Job Satisfaction, and Burnout	Abigail Silverman 84
Excellence, Equity, and Enrichment: Spreading the Schoolwide Enrichment Model in Broward County	Sanshray Singh 88
ENVIRONMENTAL & TECHNOLOGY POLICY	91
Agricultural Solutions to Water Resource Issues in the American Southwest	William Dignam 92
Unlocking the Potential of New York City’s Vacant and Underutilized Lots	Noah Duguma 95
Growing Towards Equity: Tackling Food Desserts and Emissions through Community Gardens	Alix Kerebel 98
Regulating Personalized Pricing in the Big Data Era: Toward a Fair Market Framework	Thej Khanna 101
Unmasking the Digital Deception: Combatting Deepfake Misinformation in Politics	Kashyap Rajesh 105
Dual-Use Solar for New York: a Win-Win for Energy Development and Agriculture	Harrison Sachs 109
Essential Car Service: Renewing America’s Commitment to Rural Communities Through EV Charging	Jack Turner 112
Building Resilience through a Climate Change Superfund	Connor Weiss 115
FOREIGN POLICY	118
Foreign Doctors Can Save Italy’s Vulnerable Healthcare System	Zaki Ahmad 119
Instability and Insecurity in Pakistan: Addressing Police Brutality and Corruption	Zain Ali 124
Restoring ASEAN Principles: Why Expelling Myanmar Could End the Junta’s Oppressive Reign	Naina Kalra 129
Mexico President Claudia Sheinbaum Must Reform Her National Guard	Jorge Mariño 133
Breaking the Cycle: Strengthening Police Response to Domestic Violence in Kyrgyzstan	Olivia Pham 136
HEALTHCARE POLICY	141
Care for Colorectal Cancer: Establishing Self-Service FIT Kiosks to Diminish Racial Inequities	Arjun Anugole 142
Addressing Florida’s Hidden Epidemic in Polypharmacy	Tanirika Choudhry 146
Creating an International Recruitment Program to Increase Clinical Specialist Return to Ireland	Zoë O'Halloran 150
Audit for Equity: Enhancing Accountability Across New Jersey’s Harm Reduction Services	Kimia Shahriyar 153
FALL 2024 CORE EXECUTIVE BOARD MEMBERS
Gary Wu ‘26, Co-President
Gary is a junior studying Policy Analysis and Management with minors in Business and Law & Society. He joined the Economics Center his freshman year and has since served as the Economics Center Director and now Co- President of CPG. Gary’s policy interests lie in the intersection of law, economics, data privacy, and the healthcare industry. Outside of CPG, Gary’s a Senior Research Assistant for the Labor Dynamics Institute and is conducting an independent research project as a Rawlings Cornell Presidential Scholar. After his undergrad, Gary plans on attending law school with a focus on healthcare and data privacy law.

Isabel Lee ‘26, Co-President
Isabel is a junior studying Health Care Policy with a minor in Philosophy. She was an Environment and Technology analyst for Spring 2023 and served as the center’s director the following 2023-2024 school year. As for her policy interests, Isabel is interested in the intersection between healthcare and technology policies, especially regarding EMS health technology.
Keten Abebe ‘27, Director of Internal Affairs
Keten is sophomore at the Jeb E. Brooks School of Public Policy majoring in Public Policy. She is also pursuing three minors respectively in International Relations, Inequality Studies and Law and Society. She joined CPG in Fall 2023 as an analyst for the Foreign Policy Center and currently serves as CPG’s Director of Internal Affairs. Keten’s policy interests lie in the field of International Affairs, specifically within sustainability, human rights advocacy, international law, and the intersection between racial/gender disparities and policy. Outside of CPG, Keten is the Vice President of New Member Development for the Black Ivy Pre-Law Society, an Institute of Politics and Global Affairs Scholar, a Brooks School course assistant and a Cornell Tradition’s Fellow. She also conducts legal review and sustainable development projects as a Research Analyst for Regenerative Africa Consulting.

Ava Boris ‘27, Director of External Affairs
Ava is a Sophomore studying Public Policy and International Relations at Cornell University. As a member of CPG Ava serves as an analyst for the Healthcare Center and the Director of External Affairs for the organization. Ava has focused her studies on understanding national security issues through the lens of gender and interpersonal relationships. Outside of CPG Ava is a member of Kappa Alpha Theta and Pi Lambda Sigma. She also is a teaching assistant for PUBPOL 2301: Introduction to Policy Analysis.

Lilia Mitra ‘26, Advocacy Director
Lilia is a junior studying Health Care Policy in the Brooks School of Public Policy. She joined CPG in Fall 2023 as an analyst in the Healthcare Center and now serves as Advocacy Director. Lilia’s policy interests include eliminating health disparities, protecting access to reproductive care, and improving public education. Outside of CPG, Lilia is a member of Phi Delta Epsilon and Tri Delta and works as an LSC organic chemistry tutor.
Grace Chen ‘24, New Member Educator
Grace is a senior, majoring in Policy Analysis and Management in the Brooks School of Public Policy. She joined CPG in Fall 2021 as an analyst for the Economic Center and has previously served as the Economic Center Director and the Co-President. Grace’s policy interests lie within the economic analysis of social welfare programs, policing and racial discrimination, and education. Outside of CPG, Grace is in Social Business Consulting, Asian American InterVarsity, and is a pre-doctorate fellow for Professor Daniela Scur in Dyson. She also loves to dance, bake, and blog.
Sahithi Jammulamadaka ‘25, New Member Educator
Sahithi is a senior, majoring in Policy Analysis and Management in the Brooks School of Public Policy. She joined CPG as an analyst for the Economic Center in Spring 2022. She previously served as Assistant Center Director for the Economics Center before her current role as one of the New Member Educators. Her policy interests lie in
education and housing policy, specifically in researching creative financing opportunities in those fields. Outside of CPG Sahithi is in International Business Consulting, Cornell Undergraduate Economic Review, a teaching assistant for both PUBPOL 2301 and INFO 1200, and a member of a dance team.
Franklin Zheng ‘25, Senior Advisor
Franklin is a senior studying Information Science with minors in International Relations and German Studies. He joined CPG in Fall 2021 as an analyst in the Center for Environmental and Technology Policy and served as the Editor-in-Chief from 2022 to 2024. Outside of CPG, Franklin conducts research on global police force violence in the Gender and Security Sector Lab and works on artificial intelligence integration in the open-source intelligence cycle at USCENTCOM.





FALL 2024 EDITORS

Henry Han ‘26, Editor-in-Chief
Henry is a junior, majoring in Industrial and Labor Relations at the ILR School. He joined CPG in Fall 2023 as an analyst for the Center of Environmental and Technology Policy and now serves as the Editor-in-Chief after previously serving as Assistant Center Director of Environmental and Technology Policy. Henry is interested in labor, electoral, and agriculture policies, pursuing these interests as a research fellow with the Worker Institute on the Labor Action Tracker and serving as Junior Representation on the ILR Student Government Association. Henry is also the Director of Publications for the Scheinman Conflict Resolution Club.
Rachel Baron ‘27, Associate Editor
Rachel is a junior studying Government, with a minor in International Relations. She has been with CPG’s Domestic Center since Fall 2023, and now serves as Associate Editor and Assistant Center Director of Domestic Policy. She’s interested in a wide range of policy topics, all centered around how domestic policy can affect human rights on a global scale. Beyond CPG, Rachel is an undergraduate scholar for the Institute of Policy and Global Affairs, an editor for the Cornell International Affairs Review, a brother of Phi Alpha Delta, and a sister in Delta Delta Delta.

Austin Grattan ‘26, Associate Editor
Austin is a junior studying Health Care Policy with a minor in LGBT Studies. He joined CPG in Fall 2023 as an analyst in the Healthcare Center and now serves as Associate Editor in Chief. Austin’s policy interests include health insurance access, medical education, social determinants of health, and LGBTQ+ health disparities. Outside of CPG, Austin is a member of Alpha Iota Gamma and is a TA for PUBPOL 1111. After graduation, Austin plans to pursue a PhD and eventually be a fellow at a think tank, work in the government, or enter academia.
Isabela Wilson ‘26, Associate Editor
Isabela is a junior pursuing a Bachelor of Arts in Government with minors in International Relations, Law & Society, and East Asian Studies with a focus on the Korean peninsula. She joined Cornell Policy Group in Fall 2023 as a Foreign Policy Analyst and currently serves as an Associate Editor and Assistant Center Director of Foreign Policy. Her policy interests include South Korean policy with focuses on immigration, education, and the Korean diaspora. Outside CPG, she is also involved in The Cornell International Affairs Review and Pi Lambda Sigma (POLIS).
FALL 2024 CENTER DIRECTORS
Elliot Serna ‘27, Center Director for Domestic Policy
Elliott is a student at Cornell University’s Jeb E. Brooks School of Public Policy studying Public Policy with a minor in Urban and Regional Studies. Elliott serves as Center Director of CPG’s Domestic Policy Center, supporting the Center’s work at the fore of all topics touching US domestic policy. Outside of CPG, Elliott is a student researcher working on housing policy research with the Brooks School’s Senior Associate Dean of Public Engagement, Dr. Jamila Michener, and economics replication work with Cornell’s Labor Dynamics Institute, with a particular research interest in community development and administrative reform.
Rachel Baron ’27, Assistant Center Director for Domestic Policy
Rachel is a junior studying Government, with a minor in International Relations. She has been with CPG’s Domestic Center since Fall 2023, and now serves as Associate Editor and Assistant Center Director of Domestic Policy. She’s interested in a wide range of policy topics, all centered around how domestic policy can affect human rights on a global scale. Beyond CPG, Rachel is an undergraduate scholar for the Institute of Policy and Global Affairs, an editor for the Cornell International Affairs Review, a brother of Phi Alpha Delta, and a sister in Delta Delta Delta.

Alice Lee ‘26, Center Director for Economic Policy
Alice is a junior, majoring in Policy Analysis and Management with an intended minor in Applied Economics. She joined CPG as an economic policy analyst in Fall 2023, and now serves as the Economic Center Director. Alice’s policy interests include housing rights, racial disparities in economic mobility, and social welfare programs in general.

Nathaniel Cain ‘27, Assistant Center Director for Economic Policy
Nathaniel is a sophomore, majoring in Policy Analysis and Management. He joined CPG in Fall 2023, and he is most interested in consumer protection policy, macroeconomic policy, and housing policy. Outside of CPG, he is the Head Teaching Assistant for the introductory public policy course at Cornell, a research assistant within the ILR School, a member of a student consulting organization, and a DJ for WVBR.

Sejal Sekhar ‘27, Center Director for Education Policy
Sejal is a sophomore, majoring in Public Policy in the Jeb E. Brooks School of Public Policy with plans of minoring in Business and Law & Society. She joined CPG in Fall 2023 and is interested in researching educational inequalities and creating policies that address them. Outside of CPG, Sejal is a brother of Cornell's Kappa Alpha Pi Pre-Law Fraternity, a board member of Community Partnership Funding Board, and a dancer on Cornell's competitive Bhangra Team.

Danielle Berkowitz ‘27, Assistant Center Director for Education Policy
Danielle Berkowitz is a sophomore studying public policy at the Jeb E. Brooks School of Public Policy, with intended minors in Law and Society and Business. She joined CPG in the Fall 2023 as an analyst for the Education Center and now serves as Assistant Education Center Director. Danielle's policy interests focus on addressing education inequality, specifically advancing equitable resource access and creating policies that effectively support underrepresented communities.

Krislyn Michel ‘27, Center Director for Environmental & Technology Policy
Krislyn Michel is a Public Policy major with an interest in specializing in environmental, data/technology, and social policy. She is also pursuing two minors respectively in Inequality Studies alongside Law and Society. She joined CPG in Fall 2023 and is interested in equitable approaches pollution, environmental racism, and consumer data protection. Outside of CPG, she is a member of various student dance groups, a campaign fellow for Students4NY,
and serves as a student ambassador for the Jeb E. Brooks School of Public Policy. In her free time, she enjoys thrifting, analyzing film and media, attending concerts, and cooking.

Jack Turner ’26, Assistant Center Director for Environmental & Technology Policy
Jack is a junior majoring in Public Policy, and joined CPG in Fall 2023. He is most interested in the intersection of transportation and infrastructure policy aimed at improving mobility for all. Outside of CPG, Jack loves to spend time outdoors, especially on a bike or through running. He is especially passionate about long-distance running and can frequently be found at the Cornell Running Club which he is the Co-VP of, or working in Rhodes Hall on a CUSD project team

Bingsong Li ‘26, Center Director for Foreign Policy
Bingsong Li is a junior studying Government and Information Science. Joining CPG as a foreign policy analyst in Spring 2022 and becoming Center Director in Spring 2023, Bing is fascinated by the intersection between foreign policy and technology. Bing conducts computational social sciences research in Bowers CIS and can also be found in Cornell Writing Centers, POLIS, and the Translator Interpretor Program.

Olivia LaBonte ‘26, Co-Assistant Center Director for Foreign Policy
Olivia is a junior, majoring in Government in the College of Arts and Sciences. She joined CPG in Fall 2023 as an analyst for the Center of Foreign Policy and now serves as the Co-Assistant Center Director for Foreign Policy.
Olivia is interested in human rights, atrocity prevention, and security policy. Outside of CPG, she is a member of the Cornell University Parole Initiative

Krystlove Yeboah ‘27, Co-Assistant Center Director for Foreign Policy
Krystlove is Co-Assistant Center Director for Foreign Policy. She is a sophomore in the College of Arts and Sciences majoring in Government and Sociology. Outside of CPG, she is a Research Fellow for the Brooks School of Public Policy’s Center for Global Democracy and a Student Career Advisor. Her policy interests include civic engagement and economic development in Sub-Saharan Africa

Kaitlyn Z Varriale ‘25, Center Director for Healthcare Policy
Kaitlyn is a senior, majoring in Healthcare Policy in the Brooks School of Public Policy. She joined CPG in Fall 2022 as an analyst for the Center of Healthcare Policy and now serves as the Healthcare Center Director. Kaitlyn is interested in pioneering and managing a more equitable, efficient, and high-quality healthcare system and strategically pairing health justice and optimal operations through an administrator’s lens.

Zoë O'Halloran ‘27, Assistant Center Director for Healthcare Policy
Zoë O'Halloran is a sophomore in the Jeb E. Brooks School of Public Policy studying Health Care Policy on a pre- medical track. She joined CPG in Spring 2024 as a Healthcare Policy Analyst and now serves as the Assistant Center Director for the Healthcare Policy Center. Zoë’s policy interests include the regulation of pharmaceutical development and international healthcare policy. Outside of CPG, Zoë is the Treasurer of the Cornell Chapter of The Diabetes Link and a member of a pre-professional chemistry fraternity. She is also an undergraduate research student in the Shaw Lab.
Editor’s Note:

Dear Reader,

On behalf of the Cornell Policy Group, I am excited to publish the twenty-second edition of the Journal of Affairs, the successor of the former Roosevelt Review.
I have had the pleasure of editing and crafting this journal during my first semester as editor-in-chief after two years under the previous editor-in-chief, Franklin Zheng. With his guidance and under new executive leadership, Cornell Policy Group wrote thirty-nine policy proposals ranging from a variety of policy fields, including but not limited to agriculture and electoral reform. Each analyst presented original, innovative solutions based on rigorous research to niche and broad-ranging issues, with each center presenting proposals personal to the analysts. Our incoming class of new analysts, the most selective class of Cornell Policy Group, has only added to the originality and new perspectives we continually seek to add to our ever-evolving group. We have added three associate editors to the editing process to oversee these new proposals and people to strengthen writing quality and standardization. With the help of our new member educators leading the new analyst training program, we can teach our new class critical writing and professional practices within and beyond Cornell Policy Group.

After a successful semester of effective restructuring with additional members, I have complete faith that our group is ready to continue our success. I am confident all of our members will thrive as we continue to formulate solutions to problems in a constantly changing world. I extend my most sincere gratitude to everyone who has supported the Cornell Policy Group and this publication. I look forward to continuing my role as editor-in-chief for another semester as we prepare the twenty-third edition in Spring 2025. I hope you enjoy our policy proposals from this semester.
Sincerely,
Henry Han Editor-in-Chief


Domestic Policy
Director: Elliott Serna Assistant Director: Rachel Baron
Analysts: Amani Agrawal, Elizabeth Fine, Celia Holden, Cole Laudenslager, Pari Patel, Avery Prince, Emily Snider, and Samuel Stille
Pre-Release Earnings Program: Providing Incarcerated Individuals a Financial Safety Net for Reintegration
By Amani Agrawal, aa2747@cornell.edu
To reduce recidivism and foster equitable reintegration, New York State should implement a Pre-Release Earnings Program to provide incarcerated individuals with liveable wages for their work in prison, and thus an accessible financial safety net upon their release.

Background
The United States incarcerates 1.2 million people in state and federal prisons, of which 33,793 are incarcerated in New York State (NYS).1 In the US, two- thirds of these incarcerated individuals also work, performing jobs similar to those of unincarcerated individuals.2 However, the legal protections afforded to these workers differ significantly based on their incarcerated status. The Thirteenth Amendment of the US Constitution protects unincarcerated individuals from unethical labor practices yet explicitly omits those “held in confinement due to criminal conviction.”2 The Fair Labor Standards Act further permits unethical practices via their definitions of employees and employers.3 Consequently, incarcerated workers face harsh working conditions, with more than 76 percent of inmates reporting they are forced to either work or face solitary confinement.2
In US prisons, inmates are assigned either industry or non- industry work. The former refers to jobs that involve manufacturing signs or furniture, while the latter refers to prison support jobs in the maintenance sector.4 In NYS, non- industry jobs, which pay less than
industry jobs at an hourly wage between $0.10 to $0.33, are the most common.3 These wages come from less than one percent of the state’s correctional budget.2 Additionally, non-industry wages in NYS are significantly lower than the nationwide incarcerated average of $0.86 per hour.5
Such non-industry wages lead to financial instability that drastically affects incarcerated individuals during incarceration and reintegration. With their current meager wages, the 95 percent of incarcerated individuals returning to their communities lack financial safety, increasing their risk of recidivism, as full-time incarcerated workers earn approximately $2000 annually — far below the $35,000 needed to cover a modest cost of living in NYS.6,7 Therefore, the NYS non-industry wages are insufficient for most prisoners supporting their families.
Policy Idea
NYS should implement a pre-release earnings program that provides individuals incarcerated for non-violent crimes with living wages in the form of state minimum wage. This program would be implemented after an individual is granted parole, limiting the program’s scope while increasing
its financial feasibility. Focusing on non-violent offenders prioritizes lower-risk individuals, making the initiative affordable and appealing to the public. The American Correctional Association and the Department of Corrections and Community Supervision (DOCCS) must ensure fair wages by aligning prison labor pay with living costs.
Additionally, non-violent inmates granted parole would be required to establish mandatory savings accounts — with a minimum of 80 percent of inmates’ total wages, considering their minimal financial responsibilities
— which they can access upon release. While some may argue that incarcerated individuals do not deserve higher wages due to their criminal record, fair pay reduces reoffending rates and supports successful reintegration, ultimately enhancing public safety.

Policy Analysis
Empirical evidence supports financial stability’s role in reducing recidivism rates.9 Research at the University of Southern California (USC) reveals that economic stability is directly correlated to reduced recidivism as criminal behavior is closely linked to income levels.9 Beyond USC, College Bound Dorchester, a Boston-based
non-profit, has given those with a criminal record in Richmond, California, a $400 weekly stipend.10 Over the next seven years, the city saw a decrease of over 50 percent in its homicide rate, with research suggesting a causal link to the stipend program.10 Both USC’s research and the Dorchester program exemplify the correlation between financial stability and reduced recidivism.
Additionally, investing in living wages for incarcerated individuals could be cost-effective as studies show that a one percent increase in economic freedom is correlated with a 0.47 percent decrease in recidivism.11 With annual housing costs at $60,000 to
$70,000 per inmate, reducing recidivism and lowering the number of inmates is cost-effective.12,13 Moreover, since incarcerated individuals’ wages are subject to deductions that prisons retain with federal, non-incarcerated taxpayer money, paying inmates a livable wage could reduce the financial burden on taxpayers, shrink the excessive profit margins of private prisons, and reduce recidivism rates.3 Reducing private prison profits is crucial because it removes the financial incentive for companies to keep incarceration rates high.14 In turn, the justice system can refocus on rehabilitation and public safety.
Further, international examples support this approach. In Norway, where recidivism rates lie at 20 percent, prisons provide incarcerated individuals with wages competitive with civilian wages.15 Incarcerated individuals are given spending freedom, exercising responsibility that translates to future reintegration. Implementing a savings account program in NYS,
would provide a similar financial foundation, directly contributing to reduced recidivism and smoother reintegration.15

Highlights
32,613 individuals are incarcerated in New York State (NYS), with two-thirds of them working in industry and non-industry jobs.1 The Thirteenth Amendment and the Fair Labor Standards Act jointly enable prison labor practices that do not meet the ethical labor standards that are upheld for non-incarcerated individuals.2
Incarcerated individuals rely on their wages to support their families and have limited financial ability to do so with an average hourly wage between $0.10 and
$0.33.3
Studies show a clear link between financial stability and reduced recidivism rates, with Norway’s implementation of fair wages for incarcerated individuals resulting in one of the lowest global recidivism rates.15
Implementing a pre-release earnings program will provide incarcerated individuals with living wages and a financial safety net following their release. Such economic stability would lead to successful reintegration and decreased recidivism.

Implementation
Successfully implementing a pre-release earnings program in NYS requires collaboration with the
Department of Corrections and Community Supervision (DOCCS), the American Correctional Association (ACA), and a shift in funding. DOCCS should play a central role in structuring, implementing, and monitoring the program.16 First, DOCCS would need to work closely with policymakers to establish fair wage standards by categorizing industry and non- industry jobs. They should specify eligibility criteria, limiting the program to those incarcerated for non-violent crimes and who have
been granted parole.17 This criterion ensures focus on individuals statistically less likely to reoffend, making the program safer and more justifiable in the eyes of the public. Second, DOCCS should establish an efficient payroll system that is integrated into NYS’s correctional system and should coordinate with third-party labor agencies to conduct periodic inspections, ensuring wage disbursement accuracy and policy compliance.
Additionally, collaboration with the ACA, a professional organization aiming to improve the justice system, and the NYS Department of Labor would align inmate work policies with industry standards, standardizing practices across facilities.18,19
The proposed program requires investing in inmate livable wages through reallocations within the $3.02 billion state correctional budget.20 This investment could prove to be controversial. Yet, by reallocating resources and exploring federal grants, the state’s budget would not be immensely burdened. Such resources would come from less essential, non-rehabilitative administrative functions and such grants would be those aimed at
reducing recidivism like those provided by the Second Chance Act.21 Approximately 20 to 30 percent of the 16,300 non-violent criminals in NYS will be granted parole and paid $15 an hour for 30 hours of weekly work.21 Given that they work for an average of two months before their release, the program’s cost ranges from $12.62 million to $18.92 million, representing only .42 percent to .63 percent of the NYS’s current correctional budget.20,22
Introducing the proposed program as law would require support from key lawmakers on criminal justice, labor, and budgeting committees. Such support could be gained by highlighting the potential to reduce the state’s $3 billion correctional budget through lower recidivism rates and improved post-release employment. Presenting concrete data on the success of pre-release programs in other countries, such as Norway, where the recidivism rate sits at 20%, along with testimonies from stakeholders would make a compelling case for the program.15
In the initial years following the program’s implementation, its success should be monitored, by the DOCCS and independent research organizations, to identify any necessary adjustments. Quantitative data, including data collection on recidivism rates, post-release employment rates, and earnings of participants, should be analyzed to assess the program’s effectiveness. Qualitative data from participants, correctional staff, and employers will also be essential to understanding the program’s impact on individual lives.
Implementing a pre-release earnings program in NYS addresses the urgent need for financial
stability among incarcerated individuals and is a critical step towards reducing recidivism, fostering successful societal reintegration, and promoting a more equitable justice system.
Works Cited
Data Collaborative for Justice. Prison Population: New York State Trends. July
2023. https://datacollaborativeforjus tice.org/wp- content/uploads/2023/07/PrisonPop. pdf.
American Civil Liberties Union. Captive Labor: Exploitation of Incarcerated Workers, p.
5. https://www.aclu.org/publication s/captive-labor-exploitation- incarcerated-workers.
Princeton Legal Journal. The Economic Impact of Prison Labor for Incarcerated Individuals and Taxpayers. https://legaljournal.princeton.edu/th e-economic-impact-of-prison-labor- for-incarcerated-individuals-and- taxpayers/.
ILR Cornell. Subminimum Wages in New York State
Prisons. https://www.ilr.cornell.ed u/carow/carow- policy/subminimum-wages-new- york-state- prisons#:~:text=While%20NYS%2 0is%20not%20among,%240.10%20 and%20%240.33%20per%20hour.
Bureau of Justice
Statistics, Prisoners in 2021, NCJ 303158 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice,
2022), https://bjs.ojp.gov/sites/g/file s/xyckuh236/files/media/document/ p21st.pdf.
Hughes, Timothy A., Doris James Wilson, and Allen J. Beck. Reentry Trends in the United States.
U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2002. Available
at: https://bjs.ojp.gov/content/pub/pdf/r eentry.pdf.
Economic Policy Institute. “EPI Updates Family Budget Calculator with Data on the Cost of Living in Every County and Major Metropolitan Area.” March 6, 2018. https://www.epi.org/press/epi- updates-family-budget-calculator- with-data-on-the-cost-of-living-in- every-county-and-major- metropolitan-area/.
New York State
Assembly. Annual Report on Wage Standards in Correctional Facilities. March 18, 2024, p, 1-
8. https://nyassembly.gov/write/upl oad/postings/2024/pdfs/20240318_ 0109548.pdf.
USC Suzanne Dworak-Peck School of Social Work. Ensuring Financial Stability for Ex-Convicts Reduces Rates of
Recidivism. https://dworakpeck.usc. edu/news/ensuring-financial- stability-for-ex-convicts-reduces- rates-of- recidivism#:~:text=These%20servic es%20foster%20economic%20stabi lity,extent%20employment%2C%E 2%80%9D%20she%20sai.
Edelman, Daniel Munczek. “Cash for Leaving Prison: A New Solution to Recidivism?” Stanford Social Innovation Review, 2017. https://doi.org/10.48558/NNZZ- FR30.
West Virginia
University. Economic Freedom and Recidivism: Evidence from US States. http://busecon.wvu.edu/phd_ economics/pdf/14-34.pdf.
Vera Institute of Justice. The Price of Prisons: What Incarceration Costs Taxpayers. New York: Vera Institute of Justice, 2017. Vera Institute of Justice. https://www.vera.org/publications/p
rice-of-prisons-what-incarceration- costs-taxpayers.
New York State Department of Corrections and Community Supervision. DOCCS 2020 Budget and Operations Report. Albany: New York State, 2020. Pages 1-4. https://doccs.ny.gov/system/files/do cuments/2021/08/community- supervision-legislative-report-2020- final.pdf.
Carl, Riley. “Private Prisons, Public Benefits? Examining Prison Privatization in the US and UK.” Harvard International Review, January 18, 2022. https://hir.harvard.edu/us-uk-prison- privatization/.
Denny, Meagan. 2016. “Norway's Prison System: Investigating Recidivism and Reintegration.” Bridges: A Journal of Student Research 10, no. 10: Article 2. Available at: https://digitalcommons.coastal.edu/ bridges/vol10/iss10/2.
New York State Department of Corrections and Community Supervision. “Re-Entry Services.” Accessed October 26, 2024. https://doccs.ny.gov/re-entry- services.
United States Sentencing Commission. Recidivism Among Federal Violent Offenders. Accessed November 25, 2024. https://www.ussc.gov/research/rese arch-reports/recidivism-among- federal-violent- offenders#:~:text=Over%2060%20 percent%20(63.8%25),during%20th e%20follow%2Dup%20period.
American Correctional Association. “About Us.” Accessed October 26, 2024. https://www.aca.org/ACA_Member
/ACA/ACA_Member/AboutUs/Abo utUs_Home.aspx.
New York State Department of Labor. "Labor Standards." Accessed November 25, 2024. https://dol.ny.gov/labor-standards-0.
New York State Assembly. Annual Report on Wage Standards in Correctional Facilities. March 18, 2024.
https://nyassembly.gov/write/upload
/postings/2024/pdfs/20240318_010 9548.pdf.
Council of State Governments Justice Center. “The Second Chance Act (SCA).” Accessed September 8, 2024. Page 20.
https://csgjusticecenter.org/?post_ty pe=publication&p=235894o
New York State Department of Corrections and Community Supervision. Under Custody Report for 2021. Albany, NY: New York State Department of Corrections and Community Supervision, April 2022.
https://doccs.ny.gov/system/files/do cuments/2022/04/under-custody- report-for-2021.pdf.
De-escalating the War on Terror: Governing “Secret Wars” and Expanding Veteran Treatment
By Rachel Baron, rlb399@cornell.edu

Amidst ongoing struggles to fund veteran rehabilitation needs at home, taxpayer dollars are instead funding secret proxy wars abroad. Heightened human rights and reporting standards are needed to limit violence abroad and divert funding toward American veteran care programs.

Background
Known as “secret wars,” at least 23 American proxy wars have been conducted as part of the War on Terror, the post 9/11 military campaign launched against international terrorist organizations.1 Codified in 2016 but in use since 2004, 10 U.S.C. §127e is a section of the U.S. Code that allows funding of up to one hundred million dollars annually for foreign militaries, militias, or individuals to conduct military operations that align with American counterterrorism goals.2 This support has been used to train, arm, and pay the salaries of non- American military actors.2
§127e is legally founded in the 2001 Authorization for the Use of Military Force (AUMF), which enables counterterrorist actions against groups responsible for or associated with the September 11th attacks, including al-Qaeda, the Taliban, al-Shabaab, and ISIS. However, §127e has been used by the Department of Defence (DoD) to falsely justify operations against unassociated groups, including Boko Haram and the Islamic State - Sinai Province.3
Congress is unable to exercise effective oversight §127e operations. The DoD reports its operations to few congressional offices, does not produce many required reports, and does not report
to either foreign relations committee.4 Further, §127e operations are exempt from Leahy law, a provision that prevents support for military units that violate human rights.4
As the War on Terror continues, veterans at home are left with little support. In January 2023, over thirty-five thousand veterans were unhoused, an increase of 7.4% from the year prior.5 Iraq and Afghanistan veterans have been diagnosed with mental disorders at a rate of 58.1%, including a 23% rate of PTSD.6,7 Although the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) provides rehabilitation programs, they do not have sufficient funding to successfully address these crises.8

Policy Idea
The US Congress should amend 10 U.S.C §127e to require
§127e operations to be subject to DoD Leahy law and mandate annual audits of Leahy law compliance. Funding provided to any operation found to violate Leahy law should be immediately terminated and diverted to the VA for rehabilitation programs of veterans who have served in Iraq or Afghanistan. In addition to current reporting to the Appropriations and Armed Services Committees, Congress should double their reporting requirements, mandating
DoD reports of §127e operations to all congressional offices at least 30 days prior to new initiatives. In order to ensure accountability and compliance, the DoD should also be held responsible for creating a biannual report to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the House Foreign Affairs Committee. Failure to adhere to reporting requirements would be grounds for funding removal and reallocation to the VA.
Policy Analysis
The DoD Leahy law prohibits DoD assistance of foreign military units that have committed a gross violation of human rights, including torture, extrajudicial killing, disappearances, and rape.9 However, exemption of §127e operations from these regulations, combined with the use of force beyond what is authorized under the 2001 AUMF, essentially nullifies Leahy law. Although most details remain confidential, §127e operations have already violated Leahy law prohibitions, including the secret employment of a Cameroonian military unit known for torture and extrajudicial killings.10 Holding §127e operations to Leahy law standards recommits American resources to complying with international and human rights law and prevents unnecessary military engagements.
Additionally, diverting funding to VA rehabilitation programs would help alleviate immense fiscal shortcomings that prevent veterans from accessing the care they are entitled to. Veterans of the Iraq and Afghanistan wars are entitled to lifelong free or low-cost medical treatment, which is estimated to cost the U.S. $600 billion to $1 trillion over the next 40 years.11 However, the VA is extremely underfunded: in July 2024, the VA reported a nearly $15 billion shortfall to Congress, $12 billion of which is needed for healthcare provisions.8 Reallocating funding for §127e operations would enhance the VA’s ability to provide healthcare treatment for veterans and deliver on their promises.
Lastly, enhancing reporting requirements for §127e operations ensures stricter congressional oversight of secretive US-sponsored violence, which subsequently holds the DoD accountable to public opinion and the law. In 2021, 68% of Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America members want to repeal or reform the 2001 and 2002 AUMFs, and 62% of Americans viewed the Afghanistan and Iraq wars as not worth fighting.12,13,14 Oversight ensures that the DoD cannot use
§127e funding for operations not authorized for attack under the 2001 AUMF.

Highlights
10 U.S.C. §127e currently allows the United States Department of Defense (DoD) to fund secret proxy wars across the world, subject to neither human rights standards nor effective reporting requirements.1,2,4
The rehabilitation needs of veterans who served in Iraq and Afghanistan include healthcare costs of up to $1 trillion over the next 40 years, and the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is already operating on a funding shortfall.8,11
Requiring §127e operations to be subject to both Leahy law and increased congressional reporting standards would reduce American human rights violations and general involvement in proxy wars, which would, in turn, deescalate the unending and unpopular War on Terror. Defunding §127e operations that violate Leahy law or are otherwise stopped due to congressional oversight and diverting such funding to the VA would help alleviate the financial strains caused by veteran rehabilitation needs and ensure all veterans may access the healthcare they are entitled to.
Implementation
The Senate and House Armed Services Committees should introduce bills to amend 10 U.S.C.
§127e and then refer them to each chamber’s Committee on Veterans’ Affairs and Committee on Foreign Affairs. This bill should hold all ongoing and future §127e operations to Leahy law standards, require an audit of ongoing §127e operations to be submitted to Congress, mandate biannual reports to the three committees in both chambers, update reporting requirements for new §127e operations, and require any funding
withheld from §127e operations to be directed to the VA.
To gain bipartisan support for successful bill passage, several hearings should be organized in each committee. These hearings should include DoD and military personnel witnesses that oversee and lead §127e operations, as well as testimony from investigatory organizations that may detail operative human rights violations. These hearings may be closed to the public in order to ensure witness honesty and transparency, avoid prioritization of media appearance from members of Congress, and prevent DoD backlash to witnesses. Strategic messaging surrounding the bill should emphasize the importance of congressional oversight and veteran rehabilitation in the country, both sufficiently bipartisan topics.15 Media outreach should serve to create public awareness and pressure congressmembers to reform DoD funding. This media campaign may be led by members of Congress in relevant committees, such as the Chairs of the Committees on Armed Services, and should emphasize visibility in national news outlets and social media.
Should opposition to the bill persist by pro-military members of Congress, non-governmental organizations should organize a grassroots lobbying campaign.
Advocacy and research groups that have shown sufficient interest in human rights vetting and veterans’ rights, including Amnesty International, Veterans of Foreign Wars, and the Brennan Center for Justice may work to spread awareness of §127e operations, promote lobbying efforts by constituents, and publicly pressure
Congress members to support human and veteran rights.2,16,17
Upon the bill’s successful passage, a DoD report on all current
§127e operations should be submitted to the House and Senate Committees on Armed Services, Veterans’ Affairs, and Foreign Affairs. In order to preserve security interests, closed hearings should be scheduled in each committee for expert witnesses from the DoD to testify on the reports, specify whether or not each operation adheres to an application of Leahy law, and present the operations’ budgets. As required under the updated code and subject to the required notice of these committees, all operations determined to violate Leahy law will be directed to be safely and promptly terminated within 30 days. All remaining funds dedicated to each canceled operation will be added to the VA’s budget in the next appropriations bill. Once in the hands of the VA, the money can be distributed between rehabilitation programs, providing veterans with the care they need and preventing future violence.
Works Cited
Star, Morning. “Documents Reveal U.S. Involved in 23 Secret Wars around the World.” People’s World, July 7, 2022. https://www.peoplesworld.org/articl e/documents-reveal-u-s-involved- in-23-secret-wars-around-the- world/.
Katherine Yon Ebright. “What Can a Secretive Funding Authority Tell Us About the Pentagon’s Use of Force Interpretations?” Brennan Center for Justice. Accessed October 18, 2024. https://www.brennancenter.org/our- work/analysis-opinion/what-can-
secretive-funding-authority-tell-us- about-pentagons-use-force.
Morgan, Wesley. “Behind the Secret U.S. War in Africa.” Politico, July 2, 2018. https://www.politico.com/story/201 8/07/02/secret-war-africa-pentagon- 664005.
Katherine Yon Ebright. “Secret War How the U.S. Uses Partnerships and Proxy Forces to Wage War Under the Radar.” The Brennan Center for Justice, November 3, 2023. https://www.brennancenter.org/our- work/research-reports/secret-war.
Sage, Debra. “Veteran Homelessness Increased by 7.4% in 2023.” VA News, December 15,
2023.
https://news.va.gov/126913/veteran
-homelessness-increased-by-7-4-in- 2023/.
Public Health. “VA.Gov.” Accessed October 18, 2024. https://www.publichealth.va.gov/epi demiology/reports/oefoifond/health- care-utilization/.
“Afghanistan/Iraq Veterans.”
Accessed October 18, 2024. https://www.research.va.gov/topics/ oef-oif.cfm#research2.
Quigley, Aidan. “Massive Veterans Budget Gap Rips Hole in Appropriations Process.” Roll Call, July 26, 2024.
https://rollcall.com/2024/07/26/mas sive-veterans-budget-gap-rips-hole- in-appropriations-process/.
U.S. Department of State. “About the Leahy Law.” U.S. Department of State, January 20, 2021. https://www.state.gov/key- topics-bureau-of-democracy- human-rights-and-labor/human- rights/leahy-law-fact-sheet/.
Turse, Nick, and Alice Speri. “Even After Acknowledging Abuses, the U.S. Continued to Employ Notorious Proxy Forces in
Cameroon.” The Intercept, March 9, 2022.
https://theintercept.com/2022/03/09/ cameroon-military-abuses-bir- 127e/.
Harvard Kennedy School. “Current and Projected Future Costs of Caring for Veterans of the Iraq and Afghanistan Wars.” Accessed October 18, 2024. https://www.hks.harvard.edu/center s/mrcbg/publications/fwp/2011-06.
Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America. “Repeal AUMFs.” August 1, 2024. https://iava.org/priorities/repeal- aumf.
Newport, Frank. “American Public Opinion and the Afghanistan Situation.” Gallup (blog), August 27, 2021.
https://news.gallup.com/opinion/pol ling-matters/354182/american- public-opinion-afghanistan- situation.aspx.
Nadeem, Reem. “A Look Back at How Fear and False Beliefs Bolstered U.S. Public Support for War in Iraq.” Pew Research Center, March 14, 2023. https://www.pewresearch.org/politi cs/2023/03/14/a-look-back-at-how- fear-and-false-beliefs-bolstered-u-s- public-support-for-war-in-iraq/.
House Committee on Veterans Affairs. “VA Committee Leaders Unveil Bipartisan Veterans Package,” May 14, 2024. https://veterans.house.gov/news/doc umentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=64 57.
VFW. “Advocacy.” Accessed November 25, 2024. https://www.vfw.org/advocacy.
“Letter to Congress on the Implementation of Leahy Law on Nigerian Security Forces.” Amnesty International USA, January 18, 2019.
https://www.amnestyusa.org/blog/le
tter-to-congress-on-the- implementation-of-leahy-law-on- nigerian-security-forces/.
The Right to Read: Combatting Book Bans in the Federal Prison System
By Elizabeth Fine, egf25@cornell.edu

Book bans within the federal prison system are inconsistent across correctional facilities and lack transparency. Congress should mandate that the Federal Bureau of Prisons publish a list of banned titles and a justification for their restriction.

Background
US federal and state prison systems manage a population of 1.2 million inmates with disproportionately low literacy rates. However, many prisoners and academics emphasize how reading while incarcerated aids in emotional development and decreases feelings of isolation.1,2 Even though the large prison population may benefit from access to literature, the widespread use of prison book bans has not attracted the same attention as the over 10,000 individual book bans schools imposed across the nation during the 2023-2024 school year.4 Among the states’ leading prison book bans is Florida, which alone bans 22,825 titles in its state prisons.5
Despite such frequent applications, only 28 states keep official records of the book titles banned behind state bars, and only 15 provide the associated reasons for doing so.6 Among states that do provide documentation, the practice is not standardized. Pennsylvania and North Carolina expunge and rebuild their lists annually, Oregon conducts the same process every three years, and Illinois publishes separate “banned” and “disapproved” book lists without defining the difference between the two.6 New York established a Facility Media Review Committee that sends monthly reports of
updated banned titles to a Central Office Media Review Committee to facilitate consistency across state correctional facilities.7 Federally, the Department of Justice currently mandates: “The Warden may not establish an excluded list of publications. This means the Warden shall review the individual publication prior to the rejection of that publication.”8 This specific prohibition of a federal banned book list presents a promising opportunity to set new standards in the federal justice system. Yet, the inconsistency in book banning and the absence of sufficient documentation of the practice obscures the literary censorship experienced by inmates and warrants policy intervention.

Policy Idea
Congress should require the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) to publish a centralized list of books banned from federal prison facilities by title with a justification for the bans. The BOP would specify the procedure and relevant criteria when adding new titles to the list, working through a committee process to regularly update the titles included and the reasons for their prohibition. This list would be readily available to mailroom managers in federal correctional facilities to evenly enforce bans while less authority is centralized
among individual staffers. The review committee would similarly oversee an appeals process for restricted materials through which prisoners can file for a reversal of a ban that restricted their access to a title.
Policy Analysis
Centralized lists of banned books promote proper standards of consistency and accountability across the many facilities within the federal prison system while safeguarding the security interests that motivate bans. The current BOP policy explicitly prohibits creating a central list of bans which may have resulted from arguments that lists indirectly promote increased censorship as books would not be re-reviewed each time they are received.8 This approach, however, ignores the importance of transparency in the censorship that already occurs. Inconsistent applications of bans across facilities make tracking book bans more complex, and the inmates’ experiences vary. Mailroom staffers responsible for designating books as permissible or restricted are included in the correctional industry’s high turnover rates in which 63% of staffers leave the prison correctional field in less than 2 years.6 This turnover presents problems for consistency in book
bans not only across facilities but over time as well.
Implementing a centralized banned titles list would standardize the enforcement of the practice within federal facilities irrespective of staff changes. Such legislation would be an incremental and alternative approach compared to previously introduced policies targeting access to literature in prisons, including the Prison Libraries Act of 2023, which sought to strengthen relationships between prisons and library services through grant programs.9 Working toward a more transparent book-banning process would provide a foundation for future collaborations with libraries and nonprofits and expand prisoners’ opportunities to read without the same costs for implementation associated with similar proposals.

Highlights
Only 28 states keep official records of the book titles banned in their prisons, and only 15 provide the reasoning for restriction.6
The inconsistency in book banning and the absence of sufficient documentation of the practice obscures the literary censorship experienced by inmates and warrants policy intervention.
The Federal Bureau of Prisons should publish and maintain centralized lists of banned books to promote consistency and accountability across the many facilities within the federal prison system while safeguarding the security interests that motivate bans.
Such legislation would be an alternative approach to
previously introduced policies targeting access to literature in prisons but without the same costs for implementation, including the Prison Libraries Act of 2023, which sought to strengthen relationships between prisons and library services through grant programs.9
Implementation
Congress should mandate the BOP to centralize book ban lists in the federal prison system.10 While Congress can present numerous challenges, reforming the
federal prison system is currently on the national agenda, and policymakers have demonstrated their willingness to support change. In July of 2024, President Joe Biden signed the Federal Prison Oversight Act, which mandates independent oversight of the BOP through facility inspections, complaints, and inquiry systems and prohibits BOP resistance to any investigative efforts.11 The Federal Prison Oversight Act was referred to the House Committee on Oversight and Accountability and the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, making policymakers on these committees important supporters of the proposed book ban list policy.11
Critics of book bans in schools would help strengthen the policy’s likelihood of passing.
Representative Jamie Raskin of Maryland and Senator Brian Schatz of Hawaii previously introduced resolutions to condemn school book bans and both would likely help garner valuable support to mandate a prison book ban list.12 PEN America, a well-known non-profit organization that informed Raskin and Schatz’s proposed resolutions,
would inform this effort through their extensive existing research on prison book bans.
The policy will likely face opposition from those fighting for stricter book bans and others advocating for the elimination of bans altogether. Content-motivated book bans across all federal facilities remain to maintain security, good order, and discipline.13 These priorities should not be completely abandoned, as many restricted titles include sexual content, violence, or anti-authority messages that threaten the security and safety of correctional staff and inmates. While many bans are rooted in valid security concerns, calls for stricter book bans ignore the lack of transparency surrounding the practice and its expansion would be irresponsible without sufficient information on its current use. To protect inmates’ access to reading materials while recognizing the security concerns that motivate bans in the first place, mandating lists of banned titles provides an incremental solution that balances the two concerns while addressing the current lack of transparency and providing information that can inform future advocacy efforts.
Upon the policy’s passage, the BOP would form and continually update the list. Given there are no existing lists in the federal prison system on previously banned books, the titles will be added on a case-by-case basis beginning from the activation of the policy based on the existing standards for prohibited titles.8 The BOP should give 30 days of advanced notice to all facilities and detail the new procedures to promote widespread compliance.
The established BOP committee
would regularly update included titles, the reasons for their prohibition, and report to the Director of the BOP. Mailroom staff across all facilities would be able to access the up-to-date titles online, and the list will be made publicly available to optimize transparency and dissuade prohibited titles from being repeatedly received. With proper implementation, a centralized and continuous list of banned book titles in the federal prison system will tackle the current inconsistencies in literary censorship across facilities.

Works Cited
Carson, E. Ann. 2023. “Prisons Report Series: Preliminary Data Release.” Bureau of Justice Statistics. https://bjs.ojp.gov/library/publicatio ns/prisons-report-series- preliminary-data-release.
Howard University School of Law. 2021. “Banning the Caged Bird: Prison Censorship Across America.” Thurgood Marshall Civil Rights Center. (8). https://thurgoodmarshallcenter.how ard.edu/sites/tmcrc.howard.edu/files
/2021- 10/HU8108%20%28Prison%20Cen
sorship%20Report%20Update%29v 1-revised.pdf.
Stanistreet, Paul. 2023. “‘Read Your Way Out’: How reading can reduce a prison sentence.” UNESCO Institute for Lifelong Learning. https://thelifelonglearningblog.uil.u nesco.org/2023/04/23/read-your- way-out-how-reading-can-reduce-a- prison-sentence/.
Meehan, Kasey, and Sabrina Baêta. 2024. “Memo on School Book Bans from PEN America.” PEN America. https://pen.org/memo-on-school- book-bans-2023-2024-school-year/.
Marquis, Moira. 2023. “How Prison Book Bans Dwarf All Other Censorship.” Time. https://time.com/6329800/prison- book-bans-censorship-essay/.
Marquis, Moira, and Juliana Luna. 2023. “Reading Between the Bars.” PEN America. https://pen.org/report/reading- between-the-bars/#without.
New York State Corrections and Community Supervision. 2022. “New York.” The Marshall Project. (3-4).
https://www.documentcloud.org/do cuments/23606996-new-york.
Kane, Thomas R. 2011. “Federal Bureau of Prisons Program
Statement.” The Marshall Project. https://www.documentcloud.org/do cuments/23606976-federal.
Prison Libraries Act of 2023, H.R.2825, 118th Congress (2023). https://www.congress.gov/bill/118t h-congress/house-bill/2825.
Federal Bureau of Prisons. 2019. “Legal Resource Guide to the Federal Bureau of Prisons.” Federal Bureau of Prisons. https://www.bop.gov/resources/pdfs
/legal_guide_march_2019.pdf.
Federal Prison Oversight Act, H.R.3019, 118th Congress (2024). https://www.congress.gov/bill/118t h-congress/house-bill/3019.
Raskin, Jamie. “As Nationwide Book Bans top 10,000, Raskin, Schats Introduce Bicameral Resolution Condemning Book Bans.” Press release. September 25, 2024.
https://raskin.house.gov/press- releases?ID=C37729D0-25CB- 4245-8375-3C826A795C19.
“Censorship and Banned Book Lists in Correctional Facilities.” n.d. National Institute of Corrections. https://nicic.gov/resources/nic- library/hot-topics/censorship-and- banned-book-lists-correctional- facilities.
Federally Mandating Insurance for Firearms
By Celia Holden, cmh434@cornell.edu
To mitigate inaction from the federal government, firearm insurance should be mandated for all gun owners in the United States to incentivize owners to take adequate safety measures.

Background
In the US, the gun death rate is considerably higher than in most other developed nations (10.6 per 100,000 compared to 1-2 per
100,000 in 2016), and active shooter incidents in the US have risen from 3 in 2000 to 61 in 2021.1 Furthermore, a 2023 survey found that 61% of Americans believe accessing a firearm is too easy.2 However, despite public opinion, the federal government has continued to enact and enforce more lenient gun policies. For example, in 2023, a federal judge in Virginia overturned a statute that prevented people aged 18-21 from purchasing firearms.3 More recently, the Supreme Court overturned a ban on bump stocks, which are devices that allow semiautomatic rifles to fire faster.4 It is evident that not only are guns becoming easier for Americans to access, but the firearms themselves are becoming more powerful as well. Taking action against these rapidly changing dynamics is long overdue, and Americans cannot continue to wait for the federal government to catch up. Private insurance companies should supplement the government’s gun safety measures by further incentivizing or requiring gun safety practices with firearm purchases.

Policy Idea
The federal government will shift gun control to a semi- privatized system where all gun
owners are required to insure their firearms, similar to requirements on car insurance or health insurance.
Americans who currently own firearms are required to purchase firearm liability insurance, which would protect gun owners in the case of hunting or shooting accidents, lost or stolen firearms, and personal legal defense.5 However, the policy would include stronger requirements for aspiring gun owners looking to purchase their first firearm after a certain date. These requirements would include a mandatory 30-day waiting period between applying for gun insurance and being able to purchase the desired firearm and a mandatory gun safety course. Gun insurance wouldn’t replace the need for government gun control, but would supplement its current shortcomings.

Policy Analysis
Although gun insurance does not cover intentional shootings, insurers are more incentivized to determine an individual’s risk level when selling an insurance plan. Recently, New Jersey and San Jose, California have passed laws that require gun owners to purchase liability insurance. According to San Jose Mayor Sam Liccardo, gun insurance with risk-adjusted premiums would promote safe gun ownership through gun safety classes, gun safes, and child locks.6 Risk- adjusted premiums could also
prevent high-risk individuals from purchasing a firearm, as insurance companies could raise prices or refuse to cover individuals they deem risky.7
Since gun insurance is a relatively new policy, there is not much data on the effectiveness of these mandates. Instead, we can evaluate the specific safety measures that insurers would incentivize or require. For example, in response to a mass shooting in 1989, Canada introduced gun laws such as mandatory waiting periods for gun purchases and mandated safety training courses.8 As a result, Canada’s gun death rate began steadily decreasing throughout the 1990s, falling from 5.0 per 100,000
in 1989 to 3.3 per 100,000 in 1999, with the gun death rate estimate in Canada being 2.17 per 100,000 between 2016-2020. The US had a rate of 14.6 per 100,000 in 2021.9,10,1 Furthermore, a regression analysis on the effects of Canada’s Bill C-17, which required background checks, safety courses, and a 28-day waiting period showed that the passage of Bill C-17 was associated with a decrease in suicide and homicide rates in Canada, supplementing earlier gun regulations.11 The relationship between requiring waiting periods and safety courses and gun death rates suggests that implementing similar policies could reduce intentional gun deaths in the US. If gun insurance were mandated, aspiring and current firearm owners
would be strongly incentivized or required to take individual measures to improve our gun death rates.

Highlights
In the US, the gun death rate is considerably higher than in most other developed nations (10.6 per 100,000 compared to 1-2 per 100,000).1 If gun insurance were mandated, aspiring and current firearm owners would be strongly incentivized or required to take individual measures to improve our gun death
rates.
The federal government should shift gun control to a semi-privatized system where all gun owners are required to insure their firearms, similar to requirements on car insurance or health insurance.
Practices that insurance companies would be required to implement under this policy, including waiting periods and gun safety courses, have been shown to lower gun deaths in Canada.10 However, it is important to note that these practices were viewed as supplemental to prior gun control policies.
Implementation
To enact this policy, the federal government would have to mandate that a certain level of insurance coverage be required to purchase a firearm. The mandate would pass through Congress, which could face opposition with a Republican House of Representatives and Senate. To
mitigate opposition, proposing a system with minimum statutes that other states could amend and add more protections to could appeal to them. Furthermore, it could garner support from Republicans because firearm regulation would be determined by private entities rather than the federal government.
Insurance companies and gun safety advocacy groups should aim to approach both Republican representatives who have voted for gun safety bills in the past and Democratic representatives who are passionate about gun safety.
Potential points of contact for sponsoring or supporting a bill include Representatives Maria Salazar (R-FL), Tony Gonzales (R- TX), Mike Thompson (D-CA), and Sylvia Garcia (D-TX), who have supported or initiated gun control initiatives in the past.12,13,14 Also, the House Judiciary and Oversight and Accountability Committees could be key actors in implementing this policy, having supported similar policies in the past.15,16
After passing through the House of Representatives, the policy must pass through the Senate. While a conservative Senate may pose challenges for this policy, a 2021 bipartisan gun safety bill sponsored by Marco Rubio (R-FL) has been signed into law, strengthening many existing gun control policies.17
To gain support, companies that sell firearm insurance, such as Prime Insurance and Lockton Affinity Outdoors, should collaborate with gun safety advocacy groups to join in lobbying efforts and public awareness campaigns – including advertisements, social media postings, and public demonstrations to garner support for the policy. In these campaigns, insurance
companies and advocacy groups should not market this policy as a restriction on Second Amendment rights, but rather as a promotion of responsible firearm ownership to appeal to centrist and conservative Americans as well as gun control activists. Before pushing this policy to the federal level, these interest groups should target states that have been successful in the past with passing gun reforms, such as New York and California, to mandate firearm insurance statewide.
While there are concerns about this policy not being able to adequately mitigate gun violence, San Jose Mayor Sam Liccardo explains that gun liability insurance will incentivize safety measures that will address gun deaths as a public health issue and from a harm reduction standpoint.18 Success at local and state levels would provide useful data on the policy’s effectiveness for federal policymakers who may be on the fence. Policy research centers and state government agencies could compare gun death rates in the state before and after implementation, which researchers could use to determine the effectiveness of these policies. As the US faces comparably high gun death statistics, it is more important than ever to implement creative solutions to combat gun deaths. Placing a share of the responsibility on the private sector would be an effective way to promote safe gun ownership and use.
Works Cited
Gramlich, John. “What the Data Says about Gun Deaths in the U.S.” Pew Research Center, April 26, 2023.
https://www.pewresearch.org/short-
reads/2023/04/26/what-the-data- says-about-gun-deaths-in-the-u-s/.
Schaeffer, Katherine. “Key Facts about Americans and Guns.” Pew Research Center, July 24, 2024.
https://www.pewresearch.org/short- reads/2024/07/24/key-facts-about- americans-and-guns/.
Hansen, Claire. “Federal Judge OKs Handgun Sales to 18-year- olds” U.S. News, May 11, 2023. https://www.usnews.com/news/nati onal-news/articles/2023-05- 11/federal-judge-oks-handgun- sales-to-18-year-olds.
Figueroa, Ariana. “U.S. Supreme Court Overturns Ban on Bump Stocks.” Washington State Standard, June 14, 2024. https://washingtonstatestandard.com
/2024/06/14/u-s-supreme-court- overturns-ban-on-bump-stocks- used-in-las-vegas-mass-shooting/.
“Personal Firearm Liability Insurance.” Lockton Outdoor, November 8, 2024. https://locktonaffinityoutdoor.com/p ersonal-firearm-liability/.
Shniderman, Adam B. “Gun Insurance Mandates and the Second Amendment.” South Carolina Law Review, February 1, 2024. https://sclawreview.org/article/gun- insurance-mandates-and-the- second-amendment/
Horstman, Celli, and Corinne Lewis. “The Basics of Risk Adjustment.” The Commonwealth Fund, April 11, 2024.
https://www.commonwealthfund.or g/publications/explainer/2024/apr/b asics-risk-adjustment.
Masters, Jonathan. “U.S. Gun Policy: Global Comparisons.” Council on Foreign Relations, June 10, 2022.
https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/u s-gun-policy-global- comparisons#chapter-title-0-3.
Hung, Kwing. “Firearm statistics - updated tables”, January 2006.
https://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/rp- pr/csj-sjc/crime/rr06_2/rr06_2.pdf.
Toigo, Stephanie, Nathaniel J. Pollock, Li Liu, Gisèle Contreras, Steven R. McFaull, and Wendy Thompson. “Fatal and Non-Fatal Firearm-Related Injuries in Canada, 2016–2020: A Population-Based Study Using Three Administrative Databases.” Injury Epidemiology 10, no. 1 (February 14, 2023). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40621-023- 00422-z.
Bridges, F. Stephen. “Gun Control Law (Bill C-17), Suicide, and Homicide in Canada.” Psychological Reports 94, no. 3
(June 2004): 819–26.
https://doi.org/10.2466/pr0.94.3.819
-826.
Wilson, Kristin, Annie Grayer, and Clare Foran. “These Are the 14 House Republicans Who Voted to Pass Federal Gun Safety Legislation” CNN, June 24, 2022. https://www.cnn.com/2022/06/24/p
olitics/house-republicans-gun- bill/index.html.
“Gun Violence Prevention.” Representative Mike Thompson, March 22, 2024. https://mikethompson.house.gov/iss ues/gun-violence-prevention.
“Gun Control.” Representative Sylvia Garcia, August 30, 2022. https://sylviagarcia.house.gov/issue s/gun-violence-prevention.
Macagnone, Michael. “House Judiciary Committee Advances Gun Control Ill.” Roll Call, June 3, 2022.
https://rollcall.com/2022/06/02/hous e-judiciary-committee-debates-gun- control-bill-amid-recent-deadly- shootings/.
“Gun Control.” The Committee on Oversight and Accountability Democrats, January 31, 2024. https://oversightdemocrats.house.go v/investigations/gun-control.
Congress.gov. "Text - S.2938 - 117th Congress (2021-2022): Bipartisan Safer Communities Act." June 25, 2022.
https://www.congress.gov/bill/117t h-congress/senate-bill/2938/text.
Martin, Michel. “San Jose Mayor: Gun Liability Insurance Law Will Alleviate Taxpayers, Promote Safety.” National Public Radio, January 29, 2022. https://www.npr.org/2022/01/29/10 76730054/san-jose-mayor-gun- liability-insurance-law-will- alleviate-tax-payers-promote-saf.
Cutting the Head off the Snake: Decentralizing the House of Representatives
By Cole Laudenslager, cdl83@cornell.edu

To decentralize power from the House of Representatives leadership while promoting bipartisanship and legislative productivity, the House should radically revise its rules through a novel rules package that places power in the hands of bipartisan committees.

Background
House leadership sets the legislative agenda primarily by deciding which items members can vote on. As such, modern legislative clogging stems from House Leadership’s reluctance to advance bills that lack saliency or anger intraparty minority factions.1
One instance of the saliency issue is Republican Congressman Greg Steube’s Federal Disaster Tax Relief Act, which would provide tax relief to natural disaster victims.2,3 After Speaker Mike Johnson failed to place Steube’s bill on the agenda, Steube forced a vote via discharge petition—a rarely used tactic whereby a House majority signs a petition to consider a bill immediately.4 While Steube’s bill would substantially affect millions of Americans, it lacked the salience of other popular issues such as immigration, foreign aid, and the economy prior to the focusing events of hurricanes Helene and Milton. For this reason and given negative partisanship, it was tabled by House leadership.5,6,7,8 Experts note that committee leadership follows this poor example and colludes with House leadership.9
The 118th Congress’ repeated battles with continuing resolutions highlight fringe minorities’ contributions to this inaction. Former Speaker Kevin
McCarthy was ousted for passing a bipartisan resolution, preventing a government shutdown despite sizable Republican opposition.10,11 Although the ouster was aided by loosened procedural rules, these rules themselves were the byproduct of threats against McCarthy by the Freedom Caucus, the most conservative caucus.12 Speaker Johnson faced similar pressures over continuing resolutions and his push for Ukraine aid.13,14 The Ukraine bill notably failed the Hastert Rule, stating that a majority of the majority party, should agree to a bill before being brought to the floor.15,16
This current system provides a target to be blamed, House leadership, who is discouraged from bringing bipartisan legislation to the floor by threats of retribution.
Additionally, the diminished power of individual members prevents them from passing important bills lacking political saliency.

Policy Idea
The House should pass a rules package that shifts agenda- setting powers from leadership to committees. It is desirable to give individual members more power, but not so much that the legislative process is abused. As such, committees are the primary focus of this proposal.
First, committees would possess equal numbers of majority and minority party members. A bill would need to pass two 50% vote thresholds to (1) initiate the vetting process and (2) release the bill from the committee. If a bill is truly subpar, it would require bipartisan agreement to kill it in committee.
After being released, bills would automatically be placed on the House calendar in order of receipt, eliminating the primary source of leadership’s agenda- setting powers. Finally, the vote threshold for future rules package adjustments would be increased to a two-thirds majority, thus hindering future undoings of these reforms.
Policy Analysis
Precedence for this proposal can be found both domestically and abroad. In the 1910s progressive Republicans, angered by the centralization and abuse of power under Speaker Joe Cannon, transferred agenda-setting powers from leadership to committees.17 The Rules Committee, controlling all aspects of the House floor, became bipartisan instead of possessing a majority party supermajority.18 This arrangement produced a record of bills passed and increased bipartisan interactions.19 The era of decentralized House rules largely ended when Democrats bypassed
the aforementioned Rules Committee in the 1960s. Decentralization’s demise was finalized when the Democratic- majority House passed a rules package restoring centralization. This vote's narrow and partisan nature underscores the necessity of this proposed rules package’s supermajoritarian safeguard.20 This two-thirds majority requirement is based upon constitutional standards in cases where institutional resistance to change is desired, such as for impeachment convictions and constitutional amendments.21
Taiwan provides a foreign case study. In the late twentieth century, reforms equalized party representation and delegated power to individual members.22 There was a resulting increase in policymaking activity (including for matters previously lacking saliency) and a decrease in interparty antagonism.22 While the majority party’s agenda faced increased hardships, one could argue that was more a result of veto powers being handed to minority parties rather than changes in committee structure. Contrary to the Taiwanese reforms, this proposal does not negate popular mandate, with final bill votes requiring a simple majority immune from minority vetoes. Secondly, the initial strain on Taiwanese legislative and executive bureaucracies appears to have diminished in the decades since the reform.23 The proposed rules package counters possible inefficiencies through leadership’s ability to enact closed rules, bypassing the amendment process.24
One could argue the automated agenda placement of bills is unnecessary as discharge petitions already exist. However,
these petitions are inefficient due to their tedious requirements.25

Highlights
The current House leadership structure disincentivizes bipartisanship, fails to promote important bills lacking political saliency, and holds the Speaker hostage to intraparty minorities.1,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,
15,16
A rules package should be implemented that makes committees more bipartisan, eliminates leadership’s formal agenda-setting powers via the automatic placement of bills on the agenda, and mandates a supermajority’s approval to implement rules changes.
Case studies of the 20th- century House of Representatives and Taiwan’s Legislative Yuan showcase the potential of this policy to bolster legislative productivity and promote bipartisanship.17,18,19,22,23

Implementation
The primary weakness of this proposal is its requirement for self-realization: actors outside of House leadership will need to incentivize leadership to cede their powers. The most likely impetus for such change is a continuation of current trends in which the House is gridlocked by the unproductive relationship between fringe minorities and helpless leadership, and the only solution is for leadership to free itself of its agenda-setting responsibilities. This phenomenon occurred in the
previously mentioned Taiwanese Yuan, where their reforms were the byproduct of frustrations over legislative inefficiencies.22
Referring back to the 20th- century House of Representatives case study, progressive Republicans were able to decentralize the House by collaborating with Democrats to strip the Speaker of their power.17 It is necessary to gain support from the opposition party, as those in the majority who voted for the leadership team are less likely to strip power from their preferred candidates. The modern equivalent to these irate progressive Republicans would be the Freedom Caucus, suggesting they could instigate similar changes. However, the differentiating factor between these two groups is that the Freedom Caucus seeks to reshape leadership in its image as opposed to the progressive Republicans’ desire to decentralize power.17,26 Additionally, the Freedom Caucus is averse to collaborating with Republicans, let alone Democrats; this reluctance to cooperate promoted the caucus’ ouster of Speaker McCarthy.27 As established earlier, collaboration with the opposing party is a necessary condition for this policy’s implementation.
One possible incentive for this rules package could be voter backlash to congressional dysfunction. Polling by Gallup shows decreases in congressional approval ratings amid Kevin McCarthy’s ouster (October 2023) and during Marjorie Taylor Greene’s ouster attempt (May 2023).28 Voters’ negative perceptions of the institution are correlated with when fringe factions prevent leadership from putting forward bipartisan bills.28 If one of
these transgressions were near an election, especially one with close races, it could sway voters to reject the party in power. The opposing political party would likely highlight congressional inefficiency and provide an impetus for the majority party to maintain order within the House.
Considering all these factors, it will be extremely difficult to implement this policy under current political conditions due to institutional resistance. There also appear to be no outside organizations currently focusing on this issue; instead, they are advocating for their policy preferences under the existing legislative framework. As such, the most likely source of change is from within the House. If a new group such as the progressive Republicans of the 20th-century forms, leadership could be pressured to enact these much- needed reforms.
Works Cited
Quorum Analytics. “115th Congress First Session in Review: Legislative Activity and Trends in Dialogue.” Accessed November 13, 2024. https://quorum- media.s3.amazonaws.com/media/bl og/115thCongressFirstSessionRevie w_Quorum.pdf.
Congress.gov. “H.R.5863 – 118th Congress (2023-2024): Federal Disaster Tax Relief Act of 2023.” May 22, 2024.
https://www.congress.gov/bill/118t h-congress/house-bill/5863.
Steube, Greg. “Opinion: My Bill Would Help Floridians Recover from Storms. But DC Democrats Don’t Care.” Sarasota Herald- Tribune, October 4, 2024. https://www.heraldtribune.com/stor y/opinion/columns/guest/2024/10/0
4/opinion-senate-must-act-on- steubes-bill-to-help-storm-victims- helene-ian-schumer/75407047007/.
Hulse, Carl. “Lawmakers Make End Run Around Speaker Johnson on Disaster Bill.” The New York Times, May 17, 2024, sec. U.S. https://www.nytimes.com/2024/05/ 17/us/house-discharge-petition- disaster-relief.html.
Rumbach, Andrew, and Sara McTarnaghan. “More Than 3 Million Americans Were Displaced by a ‘Natural’ Disaster in the Past Year. How Can We Prepare for Our Climate Future?” Urban Institute, November 15, 2023. https://www.urban.org/urban- wire/more-3-million-americans- were-displaced-natural-disaster- past-year-how-can-we-prepare.
Gallup Inc. “Most Important Problem,” 2024. https://news.gallup.com/poll/1675/ Most-Important-Problem.aspx.
Leddy, Maureen. “House Passes Disaster Tax Relief Bill.” Thomson Reuters Tax & Accounting News, May 23, 2024.
https://tax.thomsonreuters.com/new s/house-passes-disaster-tax-relief- bill/.
Blue, Alexis. “The Rise of Negative Partisanship and How It Drives Voters.” The University of Arizona, October 21, 2020. https://news.arizona.edu/news/rise- negative-partisanship-and-how-it- drives-voters.
Kelly, Erin. “RURAL Act: Why Popular, Bipartisan Legislation Can Face Hurdles in Congress.” Cooperative.com, November 25,
2019.
https://www.cooperative.com/news/ Pages/rural-act-why-popular- bipartisan-legislation-faces-hurdles- in-congress.aspx.
Mascaro, Lisa, and Farnoush Amiri. “Speaker McCarthy Ousted
in Historic House Vote, as Scramble Begins for a Republican
Leader.” AP News, October 3, 2023. https://apnews.com/article/mccarthy
-gaetz-speaker-motion-to-vacate- congress- 327e294a39f8de079ef5e4abfb1fa55 5.
Hulse, Carl, and Catie Edmondson. “Congress Narrowly Averts Shutdown as House Democrats Help Pass Stopgap Bill.” The New York Times, September 30, 2023.
https://www.nytimes.com/2023/09/ 30/us/politics/government- shutdown-house-republicans.html.
Binder, Sarah. “McCarthy Paid a Steep Price for His Speakership— Now What?” Brookings, January 10, 2023.
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/ mccarthy-paid-a-steep-price-for- his-speakership-now-what/.
Edmondson, Catie. “Hemmed In by the Hard Right, Johnson Again Turns to Democrats for Votes.” The New York Times, September 24, 2024. https://www.nytimes.com/2024/09/ 24/us/politics/johnson-spending- democrats-republicans.html.
Grayer, Annie, Melanie Zanona, and Manu Raju. “How Johnson Came to Embrace Ukraine Aid and Defy His Right Flank.” CNN, April 21, 2024.
https://www.cnn.com/2024/04/21/p olitics/ukraine-aid-mike-johnson- house-speaker-israel- taiwan/index.html.
Perry, Kati, Hannah Dormido, Dylan Moriarty, Kevin Uhrmacher, and Adrián Blanco. “How Every House Member Voted on Aid to Ukraine, Israel and More.” The Washington Post, April 20, 2024. https://www.washingtonpost.com/p olitics/interactive/2024/04/20/ukrai
ne-israel-border-funding-house- vote/?itid=lk_inline_manual_34.
Strand, Mark, and Tim Lang. “The Hastert Rule.” Congressional Institute, July 17, 2013. https://www.congressionalinstitute. org/2013/07/17/the-hastert-rule/.
Drutman, Lee. “There Are Many Ways to Organize a House of Representatives. Not All Involve a Powerful Speaker.” New America (blog), October 25, 2023. http://newamerica.org/political- reform/blog/there-are-many-ways- to-organize-a-house-of- representatives-not-all-involve-a- powerful-speaker/.
House of Representatives Committee on Rules. “About,” December 19, 2013. http://rules.house.gov/about.
Huder, Josh. “Our Very Unproductive Congress.” The Government Affairs Institute at Georgetown University, n.d. https://gai.georgetown.edu/our- very-unproductive-congress/.
Glass, Andrew. “House Increases Size of the Rules
Committee, Jan. 31, 1961.”
Politico, January 31, 2018. https://www.politico.com/story/201 8/01/31/house-increases-size-of- the-rules-committee-jan-31-1961- 373983.
Ballotpedia. “Supermajority.”
Accessed November 19, 2024. https://ballotpedia.org/Supermajorit y.
Huang, Isaac Shih-hao, and Shing-yuan Sheng. “Rethinking the Decentralization of Legislative Organization and Its Implications for Policymaking: Evidence from Taiwan.” Government and Opposition 57, no. 2 (April 2022):
318–35.
https://doi.org/10.1017/gov.2020.20
.
BTI Transformation Index. “Taiwan Country Report 2024,” 2024. https://bti- project.org/en/reports/country- report?isocode=TWN&cHash=5617 b0df5babf8ef0791d8aa39ea8398.
House of Representatives Committee on Rules. “Special Rule Types,” April 10, 2019.
http://rules.house.gov/about/special- rule-types.
Wallach, Philip. “The Discharge Petition: Its History and Role in the 118th Congress.” American Enterprise Institute, April 29, 2024.
https://www.aei.org/articles/the- discharge-petition-its-history-and- role-in-the-118th-congress/.
Rogers, Kaleigh. “The Freedom Caucus Was Designed To Disrupt.” FiveThirtyEight (blog), January 20, 2023. https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/t he-freedom-caucus-was-designed- to-disrupt/.
Beavers, Olivia, Jordain Carney, and Sarah Ferris. “House GOP Back in Familiar Pattern — Fury at the Freedom Caucus.” Politico, January 3, 2023. https://www.politico.com/news/202 3/01/03/house-gop-freedom-caucus- mccarthy-00076268.
Gallup Inc. “Congress and the Public.” Gallup.com, 2024. https://news.gallup.com/poll/1600/ Congress-Public.aspx.
Reducing Recidivism Rates Through Mandatory Rehabilitation Programs
By Pari Patel, pyp4@cornell.edu

While prison rehabilitation programs have been proven to reduce recidivism rates, these programs are not compulsory for inmates and, therefore, mitigating the potential benefits the programs result in. Recidivism rates can be reduced by mandating participation in such programs.

Background
Recidivism refers to the rate at which released prisoners return to prison. The United States has an astonishingly high recidivism rate, with nearly 49.3% of federal offenders being rearrested over an eight-year period.1 Additionally, the stigma surrounding incarcerated individuals leaves released prisoners unable to secure employment and successfully rehabilitate into society, often leading them toward illicit activities.2
The high recidivism rate in the US is a consequence of its punitive rather than rehabilitation- based prison system.3 Prisoners are often stripped of their identity, lack a sense of community, and are exposed to an overly stressful and abhorrent environment that alters their mental health.4 Consequently, the lack of adequate social welfare support after incarceration can lead to incarceration.3 This vicious cycle of incarceration, release, and reoffense is compounded with racial and structural inequality. Black and Brown communities are more likely to be arrested due to stereotypes and unfair policing practices.5 This is further exacerbated by the generational discrimination and poverty minority communities face that add to the cycle structural inequality and incarceration.6
Furthermore, the annual cost of incarceration for one inmate costs American taxpayers around
$120.59 per day, making recidivism not only a social issue but also an economic challenge.7 Beyond these direct costs, recidivism also has macroeconomic consequences. For instance, recidivism is cited to decrease the US’s annual GDP by
$65 billion a year due to the cost of housing inmates as well as the loss of productivity and tax revenue inmates would otherwise contribute to the economy.8 Additionally, this cost also does not include the economic and social cost incarceration has on families and communities.9 Reducing recidivism, therefore, is not just a criminal justice issue but also a critical economic and social priority.
Policy Idea:
To help reduce recidivism rates and support released inmates, state policymakers should implement a policy requiring inmates to participate in an educational or vocational training program within the prison as a part of their sentence. Through these programs, prisoners can acquire marketable and valuable skills that can help them rehabilitate into society.10 Skills such as interview etiquette, resume building, and financial literacy can be taught to help inmates search for and secure
employment after their release. Furthermore, certification and vocational programs should be provided so inmates can access sustainable employment.

Policy Analysis:
The current prison system is proving to be unsustainable, and rising recidivism rates add to the economic and social pressure to promote reform.10 Multiple studies demonstrate how educational and vocational programs directly reduce recidivism by decreasing criminogenic causes and alleviating financial burdens. A Research and Development Corporation (RAND) study finds that educational programs reduce recidivism by 13 percentage points.11 The study also showed that inmates who participated in educational programs were 43 percent less likely to recidivate than those who didn’t participate in the program.11 RAND drew upon also estimated that the educational programs would cost around $1,400 or $1,744 per inmate.11 Comparing this to the average annual cost of incarceration for an inmate being $42,672, educational programs prove to be the most cost-effective solution than incarceration.7 Furthermore, RAND has also estimated that in order for educational programs to be cost- effective and break even, the recidivism rate only needs to
decrease between 1.9 and 2.6 percentage points, a relatively easy goal.11
Similar policies such as California’s Proposition 57 have successfully reduced recidivism.12 A component of Proposition 57 allows convictions
to utilize rehabilitation programs as a part of sentences.13 The California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation published a report that showed after the enactment of Proposition 57, recidivism decreased by 2.7 percent.14
Furthermore, this proposed policy requires inmates to participate in a rehabilitation program. Current programs do not require inmates to participate in these programs and exclude them from vital resources that provide life-long skills.14 However, if programs are incorporated into sentences, inmates would be required to attend programs and leverage rehabilitation resources. Through this initiative, issues such as mental health disparities and financial illiteracy can be addressed while reducing criminogenic activities after release.
Highlights:
Recidivism is not only a product of social inequality but is also a catalyst in driving inequality further. Structural inequalities and generational issues compounded with improper rehabilitation mechanisms further exacerbate criminogenic behaviors and environments.
High recidivism rates are not just a social justice issue; it is also an economic issue. Taxpayers spend
$120.59 per day per inmate,
amounting to over $60 billion total on prisons.8,16
Prisoners who engage in rehabilitation programs are 43% less likely to re-offend after release.15 These programs directly reduce criminogenic behaviors and causes by providing social safety nets, ultimately fostering safer communities and breaking cycles of crime that burden individuals, families, and society as a whole.
Rehabilitation programs are also better economically: they cost around $1,400 per inmate to implement these programs, which is considerably cheaper than the annual cost of incarcerating one inmate.11
Implementation:
The implementation of such criminal justice reform would require cooperation from all government levels. Currently, 91% of the nation’s incarcerated population is in local and state prison systems.17 This points to the bulk of programs that need to be concentrated at the local and state level to target the largest incarcerated population. State legislatures can pass criminal reform legislation that focuses on rehabilitation rather than punishment within the state prison system, which states can determine individually either through reallocating budgets or raising taxes. States can also apply for federal funding programs that incentivize criminal justice reform. Federal legislation, such as grant programs through the Department of Justice, can provide financial resources to states implementing evidence-based rehabilitation
programs. Federal incentives could also reward states for reducing recidivism rates and prison populations. Pilot programs and phased implementation of programs would also need to be implemented to identify key metrics, such as long-term effects on employment for incarcerated individuals, and issues to ensure efficiency and scalability. Local and state justice departments would run these programs.
Policymakers should also leverage the various non-profits and social justice institutions that can be included in implementing rehabilitation programs.
Community outreach groups can reduce criminogenic activity by providing social safety nets for adults and children.18 Additionally, higher education institutions such as community colleges and universities can be utilized to provide support through programs. Cornell University’s Cornell Prison Education Program (CPEP) is one example of how academic institutions can provide for their community.19 Meta-analysis of inmates who participated in CPEP found that individuals who participated in two or fewer courses have a seven percent recidivism rate, while individuals who complete an associate’s degree have a zero percent recidivism rate.20
To gain support from conservative legislatures, reform advocates can frame rehabilitation programs as fiscally responsible measures that reduce the economic burden of incarceration.
Highlighting the long-term cost savings associated with lower recidivism rates. Programs can also utilize volunteers and community spaces to offset costs. Ideological opposition may arise from those
who view rehabilitation as lenient, but this concern can be addressed by phasing in programs gradually and initially targeting non-violent offenders.

Works Cited
“Recidivism of Federal Offenders Released in 2010.” 2022. United States Sentencing Commission. May 9, 2022. https://www.ussc.gov/research/rese arch-reports/recidivism-federal- offenders-released-2010.
Robinson, Gerard. 2021. “Prison Education Can Help Rebuild the Economy.” American Enterprise Institute. July 21, 2021. Accessed
November 6, 2024. https://www.aei.org/society-and- culture/prison-education-can-help- rebuild-the-economy/.
“A Second Chance: The Impact of Unsuccessful Reentry and the Need for Reintegration Resources in Communities.” n.d. https://cops.usdoj.gov/html/dispatch
/04-
2022/reintegration_resources.html.
Haney, Craig. 2001. “The Psychological Impact of Incarceration: Implications for Post- Prison Adjustment.” National Policy Conference. https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default/fil es/migrated_legacy_files/42351/Ha ney.pdf.
NAACP. 2022. “Criminal Justice Fact Sheet.” November 4, 2022.
https://naacp.org/resources/criminal
-justice-fact-sheet.
Pettit, Becky, and Carmen Gutierrez. 2018. “Mass Incarceration and Racial Inequality.” American Journal of Economics and Sociology 77 (3–4):
1153–82.
https://doi.org/10.1111/ajes.12241.
“Annual Determination of Average Cost of Incarceration Fee (COIF).” 2021. Federal Register. September 1, 2021. https://www.federalregister.gov/doc uments/2021/09/01/2021- 18800/annual-determination-of- average-cost-of-incarceration-fee- coif.
Muresianu, Alex. 2018. “Criminal Justice Reform Is Also Good Economics.” Foundation for Economic Education. August 16, 2018. Accessed November 6, 2024. https://fee.org/articles/criminal- justice-reform-is-also-good- economics/#:~:text=According%20t o%20the%20Center%20for,labor% 20force%2C%20boost%20the%20e conomy.
McLaughlin, Michael, Carrie Pettus-Davis, Derek Brown, Chris Veeh, Tanya Renn, Institute for Justice Research and Development, Florida State University, The University of Iowa, and Washington University in St. Louis. n.d. “The Economic Burden of Incarceration in the United States.” https://ijrd.csw.fsu.edu/sites/g/files/ upcbnu1766/files/media/images/pub lication_pdfs/Economic_Burden_of
_Incarceration_IJRD072016_0_0.p df.
“It’s Time To Expand and Reform the Prison-Based Workforce Development System.” 2024. April 26, 2024.
https://www.nawb.org/its-time-to- expand-and-reform-the-prison- based-workforce-development- system#:~:text=Evidence%20shows
%20that%20incarcerated%20indivi duals,first%20year%20of%20being
%20released.
Davis, Lois M., Jennifer L. Steele, Robert Bozick, Malcolm Williams V, Susan Turner, Jeremy
N. Miles V, Jessica Saunders, and Paul S. Steinberg. 2014. “How
Effective Is Correctional Education, and Where Do We Go From Here?: The Results of a Comprehensive Evaluation.” March 18, 2014: 17-
18.
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research
_reports/RR564.html.
Prison Policy Initaitve n.d. “Education.” Prison Policy Initiative. https://www.prisonpolicy.org/resear ch/education/#:~:text=Evaluating% 20the%20Effectiveness%20of%20 Correctional,and%20the%20odds% 20of%20obtaining.
California Budget & Policy Center. 2024. “Understanding Proposition 57.” California Budget and Policy Center. October 3, 2024. https://calbudgetcenter.org/resource s/understanding-proposition-57/.
Tessaouthyse. 2024. “CDCR Recidivism Report Finds Recidivism Rates Drop - News Releases.” News Releases. February 13, 2024.
https://www.cdcr.ca.gov/news/2024
/02/13/cdcr-recidivism-report-finds- recidivism-rates-drop-2/.
The Boston Consulting Group. 2016. “Reducing Recidivism Through Programming in the Federal Prison Population in the Federal Prison Population FINAL REPORT: BOP Programs Assessment.” Department of Justice. Accessed November 6, 2024.
https://www.justice.gov/dag/page/fi le/914031/dl?inline.
Zoukis, Christopher, 2024. “The Cost of Recidivism: Victims, the Economy, and American Prisons.” Zoukis Consulting Group. July 10, 2024.
https://federalcriminaldefenseattorn ey.com/cost-recidivism-victims- economy-american-prisons/.
“A Federal Agenda for Criminal Justice Reform.” 2023.
Brennan Center for Justice. October 24, 2023.
https://www.brennancenter.org/our- work/policy-solutions/federal- agenda-criminal-justice-reform [18]“Beyond Jails: Community- Based Strategies for Public Safety.” 2022. Vera Institute of Justice. May 13, 2022.
https://www.vera.org/beyond-jails- community-based-strategies-for- public-safety.
“Cornell Prison Education Program.” n.d. Cornell University. https://experience.cornell.edu/oppor tunities/cornell-prison-education- program.
Goodrick, Amanda. 2024. “Reversing the Tide.” Bard Prison Initiative. September 11, 2024. https://bpi.bard.edu/news- stories/stories/reversing-the- tide/#:~:text=Recidivism%20rates% 20for%20prisoners%20who,to%20c omplete%20an%20associate's%20d egree.
Banning Checkpoint Stops to Reduce Racial Profiling and Enhance Privacy
By Avery Prince, asp256@cornell.edu

New York State should place a ban on checkpoint stops to protect the Fourth Amendment rights of drivers and prevent police discrimination against minority groups.

Background
Police set up checkpoint stops at predetermined locations where drivers who pass through are briefly stopped and questioned.1 Officers may stop any vehicle passing through the checkpoint but must follow systematic and impartial procedures, such as stopping every third vehicle, to ensure objectivity.2 These stops must be highly visible and are often publicized through billboards, radio announcements, and newspaper articles. While checkpoint stops are often brief, some result in searches or further questioning from the police, raising concerns about breaches of individual rights and privacy. The Fourth Amendment protects citizens against unreasonable search and seizure, which had its application to checkpoint stops debated in Michigan Department of State Police v. Sitz (1990), where the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of checkpoint stops.3 After this decision, checkpoint stops were determined unconstitutional in the Michigan, effectively banning their use within the state.3
Checkpoint stops set in specific areas can also lead to a disproportionate racial makeup of drivers stopped, as shown by the Department of Justice (DOJ) investigation into North Carolina’s Alamance County Sheriff’s Office.4
This investigation found that officers repeatedly selected predominantly Latino neighborhoods to set up checkpoint stops and were four to ten times more likely to stop Latino drivers than non-Latino drivers.4 Officers conducting these stops pulled over many Latino drivers without a specific cause, such as reasonable suspicion or a traffic violation, leading officers to question drivers and sometimes search vehicles after stopping them. Similarly, researchers found that New York Police Department (NYPD) checkpoints accounted for 12.1% of stops involving Native drivers, 10.9% involving Asian American and Pacific Islander drivers, 8.4% involving Black drivers, and 8.4% of stops involving Latino drivers. In contrast, only 6.5% of stops involved White drivers.5

Policy Idea
New York State should issue a ban on checkpoint stops. Once the ban is implemented, sheriffs would have six months to stop using checkpoints completely. Under the ban, sheriff’s departments and police officers would be required to have a specific cause to make a stop, such as reasonable suspicion or traffic violations like speeding or a broken tail light.
The New York State Division of Criminal Justice
Services would work with sheriffs and police officers to reallocate resources that were previously used for checkpoints to other methods including saturation patrols and other related measures.6 The New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services would also train sheriffs and police officers to report key information about each stop, including the reason the driver was pulled over.

Policy Analysis
A ban on checkpoints would reduce racial discrepancies in policing by eliminating a policing method that often targets Latino and Black communities.7,8 Based on the research of several cities in California, checkpoints are often placed outside of Latino communities, leading to disproportionate arrests of Latinos and over-policing of Latino communities.7 Research in Chicago showed that checkpoints similarly target Black and Latino communities, resulting in nearly 20 unrelated citations per drunk driver arrested.8 Banning checkpoints would decrease disproportionate policing of Black and Latino neighborhoods, encouraging other police methods that do not over police Black and Latino communities.
While checkpoint stops may produce some social benefits, it is important to consider the costs
incurred. These stops are effective at decreasing alcohol-related crashes, but they are extremely costly.2 Typical checkpoints use 15 or more officers and cost between
$5,000 and $7,000.2 Instead, police can use alternative methods with similarly effective reduction in driving under the influence.6 Although evidence for the effectiveness of saturation patrols in reducing alcohol-impaired driving is less established than for checkpoints, saturation patrols are frequently used by state patrols and local police departments along with other strategies.9 Combined, these methods are associated with a reduction in alcohol-impaired driving while operating at a lower cost.9 The main costs of saturation patrols are time and publicity, such as billboards and advertisements that promote awareness of the patrol, which are flexible in price depending on the resources of the department implementing them.6 Prior research on checkpoint stops has also cited saturation patrols as a similar yet more sensible alternative, lending an ethos to saturation patrols of inspiring public trust.10

Highlights
Checkpoint stops raise concerns of racial profiling and privacy violations, shown by research into California and North Carolina cities showing disproportionate placement of checkpoints outside of Latino communities.4,7
Running checkpoint stops requires a lot of police resources that could instead be used for other tested anti- impaired driving methods
that would more fairly protect communities.2,6
Placing a ban on checkpoint stops and utilizing saturation patrols and related measures would protect Fourth Amendment rights, ensuring stops are based on a specific cause and reducing racial disparities in traffic stops.

Implementation
To ban checkpoints in the state of New York, the New York legislature would introduce a bill to ban checkpoint stops. Under this policy, sheriff departments would be required to have a specific cause to make a stop and The New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services would train officers to document key information about the stop, such as why the driver was pulled over. These measures protect privacy and increase transparency in law enforcement practices.
Upon transitioning away from checkpoint stops, the New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services would instruct sheriffs on implementing saturation patrols and other methods and reassigning officers from checkpoints.11 Redirecting funds from checkpoints would allow flexibility in spending on traffic enforcement and areas with different needs to implement less costly methods based on their needs. Training for saturation patrols takes roughly three months, which would give law enforcement time to implement substitute methods within the required time frame.6 Saturation patrols combined with other measures are proven to be effective in deterring drunk driving and reducing alcohol- impaired driving by 18-40%.6,9 If resources are properly allocated,
banning checkpoint stops should reduce spending for sheriff’s departments while maintaining a low rate of drunk driving and accidents.
Based on similar policies in other states and preliminary research on checkpoint stops, adopting this policy in New York would garner support that would help secure its implementation.
Several states already prohibit checkpoint stops based on violations of their state constitution or law.2 In Michigan, checkpoints were deemed generally ineffective.3 Checkpoints also use a significant number of resources and police attention that could be used for other methods.2 This policy would gain bipartisan support as a cost- saving method that effectively repurposes police resources. A typical checkpoint with fifteen or more officers can cost $5,000 to
$7,000, along with media publicity costs of publicity through paid media such as road signs and advertisements.11 Rather than spending these funds on checkpoints and publicity, officers could be trained for other methods, such as saturation patrols that have flexible costs based on the number of officers participating.6
Additionally, the increased police transparency as a result of this ban aligns with the platforms of organizations such as Communities United for Police Reform, Make the Road New York, and the New York Civil Liberties Union.
Organizations like Communities United for Police Reform can publish articles and generate public support for legislation similar to a ban on checkpoints and could similarly advocate for this policy. Evidence of racial discrepancies in checkpoint stops would help gain
the support of these organizations, who could advocate for the bill to pass in the New York legislature. Representatives such as Bill Magnarelli, the chair of the transportation committee, have a history of supporting police transparency efforts and could help lead advocacy for a ban on checkpoints. Additionally, the New York legislature has historically passed bills with similar causes, with the current assembly generally representative of similar ideals.

Works Cited
Fell, James C., Susan A. Ferguson, Allan F. Williams, and Michele Fields. “Why Are Sobriety Checkpoints Not Widely Adopted as an Enforcement Strategy in the United States?” Accident Analysis & Prevention 35, no. 6 (November
1, 2003): 897–902.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0001- 4575(02)00097-0.
“Publicized Sobriety Checkpoints” National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 2023.
https://www.nhtsa.gov/book/counte rmeasures-that-work/alcohol- impaired- driving/countermeasures/enforceme nt/publicized-sobriety-checkpoints.
Tracy A. McCloskey, "Michigan Constitutional Law--A Sobriety Checkpoint Program That Seizes Automobiles on a Public Highway in the State of Michigan without Suspicion Violates Article 1, Section 11 of the Michigan
Constitution," University of Detroit Mercy Law Review 71, no. 4
(Summer 1994): 1095-1110.
https://heinonline.org/HOL/P?h=hei n.journals/udetmr71&i=1107.
“Justice Department Releases Investigative Findings on the Alamance County, N.C., Sheriff’s Office,” U.S. Department of Justice, Sep. 18, 2012.
https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justi ce-department-releases- investigative-findings-alamance- county-nc-sheriff-s-office.
“NYPD Traffic Stops Data,” New York Civil Liberties Union, Jul. 11, 2024.
https://www.nyclu.org/data/nypd- traffic-stops-data#checkpoint.
“High-Visibility Saturation Patrols” National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 2023. https://www.nhtsa.gov/book/counte rmeasures-that-work/alcohol- impaired- driving/countermeasures/enforceme nt/high-visibility-saturation-patrols.
Peraza, Humberto, Jr. “Over the Legal Limit: How Race Influences DUI Checkpoint Location in Latino Neighborhoods.” Order No. 10639588, San Diego State University, 2017. https://www.proquest.com/dissertati ons-theses/over-legal-limit-how- race-influences- dui/docview/1986801778/se-2.
Caputo, Angela. “Chicago Police Sobriety Checkpoints Target Black, Latino Neighborhoods.” Chicago Tribune (blog), May 8, 2015.
https://www.chicagotribune.com/20 15/05/08/chicago-police-sobriety- checkpoints-target-black-latino- neighborhoods/.
Sanem, Julia R., Darin J. Erickson, Patricia C. Rutledge, Kathleen M. Lenk, Toben F. Nelson, Rhonda Jones-Webb, and Traci L. Toomey. “Association between Alcohol-Impaired Driving Enforcement-Related Strategies and Alcohol-Impaired Driving.” Accident Analysis & Prevention 78 (2015): 104–109.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2015.0 2.018.
Vissing, Jacob. “Note: Preserving Liberty While Increasing Safety: Why Indiana Should Outlaw Sobriety Checkpoints.” Indiana Law Review 48 (2015): 1089. https://advance.lexis.com/api/docu ment?collection=analytical- materials&id=urn%3acontentItem% 3a5G5V-74J0-00CV-F01P-00000-
00&context=1519360&identityprofi leid=QQTRN251671.
NYS Division of Criminal Justice Services. “New York Police and Peace Officer Training.” http://www.criminaljustice.ny.gov/o ps/training/.
Rubalcaba, Joaquin Alfredo- Angel, Alberto Ortega, and Prentiss
A. Dantzler. “DOJ Intervention and the Checkpoint Shift: Profiling Hispanic Motorists under the Section 287(g) Program.” AEA Papers and Proceedings 114 (2024): 546–49.
https://doi.org/10.1257/pandp.2024 1132.
Family First: A Call for Mandatory Paid Family Leave
By Emily Snider, ems459@cornell.edu

The United States should enact a federal, mandatory paid family leave policy to strengthen its economy, improve public health, and promote equity.

Background
The United States remains the only high-income country without a national paid parental leave policy, despite strong evidence linking paid leave to improved health outcomes for parents and children.1 The Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) is the only federal leave policy, offering up to 12 weeks of unpaid, job-protected leave yearly for eligible employees.2 This leave can cover childbirth, adoption, care for immediate family members with serious health conditions, and personal medical leave for a serious health condition.2 The FMLA’s eligibility criteria include that employees must have at least 12 months of tenure, have worked at least 1,250 hours over the past year, and be employed by companies with 50 or more employees within a 75-mile radius.2
Beyond this federal policy, some states have implemented unique paid family leave policies. Thirteen states and Washington,
D.C. have enacted mandatory paid family leave, and nine states have voluntary policies using private health insurance.3 In most states with mandatory leave laws, the policies are funded through social insurance payroll taxes levied on employees and employers.3 Furthermore, employees can buy paid family insurance in some states with voluntary policies.3 New York
is an exception, where employees must purchase paid leave plans through private insurers.3 Parental leave laws across the U.S. are inconsistent, leaving many families without sufficient support.

Policy Idea
The U.S. should adopt a federal paid family leave policy with FMLA’s eligibility standards. The funding model would align with President Biden’s past proposals that use Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) as the administration tool, with the benefits funded through a payroll tax. The tax required would be a minimal 0.62% payroll tax split between employers and employees, according to Social Security actuaries.4 To ensure equitable access, benefits would be progressive, with low-income workers who earn minimum wage, receiving close to full wage replacement while on leave.

Policy Analysis
Paid family leave policies have positive economic, health, and equity implications. Economically, such policies stabilize incomes, reducing the need for employees to choose between job security and family needs.5 Paid leave improves employee retention, cutting turnover costs (estimated at 21% of an employee’s annual salary).5 90% of companies with paid leave report
neutral to positive effects on productivity and morale.1 In the UK, companies with paid leave were 60% more likely to report better financial performance.1
Paid leave enhances women’s labor force participation, enabling them to remain in roles where they have built valuable skills, boosting productivity.5 It also correlates with improved maternal and child health. In low to middle- income countries, each month of paid maternity leave decreases infant mortality by approximately 13%.1 In Norway, children of parents with extended leave exhibit better cognitive development, and are likelier to attain university degrees and earn higher wages.1
The current FMLA disproportionately benefits wealthier workers because it guarantees only unpaid leave. Half of eligible workers cannot afford unpaid family leave, and two-thirds of those who take it, report subsequent financial strain.6 Paid leave improves access across socioeconomic groups. For example, California’s paid leave law has particularly benefited minority women, less-educated workers, and single mothers.5 Maternity leave usage doubled, and mothers with young children increased their work hours by 6– 9%, with corresponding wage gains.7
The equity implications are significant as paid family leave prevents bankruptcies for 25% of dual-income and 13% of single- parent families (predominantly single mothers) missing two or more weeks of work due to illness.5 It also reduces reliance on public assistance, as women returning from paid leave are 40% less likely to need welfare within a year of giving birth.5 Paid leave would provide underserved populations with essential support for their health and financial stability.

Highlights
The U.S. is the only high- income country without a mandatory paid parental leave policy despite evidence of its substantial health benefits, for families, including improved maternal and child well- being.1
Current federal protections under the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) provide unpaid leave, leaving low-income families without adequate support. Beyond this policy, some states have adopted their own paid leave policies.2,3
A mandatory federal paid family leave policy, funded by the Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI), would foster economic and health benefits while promoting equity.
This policy would stabilize incomes, enhance employee retention, improve productivity, and increase women’s labor force participation.5 Additionally, it would improve access to underserved groups, like
minority women and single mothers, helping to prevent bankruptcies and reduce reliance on public assistance.5

Implementation
Funding this mandatory leave program would be straightforward, modeled after existing Social Security benefits with a 0.62% payroll tax split between employers and employees.4 Low-income workers would receive near full wage replacement to ensure equitable access, similarly to how many state programs currently operate. Typically, Republican lawmakers oppose tax increases; however, this proposed increase is minimal, and the resulting economic benefits far outweigh its modest impact.8 Additionally, maintaining the current eligibility requirements under the FMLA would strengthen political support for this policy, as the established guidelines have already garnered approval through their successful implementation.
The SSDI falls under the jurisdiction of the Social Security Administration (SSA) within the executive branch, but any changes require Congress to pass a federal law. Although bipartisan support exists for a policy like this one, legislative advocacy and public awareness are essential.9 The House and Senate Bipartisan Paid Family Leave Working Groups should expand outreach to more legislatures to secure broader support.9 Educating businesses and individuals on the policy’s shared positive impacts can alleviate concerns about payroll taxes. Once Congress passes this policy, it could be enacted and funded in the next
fiscal year through minor tax adjustments.
Effective implementation requires widespread workforce awareness. Currently, many eligible employees remain unaware of state- level benefits, especially among marginalized groups. Five years after California’s paid family leave program began, less than half of eligible workers knew about it, with even lower awareness among low- wage workers, immigrants, Latinos, and those without a high school diploma.10 Outreach should focus on social media campaigns to maximize awareness and involve employers, healthcare providers, community organizations, and government agencies.4 Medical providers can play a pivotal role by informing patients directly about eligibility.4 Overall, this federal mandatory paid leave policy, funded through the SSDI with a progressive structure, would provide substantial benefits to individuals, businesses, and the economy, with successful implementation relying on bipartisan support, public awareness efforts, and targeted outreach to marginalized groups.

Works Cited
Wallace, Kelly. 2017. “Paid leave: What’s the right amount of time?” CNN. https://www.cnn.com/2017/06/29/h ealth/paid-leave-how-much-time- enough/index.html.
“Family and Medical Leave (FMLA).” n.d. U.S. Department of Labor. Accessed November 6, 2024.
https://www.dol.gov/general/topic/b enefits-leave/fmla.
“State Paid Family Leave Laws Across the U.S.” 2024. Bipartisan Policy Center.
https://bipartisanpolicy.org/explaine r/state-paid-family-leave-laws- across-the-u-s/.
Romig, Kathleen, and Kathleen Bryant. 2021. “A National Paid Leave Program Would Help Workers, Families.” Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. https://www.cbpp.org/research/econ omy/a-national-paid-leave- program-would-help-workers- families#_ftn64.
“The Economic Benefits of Paid Leave: Fact Sheet.” n.d. Joint Economic Committee. Accessed November 6, 2024. https://www.jec.senate.gov/public/_ cache/files/646d2340-dcd4-4614- ada9-be5b1c3f445c/jec-fact-sheet--- economic-benefits-of-paid- leave.pdf.
Center for American Progress and the National Partnership for Women & Families. 2014. “Key Features of a Paid Family and Medical Leave Program that Meets the Needs of Working Families.” American Progress. https://www.americanprogress.org/a rticle/real-family-values-paid- family-leave/.
Rossin-Slater, Maya, Christopher Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel. 2011. “The Effects of California’s Paid Family Leave Program on Mothers’ Leave-Taking and Subsequent Labor Market Outcomes.” The Institute for the Study of Labor. https://docs.iza.org/dp6240.pdf.
Newport, Frank. 2024. “Where Americans Stand on Taxes.” Gallup News.
https://news.gallup.com/opinion/pol ling-matters/652151/americans- stand-taxes.aspx.
Antonioli, Justis. 2024. “Bipartisan Momentum on Paid Family Leave Policy in the 118th Congress.” Bipartisan Policy Center. https://bipartisanpolicy.org/blog/bip artisan-momentum-on-paid-family- leave-policy-in-the-118th- congress/.
Goodman, Julia M., Holly Elser, and William H. Dow. 2020. “Expand and Simplify To Reach Low-Income Workers with Paid Family Leave Policies.” Berkeley Population Sciences. https://www.populationsciences.ber keley.edu/sites/default/files/SF_Pai d_Parental_Leave_UC- Berkeley_Issue_Brief_3_0.pdf.
Guaranteeing Flexibility for Employees on Election Day
By Samuel Stille, ss3787@cornell.edu

To augment voter participation, the federal government should designate Election Day as a national holiday and mandate paid voting leave for workers.

Background
High voter turnout is the linchpin of any flourishing democracy, and failure to provide all American voters with flexible voting options compromises it.
These options can include vote-by- mail, expanded early voting initiatives, and extended polling hours on Election Day. To improve our democratic system, the government must cultivate an electoral framework that accommodates the diverse needs of its electorate.
As of 2022, 21 states had no laws providing workers with time off to vote, while an additional 6 states had statutes requiring leave for voting without accompanying payment.1 The lack of government involvement in promoting election participation leaves voters at the mercy of their employers. In states without paid leave, lower-income voters may deem the opportunity cost of voting to be higher than the benefit, opting instead to work an additional shift to accrue income.
Furthermore, rapacious bosses in states without voter leave mandates may disregard their employees’ voting aspirations and assign them exigent work on Election Day.
These phenomena contribute to the disparities in voter turnout rates between socioeconomic strata.
The 2016 presidential election illustrated socioeconomic disparities in voter turnout, with
only 46% of individuals with family incomes below twice the federal poverty line voting, in contrast to 68% of those whose incomes exceeded that threshold.2 Guaranteeing paid time off for workers would ensure that those living paycheck to paycheck have equal voting opportunities, helping bridge the divide in voter turnout between lower and higher-income individuals.

Policy Idea
The federal government should create a federal holiday on Election Day. To offset any productivity loss from an additional federal holiday, Veterans Day could be moved from November 11th to coincide with national elections on the second Tuesday of
November.3 Finally, Congress should move to mandate a paid 3- hour leave period for workers on Election Day. In 2012, approximately 3.5 million voters endured queues exceeding an hour to cast their ballots, with minority voters being seven times more likely than white voters to encounter such delays.4 The 3-hour period would grant voters latitude in the event of distant polling sites or protracted wait times.
Policy Analysis
The absence of federally mandated paid time off on Election Day places the onus of determining
paid voter leave policies on individual states and, ultimately, on employers—resulting in significant disparities in voter turnout between socioeconomic groups. In 2021, 45% of large companies and 55% of small companies afforded their employees paid time off to vote.4 Accordingly, potential voters— particularly those who depend on hourly pay—are often at the mercy of their employers on Election Day. By requiring paid leave nationally, the federal government would seize this discretion from corporations, allowing more of its constituents to access the ballot box. Paid voter leave is hardly a pioneering initiative, as numerous democratic regimes worldwide, including Mexico, Belgium, and Argentina, have implemented a similar policy with corollary increased turnout.5 Additionally, 14 states have already made Election Day a public holiday.6 However, a Princeton University study found that making Election Day a holiday does not significantly increase voter turnout, emphasizing the need to implement policies like paid leave in tandem with the holiday to effectively enhance participation.7
According to Census Bureau data, approximately 27% of nonvoters in the 2022 midterm elections did not vote due to scheduling incompatibility.8 While making Election Day a federal holiday and granting paid leave to
frontline workers would not eradicate all scheduling problems, it would substantially reduce this barrier for many individuals, especially those in lower-income or hourly positions. Moreover, this policy would help level the playing field across socioeconomic groups, allowing more Americans to participate in the democratic process. Critics of efforts to make Election Day a national holiday often cite the costs, with some estimating a cost to taxpayers of $4 billion.9 However, this proposal remedies this issue by moving Veterans Day to Election Day, ensuring more federal holidays do not financially burden employers.

Highlights
The voting capabilities of many Americans are impeded by financial burdens and difficult working schedules, particularly in states without paid leave policies. In the 2016 presidential election, voter turnout was substantially lower among individuals with lower incomes, highlighting socioeconomic disparities in electoral participation.
Establishing Election Day as a federal holiday and mandating paid voting leave would help level the playing field among voters across all demographics.
By moving Veterans Day to Election Day, this policy would bear a net-zero cost and circumvent any productivity losses. Furthermore, the proposed policy aligns with practices in other democratic nations and would significantly
mitigate scheduling conflicts, facilitating greater participation in the electoral process.5

Implementation
The initiative to mandate voter paid leave and create a national holiday on election day would require Congressional sponsorship. To successfully change a holiday’s date or add a new holiday to the Federal Register, Congress must pass a law approving the change.10 To lobby Congress to take action on this issue, extensive community support is necessary given the low likelihood of corporate involvement. Since 65% of US citizens agree with making Election Day a federal holiday, a grassroots campaign could fuel this issue’s legislative success.11 Building partnerships with established organizations such as the League of Women Voters, which has over 700 chapters across the country and has over 1 million members, would help corral support and amplify the campaign’s reach and credibility. They have a proven track record of advocating for enfranchisement efforts and supporting voter registration initiatives.12
Public opinion polls on paid voter leave policies are scant, and this aspect of the legislation would create more of an uphill battle.
Likewise, a lack of polls would require galvanizing support from labor activists as well. Labor groups, in particular, may see paid voting leave as an extension of workers' rights and potentially frame it as essential for ensuring fair and democratic access to voting. Furthermore, implementing this initiative would require partnerships with Congressmen who
have demonstrated interest in voting rights issues. In 2024, Representative Anna Eshoo (CA- 16), for example, introduced the Election Day Holiday Act which aimed to make Election Day a federal holiday.13 Voter groups could partner with Representative Eshoo to include provisions to mandate federal paid leave across the US, citing the current obstacles for workers on Election Day. To move this idea through the legislative process, activists must build broad support across both sides of the aisle, especially from lawmakers who have championed labor rights and voting access in the past. Convincing Republicans to approve it would likely involve highlighting how the proposal would mitigate financial losses while boosting voter turnout. When meeting with conservative legislators, proponents of this legislation could emphasize the nonpartisan nature of it, as it will increase voter turnout for workers across partisan lines.

Works Cited
Huddleston, Tom Jr. “A State- by-state Guide to Where You’re Guaranteed Paid Time Off for Voting—And Where You Aren’t.” CNBC. November 15, 2021. https://www.cnbc.com/2022/11/01/ us-states-where-employers-have-to- give-you-paid-time-off-to- vote.html.
Stevens, Matt. “Poorer Americans Have Much Lower Voting Rates in National Elections than the Nonpoor, a Study Finds.” New York Times. August 11, 2020. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/08/ 11/us/politics/poorer-americans- have-much-lower-voting-rates-in- national-elections-than-the- nonpoor-a-study-finds.html.
Rieckhoff, Paul. “Make Election Day a National Holiday.” CNN. November 10, 2023. https://www.cnn.com/2023/11/10/o pinions/opinion-veterans-day- election-day-combine- rieckhoff/index.html.
Pettigrew, Stephen. ‘The Downstream Consequences of Long Waits: How Lines at the Precinct Depress Future Turnout’. Electoral Studies 71 (20 August 2020):
102188.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electstud.2 020.102188.
Thomas, Grace. “Giving Voters Time Off To Vote Would Help Promote Fair Representation.” Campaign Legal Center. June 29, 2021.
https://campaignlegal.org/update/gi ving-voters-time-vote-would-help- promote-fair-representation.
Gale, William G., and Darrell
M. West. “Make Election Day a National Holiday.” Brookings. June 23, 2021.
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/ make-election-day-a-national- holiday/.
Visram, Talib. “Should Election Day Be a Federal Holiday? Maybe Not.” Fast Company. October 21, 2022.
https://www.fastcompany.com/9079 8496/should-election-day-be-a- federal-holiday-maybe-not.
Douglas, Joshua A. “Opinion: The Unintended Consequences of Making Election Day a Federal Holiday.” CNN. April 9, 2024. https://www.cnn.com/2024/04/09/o pinions/election-day-federal- holiday-presidency-vote- douglas/index.html.
“New Census Data Reveal Voter Turnout Disparities in 2022 Midterm Elections.” National Low Income Housing Coalition. May 15, 2023.
https://nlihc.org/resource/new- census-data-reveal-voter-turnout- disparities-2022-midterm-elections.
Andrzejewski, Adam. “$4+ Billion Cost To Give Federal Employees A New Paid Holiday On Election Day.” Forbes. June 30, 2021.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/adam andrzejewski/2021/04/18/new-4- billion-cost-to-give-federal-
employees-a-paid-holiday-on- election-day/.
Wagner, Jeff. “How Are Federal Holidays Created?” CBS News. June 19, 2024. https://www.cbsnews.com/minnesot a/news/how-are-federal-holidays- created/.
McCormack, Amber. “Should Election Day Be a Federal Holiday? Weighing the Benefits and Drawbacks.” The Alliance for Citizen Engagement. October 21, 2022. https://ace- usa.org/blog/research/research- votingrights/should-election-day- become-a-federal-holiday- weighing-the-benefits-and- drawbacks/.
“About Us.” League of Women Voters. Accessed October 23, 2024. https://www.lwv.org/about-us.
“Rep. Eshoo Introduces Bill to Make Election Day a Federal Holiday.” Congresswoman Anna G. Eshoo. February 13, 2024. https://eshoo.house.gov/media/press
-releases/rep-eshoo-introduces-bill- make-election-day-federal-holiday.


Economic Policy
Director: Alice Lee Assistant Director: Nathaniel Cain
Analysts: Carson Appel, Simone Chan,
Ian Gilenson, Pranav Jaganathan, and Aryan Shah
A Structure to Dig On: Transitioning to Underground Direct Current Power
By Carson Appel, cla85@cornell.edu

In partnership with East Coast state governments, the federal government should establish a structured tax incentive program to aid organizations like the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and implement underground direct current powerlines to reduce costs associated with catastrophic natural disasters.

Background
Climate scientists have warned for decades of the looming effects of US greenhouse gas emissions. Rising Atlantic Ocean temperatures are directly linked to stronger and more frequent hurricanes and winter storms.1 The effects of these storms on U.S. infrastructure are critical when determining the direction of future gridwork investments and enhancing U.S. power resilience.
A Rowan University research article analyzing Atlantic weather patterns (1971 to 2020) highlighted a dramatic recent increase in the intensification rates of hurricanes.2 A weak Category 1 hurricane can develop into a Category 3 or stronger within 24 hours. Modern hurricanes (2001- 2020) are 28.7% more likely to intensify rapidly, with wind speeds increasing by up to 57 mph over 24 hours.2 With greater intensity and frequency, hurricanes devastate localities, imposing significant costs and leading to extended repair and reconstruction timelines. As of August 2023, tropical storms have caused an average cost of $22.8 billion per event, totaling over $1.3 trillion in lifetime costs.3 The increased frequency also means areas can face multiple hurricanes with shorter breaks, as seen with
Helene (late Sept. 2024) and Milton (early Oct. 2024).3
In addition to hurricanes, a warmer atmosphere holds more moisture, contributing to more frequent and intense precipitation.4 Although U.S. winters are getting warmer and shorter on average, blizzards are becoming more severe and prevalent.4 A state-by-state electric utility performance report by the Citizens Utility Board (CUB) found that northeastern states with high blizzard rates experience longer average power outages annually. Maine and Vermont are at the high end, with outages lasting 908 minutes and 444 minutes per customer per year, respectively.5 The New York Department of Public Service published a cost- benefit analysis estimating overhead transmission power lines cost anywhere from $4,000 to $37,000 per mile, with additional overhead distribution costs between $1,700 and $22,000 per mile.6 Intense snowstorm damage can amplify costs and prolong power outage times.
Currently, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) assists declared natural disasters. However, as event intensity increased, FEMA spent over half its fiscal budget in just eight days. Without intervention, FEMA will be forced to reduce or
suspend aid to catastrophic events.7 Integrated policy solutions are essential to address infrastructure investments and implement preemptive measures to reduce long-term costs.
Policy Idea
A distributive tax credit structure should be implemented to promote the development of a direct current (DC) underground electrical grid. Incentives of this nature would increase the reliability and climate resilience of the eastern U.S. power grid. Partnered with this, tax credits will be established for utility companies, modeled after the individual homeowner credits outlined in the Inflation Reduction Act. This system would significantly reduce power outages, lower maintenance costs, and modernize infrastructure to accommodate future energy demands and renewable power integration.

Policy Analysis
The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) recently announced a $34 million pilot program to develop a dozen advanced technologies through the Grid Overhaul with Proactive, High- Speed Undergrounding for Reliability, Resilience, and Security (GOPHURRS) for the
implementation process of underground power lines including the creation of a worm-like digging tool.8 $4 million was directed to improving an AI-driven digital subsurface obstacle detection system. An additional $4 million grant was allocated to establish a sensing platform using radar and radio frequencies to locate existing utility lines. Investments like this are aimed at reducing construction costs for underground systems.8
Converting traditional alternating current (AC) powerlines to direct current (DC) systems can enhance transmission efficiency and decrease overall electrical consumption. Companies in industrial computing, LED technology, solar energy, and electric vehicles increasingly adopt DC power and develop methods to convert currents at various voltages.9,10 High-voltage DC (HVDC) lines transmit nearly double the voltage of AC lines and offer greater stability over long distances.11 While High Voltage AC (HVAC) transmission has traditionally been cheaper, accounting for terminal converter station costs makes HVDC exponentially more cost-effective at distances greater than 600 km above ground or between 50 and 90 km underground.9
Using DC distribution systems in households with solar photovoltaic (PV) panels can reduce energy use by 9-20%, and up to 14- 25% when combined with battery storage.9 Despite high initial implementation costs, HVDC infrastructure is a cost-effective long-term solution, particularly for East Coast development. New York State Assembly Bill 2330-A directed a feasibility study on underground transmission lines,
finding such projects economically viable in densely populated areas prone to extreme weather.6 Underground grids reduce FEMA’s reconstruction costs and can pay for themselves after two damaging weather events.14 Studies indicate that upfront investments in underground powerlines lead to long-term savings by reducing fire damage and improving public health.12,13

Highlights
Catastrophic environmental events are becoming more intense and frequent with global warming, costing
$22.8 billion per event, creating an immediate need for climate-efficient grid enhancements.3
High-voltage direct current (HVDC) power lines are cost-effective when implemented at distances greater than 50 to 90 kilometers underground, establishing economies of scale in long-term integration.9
DC power is more reliable and resilient compared to alternating current (AC) power and expands the grid for renewable energy integration, leaving room for large-scale implementation.3,9
This policy would address upfront investments through an integrated tax system to incentivize the implementation of high- voltage direct current underground power by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, utility companies, and local and state government programs
like the Grid Overhaul with Proactive, High-Speed Undergrounding for Reliability, Resilience, and Security (GOPHURRS).8

Implementation
This policy proposes an incentive agreement among state governments, FEMA, and local utility companies, funded through tax incentives and small utility bill surcharges. Modeled after New York’s Inflation Reduction Act homeowner credits, utility companies will receive up to 30% tax credits.15 A 2.35% state tax on electrical services will be implemented, with 15% of revenue allocated to FEMA, capped at $20 million- the equivalent of the upfront aid provided by the Biden- Harris Administration in 2024.16 This funding will support DC underground powerlines as part of climate resilience efforts, minimizing financial burdens on residents.
A phased implementation would begin in areas most prone to storm-related outages, aligning with ongoing road construction and utility upgrades. Investments would initially focus on the northern and southernmost states along the East Coast, where immediate investments are required, and slowly work towards a midpoint.
By enhancing grid reliance, HVDC power will mitigate catastrophic climate events and establish more stable energy prices for consumers in high-risk areas.
Cities like North Redington Beach, Florida, are implementing underground power supply systems in partnership with local power providers such as the Florida Power Corporation.17 Jacksonville, Florida, and surrounding areas are
using partnering groups like the Jacksonville Electric Authority (JEA) to study the cost- effectiveness and feasibility of underground power lines.18 Partnerships like these will be used to incentivize local stakeholders and businesses to invest in underground power infrastructure through government-subsidized contracts.
With the help of local policy think tanks, agencies will evaluate the effectiveness of this plan using proportional and integral (PI) simulation modeling. This sophisticated computational approach integrates control systems principles into the analysis of electrical networks.19 This method will enable a detailed evaluation of critical performance metrics— transmission efficiencies, voltage drops, and line losses—specifically within the context of implementing underground High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) systems.20 The insights from this evaluation will inform targeted spending for future projects.

Works Cited
World Weather Attribution. (n.d.). Climate change key driver of the catastrophic impacts of Hurricane Helene that devastated both coastal and inland communities.
Rowan researcher documents a 50-year trend in hurricane escalation due to climate change. (n.d.).
https://today.rowan.edu/news/2023/ 10/rowan-researcher-documents-50- year-trend-in-hurricane-escalation- due-to-climate-change.html
“Hurricane Costs.” NOAA Office for Coastal Management. https://coast.noaa.gov/states/fast- facts/hurricane-costs.html
National Geographic. (n.d.). Maybe it’s cold outside. Retrieved November 14, 2024, from
https://education.nationalgeographic
.org/resource/maybe-its-cold- outside
Jester, Douglas, and Five Lakes Energy LLC. “Electric Utility Performance A State-By-State Data Review.” Electronic Utility Performance, 2021.
Industrial Economics. (n.d.). The Benefits, Costs, and Economic Impacts of Undergrounding New York’s Electric Grid.
Politico. (n.d.). Fema Spent Nearly Half Its Disaster Budget in Just 8 Days.
Rogers, Jack. “DOE Invests in Tech to Move Power Lines
Underground.” benefitspro.com. https://www.globest.com/2024/01/2 6/doe-invests-in-tech-to-move- power-lines-underground/. 
Glasgo, B., Azevedo, I. L., & Hendrickson, C. (2016). “How much electricity can we save by using direct current circuits in homes? Understanding the potential for electricity savings and assessing the feasibility of a transition towards DC-powered buildings.” Applied Energy, 180, 66–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2 016.07.036
The war of the currents: AC vs. DC power. (n.d.). Energy.Gov. https://www.energy.gov/articles/wa r-currents-ac-vs-dc-power
“Benefits of HVDC Transmission Systems: Cence Power.” Benefits of HVDC Transmission Systems Cence Power. https://cencepower.com/blog- posts/hvdc-transmission-systems.
Power Lines: Climate Change and the Politics of Undergrounding. (n.d.).
https://heinonline.org/HOL/Page?co
llection=journals&handle=hein.jour nals
The Advantages of Undergrounding Utilities gprs. https://www.gp- radar.com/article/unveiling-the- underground-the-advantages-of- undergrounding-utilities
“From Overhead to Underground: It Pays to Bury Power Lines.” FEMA.gov. https://www.fema.gov/case- study/overhead-underground-it- pays-bury-power-lines. 
“NYS Guide to Inflation Reduction Act Savings.” NYSERDA.
https://www.nyserda.ny.gov/Feature d-Stories/NYS-Guide-to-Inflation- Reduction-Act-Savings. 
“Biden-Harris Administration Provides More than $20 Million to Hurricane Helene Survivors, Ongoing Search and Rescue Operations Continue in North Carolina.” FEMA.gov. https://www.fema.gov/press- release/20241003/biden-harris- administration-provides-more-20- million-hurricane-helene. 
States News Service. (n.d.). Public Power Utilities Take Proactive Approach in Response to Supply Chain Challenges. https://advance.lexis.com/api/docu ment?collection
Energy Monitor Worldwide. (n.d.). The plan pushes for more underground power lines in Florida. https://advance.lexis.com/api/docu ment?collection=news&id=urn%3a contentItem%3a5VT8-H5X1-F11P- X247-00000-
00&context=1519360&identityprofi leid=QQTRN251671.
Yang, Z. (2024). PI-based simulation modeling for performance testing of the power

Using Shared Appreciation Mortgages to Improve Homeownership Trends
By Nathaniel Cain, nc482@cornell.edu

The housing landscape for young people is incredibly fraught, particularly for people of color, who have historically struggled with homeownership at disproportionate rates. Local governments should implement shared appreciation mortgage programs to combat the crisis.

Background
The current state of homeownership in the United States presents several challenges.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau’s Housing Vacancies and Homeownership Survey, the homeownership rate in the second quarter of 2024 was 65.6%, falling below the 25-year average of 66.4%, marking the lowest rate in the past two years.1 This decline is particularly concerning for younger Americans, who find it increasingly difficult to purchase homes. For individuals below the age of 35, the homeownership rate for the head of households fell to 37.4%, the lowest figure in four years.1 This is primarily due to stricter lending practices and credit standards following the Great Recession.2 Young adults lacking robust financial stability are unable to purchase homes. In addition, home prices have risen considerably in the past decade, which has made homeownership increasingly unaffordable.2
Racial disparities further complicate homeownership.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, 74.3% of White individuals are homeowners, whereas 45.7% of Black people, 49.5% of Hispanic individuals, and 62.3% of Asian individuals are homeowners.3 Minority groups consistently face lower homeownership rates
compared to their White counterparts, and homes owned by minority groups tend to have lower appraisal values.3 These disparities are rooted in a long history of racial discrimination in the housing market, dating back to the early 20th century when exclusionary behavior such as redlining was commonplace.4
Municipalities across the country must address this via public policy to ensure a more equitable housing market going forward.
Shared appreciation mortgages can make homeownership more accessible to those who need it the most.
Policy Idea
Local governments across the United States should leverage both federal and state funds to establish shared appreciation mortgage programs. It is ideal for local governments to tackle this issue, as there tends to be extensive variation in housing policies by state and locality. Shared appreciation mortgages, or loans, are typically structured as deferred loans.5 They are interest-free, with repayment deferred until the property is either sold or refinanced, at which the loan is repaid.5 This differs from a typical mortgage, which is repaid in monthly payments. Furthermore, the homeowner pays a percentage of
any property value appreciation gained over time.5 If a home depreciates, the buyer only repays the value of the loan, without interest.6 These programs allow for increased housing accessibility by lowering upfront costs for buyers, while also allowing lenders to recapture new property value gained over time. By financing mortgages with a combination of equity and debt, shared appreciation mortgages spread risk more evenly across lenders and borrowers, decreasing the risk of foreclosure if home prices fall.5

Policy Analysis
A 2019 study from the Joint Center for Housing Studies at Harvard University used data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) to estimate the number of eligible households for shared appreciation mortgages across the country. The analysis found that 6.6 million potential homeowners could buy a home in their county with $25,000 to
$100,000 in financial assistance, which the authors noted was typical of most shared appreciation programs.6The study also found that an additional 8.6 million people could buy a home with financial assistance of $100,000 or more.6 Furthermore, the study found that shared appreciation programs could ease racial disparities in
homeownership.6 The study found that if all 1.4 million potential Black homeowners became homeowners through shared appreciation programs in 2013, their homeownership rate would’ve increased by 10%.6 Moreover, if all potential Hispanic homeowners became homeowners through shared appreciation mortgages in 2013, their homeownership rate would have increased by 9.4%.6
A 2018 study in the Housing Policy Debate journal observed the short-term loan performance of homeowners participating in nine shared appreciation mortgage programs.7 Using a difference-in- difference analysis, the study compared the outcomes of shared appreciation mortgage holders with the outcomes of other first-time homebuyers in metropolitan areas.7 The results showed that shared appreciation mortgage purchasers had “significantly less mortgage debt” and were “less likely to have a home equity line of credit.”7 Furthermore, the study observed no significant difference between shared appreciation and non-shared mortgage holders when analyzing 90- to 180-day delinquencies.7 This demonstrates that shared appreciation mortgage holders were maintaining homeownership at a similar rate to those with non- shared appreciation mortgages, highlighting the longevity of the program’s effectiveness.

Highlights
Homeownership rates have declined for young adults due to strict lending practices following the Great Recession and high home prices over the past decade.1
Shared appreciation mortgages are structured as deferred, interest-free loans repaid upon sale or refinancing, with homeowners sharing a percentage of any appreciation.5
Local and state housing authorities should utilize Community Development Block Grant funds to subsidize community financial institutions in providing shared appreciation mortgages to borrowers.
Housing authorities should ensure that strict oversight is kept over financial institutions to ensure predatory lending practices do not occur.
Implementation
Local and state housing authorities should use Community Development Block Grant funds from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development to “sponsor” certain financial institutions in providing shared appreciation mortgages. Local and state governments should prioritize collaborating with local community banks and credit unions for loan distribution, as local financial institutions are often more attuned to the unique needs of residents compared to larger financial institutions.8 Nevertheless, strict oversight is essential: local and state housing authorities must develop clear regulatory frameworks and monitoring practices to prevent predatory lending and ensure responsible loan distribution. This may include regular financial reports on the program’s efficacy.
Furthermore, if the necessary funds
are available, the government should contract an outside firm to evaluate the program’s effectiveness.
Local and state housing authorities should ensure their shared appreciation mortgages rely on diverse funding sources. While federal block grants, such as the Community Development Block Grant, can be the primary source of subsidies for these mortgages, governments should work with financial institutions to finance these loans via alternative means, such as through mortgage-backed securities or government bonds.
Housing authorities can also consider reaching out to philanthropic organizations or private investors who may be interested in the housing market.
Clear eligibility requirements are crucial to ensure the program reaches its target demographic. For example, the shared appreciation mortgage program in Boulder, Colorado, mandates that enrollees have a family income at 80% of the area’s median, enrollees must work within the city’s formal limits, and enrollees must participate in a financial literacy class for buying a home.9 Programs can also create rules limiting the location, price range, and type of home that can be purchased with a shared appreciation mortgage. For example, Arlington, Virginia’s program does not allow homes to be bought with a shared appreciation mortgage if its price exceeds
$500,000.9 This helps to finetune shared appreciation mortgage programs to align with housing market dynamics in a given location.
The application process should be as accessible and
streamlined as possible to encourage high participation rates. Multiple application pathways, including an online form and a paper application that can be mailed or submitted in person, will accommodate diverse applicant needs. It is imperative to conduct outreach in communities with low homeownership rates. Creating social media adverts, posting flyers in physical spaces, hosting informational town halls, and collaborating with other public entities to spread information are all potential methods of performing such outreach. By implementing these key strategies, local governments can create a more equitable homeownership environment for all.

Works Cited
Lowest homeownership rate for younger householders in four years. (2024, August 5). https://www.nahb.org/blog/2024/08
/lowest-homeownership-rate-in- four-years
Callis, Robert. “Rate of Homeownership Higher Than Before Pandemic in All Regions.”
U.S. Census Bureau. Accessed November 5, 2024. https://www.census.gov/library/stor ies/2023/07/younger-householders- drove-rebound-in- homeownership.html.
Taylor, M. (2024, September 10). Homeowner data, facts and statistics 2024. Bankrate. https://www.bankrate.com/homeow nership/home-ownership-statistics/
Racial differences in economic security: Housing. (2024, September 20). U.S. Department of the Treasury. https://home.treasury.gov/news/feat ured-stories/racial-differences-in- economic-security-housing
Caplin, Andrew, Noel Cunningham, Mitchell L. Engler, and Frederick Pollock. “Facilitating Shared Appreciation Mortgages.” The Hamilton Project. Brookings. Accessed November 5, 2024. https://www.hamiltonproject.org/pu blication/policy- proposal/facilitating-shared- appreciation-mortgages-to-prevent- housing-crashes-and-affordability- crises/.
Perkins, Kristin, Shannon Rieger, Jonathan Spader, and
Christopher Herbert. “The Potential for Shared Equity and Other Forms of Down Payment Assistance to Expand Access to Homeownership.” Joint Center for Housing Studies at Harvard University, October 2019. https://www.jchs.harvard.edu/sites/ default/files/harvard_jchs_housing_ tenure_symposium_perkins_2019_0
.pdf.
Theodos, B., Stacy, C. P., Braga, B., & Daniels, R. (2019). Affordable homeownership: An evaluation of the near-term effects of shared equity programs. Housing Policy Debate, 29(6), 865–879. https://doi.org/10.1080/10511482.2 019.1596965
Bennett, Karen. “Reasons to Have a Local Bank.” Bankrate, July 31, 2024.
https://www.bankrate.com/banking/ checking/reasons-to-have-a-local- bank/
Local Housing Solutions. “Shared Appreciation Mortgages.” Accessed November 3, 2024. https://localhousingsolutions.org/ho using-policy-library/shared- appreciation-mortgages.
Future-Proofed! Federal Automatic IRA for an Easy Retirement
By Simone Chan, sc3336@cornell.edu

Federal implementation of automatic Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) helps address gaps in retirement savings access, particularly for marginalized workers. Making saving a default option can help secure millions of Americans’ financial stability and contribute to the nation’s economic success.

Background
Employer-based retirement plays a major role in securing financial welfare for American workers. However, according to the AARP Public Policy Institute, around 55 million employees in the private sector – equivalent to nearly half – work for an employer that does not offer a retirement plan.1 Many employers, especially small businesses, face cost barriers when offering retirement plans.2 About 32 million workers in small businesses did not have access to a retirement plan, compared to about 23 million in businesses with 100 or more workers.2 Workers who are not provided with a retirement plan must open their own Individual Retirement Arrangement (IRA).
According to research by Life Insurance Marketing and Research Association Secure Retirement Institute, only 34% of Americans know about IRAs, and 46% of those who do not own an IRA reported that they do not understand enough about IRAs.3 Given the lack of financial literacy, these populations are at a greater risk of financial insecurity in old age.
Marginalized individuals like low-wage workers, small businesses, part-time workers, and gig economy workers are typically the most affected by financial insecurity when entering older age. Without access to a retirement plan,

these workers are exposed to an increased risk of financial struggle, further contributing to the wealth gap. Such a deficit in retirement funds greatly affects the overall economy. PEW Charitable Trust data estimated that six states cumulatively faced a $334.3 billion shortfall due to a lack of or inadequate retirement savings.4
Various policy efforts have attempted to address this gap. State- level automatic IRAs have been implemented across eleven states, and efforts have progressed, but national implementation has yet to occur. The implementation of federal automatic IRAs is urgently needed for the millions of Americans whose financial futures are in jeopardy.
Policy idea
The U.S. Department of Treasury and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) should implement automatic IRAs for employees whose company/employer does not offer a retirement plan. The Treasury would oversee the policy framework and manage the infrastructure of the program, while the IRS would handle the enrollment and compliance aspects. The structure of the program will be based on existing states’ automatic IRA programs to ensure fluidity.5 Employers would enroll workers

into a government-managed IRA via social security numbers, with 3- 8% of the employee’s salary automatically deducted. Workers could opt out or adjust contributions for flexibility. Employers would facilitate enrollment and payroll deduction, lowering administrative barriers. Compliant employers would receive tax credits to encourage participation. Workers would retain accounts even if they change jobs, ensuring continued contributions.

Policy Analysis
Historically, research has consistently demonstrated that automatic IRA enrollment boosts participation. Research, including projections from the National Bureau of Economic Research, indicates that when eligible workers are automatically enrolled, participation rates climb significantly—from around 66% to 92%.6 These results suggest that this policy will dramatically enhance savings among workers without current access to employer- sponsored plans and ease the burden of establishing voluntary retirement plans.
This federal initiative takes inspiration from successful state-run programs, such as California’s CalSavers. CalSavers automatically enrolls employees who do not have
retirement plans at work, making it easier for them to save through options with low administrative demands and portability across jobs. Evaluations of CalSavers show a rapid increase in assets under management, growing from $595 million to $858 million in just a year, which not only highlights its viability but also its potential benefits on a national scale.5 Expanding this model at a federal level could provide millions of lower-wage workers with a stable foundation for financial security in retirement, thereby reducing their dependence on future government aid, such as Social Security, to help stabilize governmental budgets.7
More importantly, automatic enrollment addresses behavioral inertia that can occur when saving is a voluntary choice. Many workers may procrastinate or feel overwhelmed by the process of setting up a retirement plan due to factors like complexity, lack of financial knowledge, and competing priorities. Automatic enrollment eliminates the initial burden of taking action and utilizes behavioral economics principles to help push individuals toward better financial strategy as AARP estimates American workers are 15 times more likely to save if they can save through automatic payroll reduction.8,9

Highlights
Nearly half of private-sector employees lack access to quality retirement saving plans, leaving millions at heightened risk of financial insecurity in old age and increasing economic inequality.1
Federal automatic IRAs address retirement access
barriers, especially for low- wage and gig workers lacking employer-sponsored plans.1
Automatic enrollment, overseen by the Treasury and IRS, ensures a seamless setup with payroll deductions, enabling easy contributions and portable accounts across jobs.
Inspired by successful state models like CalSavers, federal IRAs aim to increase savings participation from 66% to 92% among eligible workers.6
Expanding access to retirement savings reduces reliance on government assistance, enhances financial stability, and narrows the wealth gap, benefiting individuals and the economy.7
Implementation
Outreach efforts need to be led by state leaders and policymakers who have implemented similar initiatives in states like California, Oregon, Illinois, and others with a history of supporting similar financial programs to gain federal momentum. By engaging representatives from these states, the policy can gain credibility and utilize existing legislative frameworks for efficiency.
Additionally, lobbying efforts should target representatives such as Congressman Richard Neal (D- MA), a prominent advocate for automatic IRAs and senior member of the Ways and Means Committee. Congressman Neal’s experience with bipartisan retirement plans and his influence within the committee would be invaluable in shaping and
advancing the legislation for expedited passage through the House Committee on Ways and Means.10
With the new Senate dominated by Republicans coming in, framing the policy strategically is key. Senator Ron Wyden, a Democrat and Chair of the Senate Finance Committee, is a critical ally due to his history of bipartisan retirement reforms, including the bipartisan Enhancing American Retirement Act with Republican Senator Mike Crapo.11 Wyden’s role can highlight automatic IRAs as a fiscally sound initiative that reduces reliance on government aid while encouraging personal savings. Advocacy should focus on committees like the Senate HELP Committee and the House Education and Workforce Committee. Presenting automatic IRAs as a market-driven, low- regulation solution that supports economic independence for working families can appeal to conservative values. Building coalitions with business groups, think tanks, and community voices strengthen external pressure on legislators.
Given the significant changes this policy brings to the retirement structure, backlash from fiscal conservatives over high federal costs may arise. A study by AARP and the Retirement Research Center projected that 58% of workers with access to a similar model of universal auto-IRA would have saved more than $100,000 for retirement, compared to only 9% of those without access. Meanwhile, 75% of workers without a payroll deduction program have saved less than $10,000.12 Policymakers should emphasize such long-term savings from reduced reliance on
government assistance during retirement, presenting data that shows how automatic IRAs can decrease dependency on federal welfare programs. Additionally, a phased rollout and capped initial incentives for employers could help address cost concerns while appealing to budget-conscious stakeholders.
For implementation, careful coordination must be made with the
U.S. Department of Treasury and the IRS, which play critical roles in overseeing the policy’s rollout. Upon enactment, the Treasury would develop the program’s financial infrastructure by establishing secure and accessible platforms for account management and investment options, allowing employees to track their savings and manage accounts easily. To reduce administrative obstacles, especially for small businesses, the Treasury would unify processes like contributions and reporting into a streamlined, user-friendly system, simplifying participation and compliance.
Meanwhile, the IRS would manage compliance, enrollment, and tax-related oversight. This would include ensuring payroll deductions are implemented correctly and contributions are accurately reported. The IRS could also provide clear guidelines, digital resources, and support materials to help employers transition smoothly, as well as a dedicated support line to address questions, making the policy accessible and reducing administrative burden.

Works Cited
John, David, and Gary Koenig. 2014. “Workplace Retirement Plans Will Help Workers Build Economic Security.” AARP Public Policy
Institute. https://www.aarp.org/content/dam/a arp/ppi/2014-10/aarp-workplace- retirement-plans-build-economic- security.pdf.
Shelton, Alison. 2024. “Reports Highlight Challenges Small Businesses Face in Offering Retirement Benefits.” The Pew Charitable Trusts. https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/resear ch-and- analysis/articles/2024/07/25/reports
-highlight-challenges-small- businesses-face-in-offering- retirement- benefits#:~:text=The%20primary% 20reason%20that%20small,over%2 0a%20larger%20asset%20base.
Anderson, Brian. 2019. “2 in 3 Americans Don’t Know Much About IRAs.” 401kspecialist. https://401kspecialistmag.com/2-in- 3-americans-dont-know-much- about- iras/#:~:text=2%20in%203%20Am ericans%20Don%27t%20Know%2 0Much%20About%20IRAs&text=L ack%20of%20knowledge%20hurtin g%20IRA,include%20similar%20q uestions%20about%20401ks.
Olson, Kim. 2023. “Retirement Assets in State Automated Savings Programs Hit $1 Billion.” The Pew Charitable Trusts. https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/resear ch-and- analysis/articles/2023/12/22/retirem ent-assets-in-state-automated- savings-programs-hit-1-billion.
“CalSavers Update—Fine Abatement Opportunity.” n.d. https://www.calcpa.org/whats- happening/california-cpa- magazine/calsavers-update#.
American Benefits Council, American Council of Life Insurers, and Investment Company Institute.
n.d. “Our Strong Retirement System: An American Success
Story.” https://www.ici.org/doc- server/pdf%3Appr_13_strong_retire ment.pdf.
Jovanovska, Tamara. 2024. “The Economic Impact of the Increase in 401(K) Contribution Limits.” Shortlister. https://www.myshortlister.com/insi ghts/401k-contribution-limits- 2024#:~:text=Higher%20individual
%20retirement%20savings%20can,t hem%20for%20long%2Dterm%20e fficiency.
Carroll, Gabriel D., James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2009. “Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4): 1639–74. https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.2009.1 24.4.1639.
Salmon, Jacqueline. 2024. “More Businesses Jumping on Retirement Savings Bandwagon.” AARP.
https://www.aarp.org/retirement/pla nning-for-retirement/info-2023/rise- in-401k-benefits.html.
“Press Releases | U.S. Representative Richard Neal.” 2024. U.S. Representative Richard Neal. https://neal.house.gov/news/docume ntsingle.aspx?DocumentID=3855.
Godbout, Ted. 2024. “Senate Finance Leaders Formally Introduce EARN Act.” ASPPA.
https://www.asppa- net.org/news/2022/9/senate-finance- leaders-formally-introduce-earn- act/.
John, David, Warren Cormier, Zahra Ebrahimi, Pamela Hess, and James Watt. 2023. “The Effect of a Universal Automatic IRA With Emergency Savings on Household Wealth.” https://doi.org/10.26419/ppi.00212. 001.
Community Development Financial Institutions and Economic Growth in New York’s I-90 Corridor
By Ian Gilenson, icg8@cornell.edu
The New York State Legislature should increase funding for Community Development Financial Institutions, stimulating growth in underservered areas along the Interstate-90 Corridor and fueling an economic revival backed by both state and federal resources.

Background
The Interstate-90 corridor is a key trade and transportation route spanning 385.5 miles across New York State, connecting major upstate economic hubs such as Buffalo, Rochester, Syracuse, Utica, and Albany.1 In 2023, the corridor was selected as one of 31 national technology hubs under President Joe Biden’s ambitious CHIPS (acronym of “Creating Helpful Incentives to Produce Semiconductors”) and Science Act.2 The initiative aims to foster domestic economic modernization by investing in the research and creation of American-made chips for machines like computers, medical devices, and vehicles.
Designation as a technology hub creates a federally-backed promise to bring jobs and industry to New York’s I-90. Such action is desperately needed, considering the pandemic resulted in a net loss of nearly 13,000 New York businesses. In a post-Covid world, upstate New York has also had the second largest decline in businesses and is ranked 46 out of 50 states in “dynamism,” a measure of economic mobility and growth.3 But the goals of the CHIPS Act appear as a remedy, aiming to offer $40 million into the region to create semiconductor factories, support
preexisting chip manufacturers, and spark small-business development.4
However, the new project faces significant challenges.
According to a July 2024 Urban Institute study, business growth in the I-90 corridor remains stagnant, hindered by insufficient government support. Additionally, minority business ownership in this area is minimal, with New York rates trailing other diverse states like Florida, California, and Texas.5
This is a bad omen as little businesses in New York can take advantage of the CHIPS program requirement that some grant money be allocated to minority groups.6 Without targeted financial investment in New York State’s business growth, this federally funded initiative risks becoming a case study for economic mismanagement.
Policy Idea
New York State legislators should facilitate the expansion of loans for small businesses along the Interstate-90 corridor. To do this, they should fund and deepen access to Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs), supporting future growth created by the CHIPS Act. Specifically, CDFIs are certified lending services required to offer a minimum of 60%
of their available finances to low, middle-income, or underserved Americans and offer fair, non- predatory interest rates.7 CDFIs receive grants from state and local governments and private donors, permitting them to offer more flexible lending terms to upstate New York businesses.8 This policy should be accomplished via specific grants given to CDFIs looking to expand their operations. The money can come from New York’s budget surplus of $2.2 billion, thus avoiding undue stress on taxpayers.9

Policy Analysis
The goal of this policy is to expand CDFIs to stimulate upstate New York’s economy. New York currently has 80 CDFIs, but according to New York’s Federal Reserve Governor Lisa Cook, this number is insufficient to drive significant economic growth.10 CDFIs are specifically important because their funds are earmarked for underserved communities and struggling businesses.11 Governor Cook emphasizes that many existing CDFIs are focused on economic rebuilding from the destruction of the pandemic, with resources stretched too thin to foster new growth.12 For New York to capitalize on CDFI funding as a tool for expansion, a policy passed by
the State Legislature and signed by the Governor’s Office providing more focused funding via grants is essential.
While there were some positive byproducts of COVID-19 economic policies — such as the introduction of the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility and Community Reinvestment Act, which allowed CDFIs to build greater capital reserves — these measures only provided a baseline that underemphasizes development along the I-90 corridor.13 Without such growth, the related economic chaos may imperil the potential success of the CHIPS Act.
Additional government financial support is needed. The Governor of New York holds budgetary powers to inject fresh energy into the economy. For example, in early March, NY Governor Kathy Hochul passed the
$800 million COVID-19 Pandemic Small Business Recovery Grant Program to help floundering businesses.14 But the current policy must go beyond rescuing — it must actively bolster new businesses in underperforming areas, like the Interstate-90 corridor. CDFIs can work quickly in giving this boost, as typically smaller, struggling organizations now face fewer barriers to entry from CDFIs, whose jobs are intrinsically to save failing businesses.15 As such, a legislator- created policy to provide greater funding to CDFIs primarily providing their services to I-90 corridor businesses is required.

Highlights
In 2023, the Interstate-90 corridor, a key trade and transportation route spanning New York State,
was selected as a national technology hub under the federal CHIPS and Science Act.1,2
Business growth in the I-90 corridor remains stagnant, hindered by insufficient government support that can diminish the impact of the CHIPS Act.3,4
New York should fund and deepen access to Community Development Financial Institutions by providing them with lump- sum grants carved from the state budget.7
CDFIs target smaller businesses that serve underserved populations, revitalizing struggling businesses and areas.9
Implementation
The CDFI grant program will be application-based, requiring Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) to prove how they plan to support new economic development and outline a detailed funding roadmap. This approach builds on the successful model of New York’s Small Business Seed Funding Grant Program (BSFG Program), which operated similarly.16 Both programs rely on an application-based system administered by the state, require the signature of the Governor to pursue their directives and give lump-sum funding to businesses in need. Grant sizes will vary based on each CDFI’s previous gross payouts, ensuring larger institutions receive funding proportionate to their needs while smaller CDFIs obtain adequate resources to expand operations. This tiered structure avoids a one-size-fits-all approach, empowering institutions of all sizes.
Again, previous programs like the BSFG have operated exactly like this, proving the feasibility and giving a model for this program’s success.17
Some business owners in upstate New York may be concerned about prioritizing CDFIs over other lending institutions.
CDFIs often require additional steps to demonstrate community impact, like maintaining community partnerships and may be less accessible to business owners outside underserved areas.18 However, it is important to then articulate the primary reason for these grants: to grow small business operations, bring economic growth to underperforming areas, and help marginalized communities become more economically mobile. Past precedent proves that CDFIs are effective at reaching targeted demographics: while traditional banks often exclude marginalized communities because of ingrained mistrust, high collateral expectations, and inconvenient geography, CDFI recipients are 60% people of color, 50% women, and 28% rural residents.19,20 As such, CDFIs can provide for the most diversified overall growth, which is essential to revitalize an area in need of economic growth injections.
With CDFIs being a potential savior for underserved New York communities, it is important to utilize strict CDFI regulations that ensure the safety and efficacy of these institutions. The Department of Treasury outlines steps that states like New York can take to monitor their CDFIs, including expressed punishments for violations in the CDFI application, listed illegal and inconsistent practices and clearly
expressed ways that CDFIs must contribute to community-level goals.21 Following these standards will create an application system that is free, fair, and economically beneficial to all involved.
By enhancing the lending power of CDFI’s, business growth along the I-90 corridor is expected. When semiconductor jobs come to the corridor as a result of the CHIPS Act, the local economies will already have a baseline for growth. They can appropriately reap the benefits of the federal grant program. By enhancing local economies before the federal grant money becomes available, the New York government can ensure I-90 cities and towns experience steady, upward growth instead of unstable economic swings that may come from an infusion of jobs and factories to areas vastly unprepared to serve them.

Works Cited
“Hochul Celebrates Federal Award to Empower New York Businesses to Access Opportunities.” Governor Kathy Hochul, December 19, 2023. https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/ governor-hochul-celebrates-federal- award-empower-new-york- businesses-access-opportunities.
“5 Crucial Differences between CDFIs and Traditional Banks.” CNote, February 16, 2021. https://www.mycnote.com/blog/5- crucial-differences-between-cdfis- and-traditional-banks/.
Augustus, Imani. “Five Reasons Minority Borrowers Can’t Access Capital.” Third Way, September 28, 2022.
https://www.thirdway.org/report/fiv e-reasons-minority-borrowers-cant- access-capital.
“Community Development Financial Institution Assistance Program.” Empire State Development, October 5, 2017. https://esd.ny.gov/community- development-financial-institution- assistance-program.
“Community Development Financial Institutions, or CDFIs.” CDFI Fund. https://www.cdfifund.gov/sites/cdfi/ files/documents/cdfi_infographic_v 08a.pdf. Accessed November 16, 2024.
“Consumer Compliance Outlook: An Overview of Community Development Financial Institutions.” Consumer Compliance Outlook, 2022. https://www.consumercomplianceo utlook.org/2022/first- issue/overview-of-community- development-financial-institutions/.
“Economic and Policy Insights: New York State Business Owners.” Office of the New York State Comptroller, March 2024. https://www.osc.ny.gov/files/reports
/pdf/business-owners-in-new-york- state.pdf.
“Fact Sheet: Biden-Harris Administration Announces 31 Regional Tech Hubs to Spur American Innovation, Strengthen Manufacturing, and Create Good- Paying Jobs in Every Region of the Country.” The White House, October 22, 2023. https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefin g-room/statements- releases/2023/10/23/fact-sheet- biden-harris-administration- announces-31-regional-tech-hubs- to-spur-american-innovation- strengthen-manufacturing-and- create-good-paying-jobs-in-every- region-of-the-country/.
“Fed’s Cook: CDFIs Face Many Challenges in Current Economic Climate.” ABA Banking Journal,
May 14, 2024.
https://bankingjournal.aba.com/202 4/05/feds-cook-cdfis-face-many- challenges-in-current-economic- climate/.
“Governor Hochul Announces
$60 Million Restore New York Program Will Launch Applications Tomorrow.” Governor Kathy Hochul, March 7, 2024. https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/ governor-hochul-announces-60- million-restore-new-york-program- will-launch-applications.
“Community Development Financial Institutions – Opportunities for Growth.” Dechert, October 7, 2020. https://www.dechert.com/knowledg e/onpoint/2020/10/community- development-financial-institutions--
-opportunities-for.html.
“NYS CDFI Coalition.” NYS CDFI Coalition. https://www.nyscdfi.org/. Accessed November 16, 2024.
Paaswell, Robert. New York in the New World Economy: The I-90 Corridor. https://utrc2.org/sites/default/files/p ubs/New-York-in-the-New-World- Economy-I-90-Corridor-final.pdf.
Orecki, Patrick, and Patrick Orecki. “NYS Budget Outlook.” Citizens Budget Commission of New York, March 7, 2024. https://cbcny.org/research/nys- budget-outlook.
Racino, Brad. “Upstate New York as a National Tech Corridor? Report Finds Some Obstacles.” Olean Times Herald, July 30, 2024. https://www.oleantimesherald.com/ news/upstate-new-york-as-a- national-tech-corridor-report-finds- some-obstacles/article_e7788f8e- 4dde-11ef-8255- f37dad177b4b.html.
[16,17] “Community Development Financial Institution Assistance
Program.” Empire State Development, October 5, 2017. https://esd.ny.gov/community- development-financial-institution- assistance-program.
Scheyder, Kristen. “Measuring CDFI Impact: A Conversation on the Need for Independent Research.” Citi, February 26, 2024. https://www.citigroup.com/global/f oundation/news/perspective/2024/m easuring-cdfi-impact-a-
conversation-on-the-need-for- independent-research.
Shoulders, Meco. “CDFIs: What Are They and How Do They Work?” Third Way, October 6, 2021.
https://www.thirdway.org/memo/cd fis-what-are-they-and-how-do-they- work.
Steele, Graham. “Update on Treasury’s Approach to Equitable Community Finance.” U.S. Department of the Treasury,
January 16, 2024. https://home.treasury.gov/news/feat ured-stories/update-on-treasurys- approach-to-equitable-community- finance.
Theodos, Brett, et al. “Growing the Small Business Economy of New York’s I-90 Corridor.” Urban Institute, July 19, 2024. https://www.urban.org/research/pub lication/growing-small-business- economy-new-yorks-i-90-corridor.
Expanding the Internal Revenue Code to Foster Employee Ownership in Private Equity and Venture Capital
By Pranav Jaganathan, prj27@cornell.edu
The current, limited application of Section 1042 of the Internal Revenue Code restricts the opportunity for employee stock ownership plans (ESOP) in private equity (PE) and venture capital-backed companies. Reform is needed to allow these firms to defer capital gains taxes when selling controlling interests of these companies to ESOPs and reinvesting the amount in ESG-compliant qualified replacement properties.

Background
Employee Stock Ownership Plans (ESOPs) are the most common employee ownership corporate structure in the United States, with approximately 6,500
U.S. companies having an ESOP and approximately 14 million U.S. workers being participants.1 They are considered defined contribution plans under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA), as they function by holding stock through a trust fund that accrues money over time as companies contribute more stock.2,3 The goal of ESOPs is to encourage employee retention and motivation throughout their tenure, especially in an age where one in every two
U.S. employees is open to leaving their current job.4 An ESOP tackles these issues by encouraging employees to have a stake in their company’s success, which in turn allows for more productivity, effectiveness, and efficiency.5
Workers are not the only ones who benefit from ESOPs. There are incentives for specific corporations as well. Section 1042 of the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) provides a tax deferral mechanism for business owners who sell stock to an ESOP and reinvest the proceeds in a qualified replacement
property (securities issued by a domestic operating corporation) within twelve months of the sale.6 Specifically, business owners of C Corporations can effectively defer capital gains taxes on their sale of stocks if the sale of their stocks is to ESOPs. The federal government taxes long-term capital gains with preferential treatment at a maximum rate of 23.8%, which is still lower than the rate for other sources of income.7 Section 1042 allows ESOPs to play a significant role in motivating corporations to invest in the betterment of their employees while retaining more of their earnings overall.

Policy Idea
The United States Congress should expand Section 1042 of the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) by allowing private equity firms and venture capital funds, which are generally limited liability companies (LLC) or limited partnerships (LP), to defer capital gains taxes when they sell a controlling interest in a company to an Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP). If a PE or VC fund sells 30% or more of its stock to an ESOP that complies with the Employment Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), the firm can
defer capital gains taxes. The proceeds from these transactions must then be reinvested in qualified replacement properties (QRPs), specifically targeting small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) with environmental, social, and corporate governance (ESG) related initiatives. Firms can defer the tax as long as they hold the QRP, with taxes only being implemented after the selling of those proceeds, continuing a capital allocation method that maximizes the firm’s profits while ensuring the empowerment of other workers.

Policy Analysis
There are three key objectives that this policy attempts to achieve. First, this policy aims to align PE’s best interests with employees. Job satisfaction grew as the attitudes of workers towards their managers and company performance, specifically in terms of sales growth, increased by 5.4% more than comparison companies with the establishment of ESOP plans. This makes them more likely to be efficient in the long-term.8

The second objective of the policy is to ensure the long-term success of PE-backed companies. ESOPs are connected to undeniable success.
73% of the ESOP companies have significantly improved their performance after setting up their plans.8 But in the PE industry, creating the ESOP plans in the first place is rare.9 Through this policy, PE-backed corporations will have an opportunity to improve performance and production output immensely, incentivizing PE firms to implement ESOP plans that produce the benefit in the first place.
The last objective of the policy is wealth building and promotion of concrete ESG initiatives. Although 87% of firms consider ESG factors only to decrease investment risk and potential litigation on a reputational basis, this policy creates two concrete contribution methods to a PE firm’s ESG efforts.10 First, ESOPs themselves are found to have a significantly positive relationship with greater environmental protection, quality of environmental impact information disclosed, and ESG ratings.11 Second, the proceeds are required to be reinvested in SMEs with ESG initiatives which are known to create jobs at a higher rate than non- PE-backed firms and to adopt sustainable business practices.12 Both methods will ensure the PE industry maximizes shareholder value while simultaneously contributing to social welfare.

Highlight:
This policy proposes that through an expansion of Section 1042 of the IRC, private equity (PE) and venture capital (VC) firms can defer capital gains taxes by selling a controlling stake in a company to Employee Stock Ownership Plans
(ESOP) and reinvesting the proceedings into a QRP from an operating corporation that is an SME with ESG initiatives as defined under this law.6
This policy also encourages reinvestment into SMEs with specific ESG initiatives, increasing their influence in their respective industries to expand their social and environmental welfare impact.13,14
This policy will use the existing compliance frameworks for Section 1042 with adjustments to account for the QRP differences, documenting both the sale to ESOPs and the reinvestment in ESG- compliant QRPs. The IRS would partner with the Department of Labor to ensure all ESOP transactions meet ERISA standards.15,16
Implementation
First, the United States Congress will need to introduce and pass a bill through both chambers, proposing amendments to Section 1042 of the IRC to allow private equity and venture capital firms holding a controlling stake in a company to defer capital gains taxes when selling to an ESOP. Within this bill, Congress must define controlling stake as at least 30%, QRP as any security issued by a domestic “operating corporation,” SMEs as firms that employ fewer than 500 employees, and ESG as a metric used in business and investing to determine a company’s performance across multiple areas of social responsibility like environment, social, and corporate governance.6,13,14 ESOPs must be
defined as a qualified defined contribution plan that is a stock bonus plan or a stock bonus/money purchase plan under IRC Section 401(a).17 These terms are important to define during the legislative process to ensure that the true meaning of the bill is held, especially with potential legal scrutiny.18
Assuming the passage of the bill in both chambers of Congress and the signing of the bill by the President of the United States, the IRS will have jurisdiction in enforcing the law. Prior to enforcement, the IRS will open a Public Notice and Comment Period to receive stakeholder input. Inputs have successfully led to the more effective and efficient enforcement of laws, as seen with the IRS Qualified Business Income Deduction in 2018 and its clarified definitions after the comments.19
To ensure compliance, the IRS will establish a framework to enforce the new tax code similar to the current compliance framework under Section 1042 of the IRC, with a few additional adjustments.
Sellers must attach a written statement indicating their choice to apply for Section 1042 to their income tax return for the year of the sale.20 This statement must include the following: a description of the corporation or qualified securities sold, the date of sale, the cost of the QRP purchased, and a justification for why the QRP is considered a part of an SME that can be measured under ESG standards.20 Within 45 days of purchasing the QRP, sellers of the QRP are required to provide a notarized statement detailing the purchase, including the date and cost.
Additionally, the statement must include their formalized ESG-
related initiatives, and their corporation size, declaring that the securities represent the QRP concerning the ESOP stock sale.15
Lastly, the IRS will work with the Department of Labor (DOL) to ensure that the ESOPs involved in all transactions comply with ERISA standards.16 The IRS and DOL will also collaborate to collect data regarding the success of the policy. Although the current Section 1042 does not have any provisions regarding data collection to measure its success, this law will encourage the DOL and the National Center for Employee Ownership to collect data regarding the welfare of workers in corporations involved in PE and VC transactions.
Works Cited
“Employee Ownership by the Numbers.” NCEO, 2024. https://www.nceo.org/articles/empl oyee-ownership-by-the-numbers.
“ERISA.” DOL. Accessed November 14, 2024. https://www.dol.gov/general/topic/h ealth- plans/erisa#:~:text=The%20Employ ee%20Retirement%20Income%20S ecurity,for%20individuals%20in%2 0these%20plans.
National Center for Employee Ownership. 2019. “What Is Employee Ownership? NCEO.” 2019. https://www.nceo.org/what- is-employee-ownership.
Gallup Inc. 2023. “Indicator: Employee Retention & Attraction.” 2023.
https://www.gallup.com/467702/ind icator-employee-retention- attraction.aspx.
Dudley, Thomas, and Ethan Rouen. 2021. “The Big Benefits of Employee Ownership.” Harvard Business Review, May 13, 2021.
https://hbr.org/2021/05/the-big- benefits-of-employee-ownership.
“26 U.S. Code § 1042 - Sales of Stock to Employee Stock Ownership Plans or Certain Cooperatives.” 2022. LII / Legal Information Institute. 2022. https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode
/text/26/1042 .
Doak, Emily. 2023. “ETFs and Taxes: What You Need to Know.” Schwab Brokerage. July 2023. https://www.schwab.com/learn/stor y/etfs-and-taxes-what-you-need-to- know.
Rosen, Corey, and Michael Quarrey. 1987. “How Well Is Employee Ownership Working?” Harvard Business Review. September 1987. https://hbr.org/1987/09/how-well- is-employee-ownership-working.
Marketplace Resources. 2023. “Private Equity Leans into the Flexibility of ESOPs.” Verit Advisors. January 18, 2023. https://verit.com/private-equity- leans-into-the-flexibility-of-esops/.
Webster, Benjamin. 2022. “ESG and Private Equity Investing - OWL ESG.” OWL ESG. September 8, 2022.
https://owlesg.com/2022/09/08/esg- and-private-equity-investing/.
Kong, Dongmin, and Yanan Wang. 2021. “Employee Stock Ownership Plans and Corporate Environmental Engagement.” SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.391536 6.
Seeman, Axel, Dale Hardcastle, Deike Diers, and Jacqueline Han. 2021. “The Expanding Case for ESG in Private Equity.” Bain. March 1, 2021. https://www.bain.com/insights/esg- investing-global-private-equity- report-2021/.
Aranoff, Shara. 2010. “Small and Medium- Sized Enterprises: Overview of Participation in U.S. Exports.”
Greene, Jim. 2021. “Environmental, Social, and Corporate Governance (ESG).” https://www.kennesaw.edu/coles/do cs/esg-greene-2021.pdf.
Markowitz, Dan. 2022. “Tax Treatment of ESOPs: Your Guide to Internal Revenue Code Section 1042.” Mncpa.org. 2022. https://www.mncpa.org/resources/in terest-areas/internal-articles/tax- treatment-of-esops-your-guide-to- internal-reve/.
U.S. Department of Labor. 2019. “ERISA.” 2019.
https://www.dol.gov/general/topic/h ealth-plans/erisa.
Internal Revenue Service. n.d. “Employee Stock Ownership Plans (ESOPs) | Internal Revenue Service.” Www.irs.gov. https://www.irs.gov/retirement- plans/employee-stock-ownership- plans-esops.
"Loper Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo." Oyez. Accessed November 14, 2024. https://www.oyez.org/cases/2023/2 2-451.
CRS. 2020. “The Section 199A
Deduction: How It Works and Illustrative Examples.” https://crsreports.congress.gov/prod uct/pdf/R/R46402.
“26 CFR § 1.1042-1T -
Questions and Answers Relating to the Sales of Stock to Employee Stock Ownership Plans or Certain Cooperatives (Temporary).” 2014. LII / Legal Information Institute.
2014.
https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text
/26/1.1042-1T.
Pathways to Mobility: Affordable Public Transportation for Low-Income NYC Residents
By Aryan Shah, ans267@cornell.edu

The New York City Government and the MTA should provide half-priced subway and bus fares to those living at or below 200% of the federal poverty line in order to combat income inequality in New York City.

Background
Income inequality in the United States is a growing problem, with the top 10% of households holding 67% of the nation’s wealth while the bottom 50% possess just 2.5%.1 This disparity is particularly prevalent in New York City, where the wealthiest 20% of Manhattan residents earn, on average, 53 times more than the bottom 20%.2 Statewide, the top 1% earn over 44 times more than the bottom 99%.3 States with higher income inequality have lower life expectancies and higher mortality and obesity rates.4
Public transit provides low- income individuals, who often cannot afford cars, access to jobs to bring themselves out of poverty.5 Residents of the 10 lowest-income city council districts in New York are 45% more likely to commute via bus than the average New Yorker.6 However, the affordability of public transit remains a significant barrier for many low- income households.7 In New York City, as of 2024, 20% of residents reported difficulty affording public transit, rising to 30% among those living in poverty.8 In response to these challenges, the MTA (Metropolitan Transit Authority) introduced the Fair Fares program, which offers half-priced transit for NYC residents living at or below 120% of the federal poverty level.

However, only 56% of eligible New Yorkers have enrolled due to a lack of advertising, public awareness, and potentially fare evasion as well.8 Many eligible residents were unaware of the program or unsure how to apply.7 Furthermore, many low-income workers do not qualify for the program because of the enrollment threshold.8 It is clear that expanded public transit assistance for low-income individuals is needed to address the high cost of transit for low-income New Yorkers, which will serve as a critical step in reducing the city’s high income inequality levels.
Policy Idea
To address New York City’s extreme levels of income inequality due to inequality in transportation access, the NYC government should expand the Fair Fares program to residents living at or below 200% of the federal poverty level, as the current 120% threshold still excludes some residents who cannot afford transit. This policy would make subways and non-express buses half-price for eligible residents, allowing them to access jobs to bring themselves out of poverty. Participants would apply for a special MetroCard, granting them half-price access to these services, and they would renew their eligibility annually to ensure

they still meet the income requirements. The program would be funded using the NYC congestion tax on cars, set to provide $15 billion to the MTA from 2020-2024. Funding may also include federal government subsidies. The policy would be proposed through NYC Councilwoman Selvena Brooks- Powers, the Chair of the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
Policy Analysis
The primary cost of expanding the Fair Fares program for low-income NYC residents would be the lost fare revenue from approximately 4.6 million NYC citizens who would no longer pay full fares.9,10 Assuming these individuals use the subway or bus twice daily over 262 workdays per year, this results in 2.41 billion rides annually.11 At the current fare of $2.90 per ride, this amounts to nearly $3.495 billion in lost revenue each year.12 Fares currently account for 23% of the MTA’s $19.38 billion budget, making this a substantial financial loss.13 To compensate for these lost fares, the MTA could tap into funds from the recently raised NYC congestion tax, which is projected to provide $15 billion over 4 years to fund MTA expansion.14 This would eliminate
the need for fare hikes, as using congestion tax funds would allow the $3.495 billion in lost fare revenue to be covered, given that the tax provides $3.75 billion in increased revenue per year to the MTA.14
This increased access to public transit for low-income individuals from Fair Fares would support upward economic mobility for low-income individuals. Limited public transit expansion has been correlated with higher rates of unemployment, meaning that increasing public transit access would decrease unemployment rates for low-income individuals.15 This decrease in unemployment rates would bring lower-income individuals closer to higher-income NYC residents, thereby increasing chances for upward economic mobility.15 There is also a positive relationship between transit access and the wealth of a neighborhood due to job access.15
Fare reduction programs for low-income residents have proven to be successful in other cities. The Boston city government implemented a 50% fare reduction program for low-income residents, projected to increase low-income ridership by 30%.16

Highlights
As of 2024, income inequality in the US is growing, with the top 10% of households holding 67% of the nation’s wealth, while the bottom 50% holds only 2.5%.1
Access to public transportation has proven to be a powerful tool for reducing poverty, enabling individuals to reach job
opportunities quickly and efficiently.5
Affordability remains a significant barrier, as approximately 30% of impoverished people struggle to afford public transportation.8
The city government of Boston implemented a 50% fare reduction program for low-income residents in the summer of 2024, which is expected to increase low- income ridership by 30%.16
In order to address this problem, the New York City Government should expand their current Fair Fares program to those living at or below 200% of the federal poverty level, giving them half-price fares on all MTA subways and non-express buses.

Implementation
The Office of NYC Councilwoman Selvena Brooks- Powers should sponsor the bill for this policy in the NYC Council, which would most likely pass due to the tendency of NYC residents and the City Council to support socially liberal policies such as this one. Councilwoman Brooks-Powers brings valuable experience in directing infrastructure funding and currently serves as the Chair of the Committee of Transportation and Infrastructure.17 Given their history of endorsing public transit improvements, advocacy organizations, including Transportation for America and the American Public Transportation Association, would also support the proposal by lobbying other NYC councilmembers.18, 19 The NYC Council would work closely with
the MTA to administer and oversee the expanded program.
The main challenge to implementing this expansion is the
$3.495 billion in lost fares.12 Although the congestion tax hike would fully cover any lost fare revenue associated with the proposed Fair Fares expansion, only
$255 million remain per year for any subway and bus upgrades.12, 14 The MTA can apply for government subsidies from President Biden’s Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, which allocated $8 billion to expand high-capacity rail and bus services in states across the US.20 If federal funding falls through, the MTA can also increase revenue by combatting fare evasion. The MTA can station more officials in high-traffic subway and bus stations to discourage potential fare evaders.21 Although there would be an associated personnel cost, the increased revenue would be significant, given that fare evasion affects 14% of subway and 48% of bus rides in New York City.22, 23 Administrative adjustments associated with special MetroCards could be combated by utilizing infrastructure from the existing Fair Fares program, using any of the aforementioned funding sources to cover the costs associated with program expansion, including personnel and administrative costs.
Limited publicity was another issue with the original Fair Fares program. To address this, the MTA will partner with community organizations to significantly publicize Fair Fares. The campaign will include posters and advertisements in low-income neighborhoods and public housing projects. Publicity would cost roughly $75-150 per advertisement, which could be covered by the 4 to
1 economic return increased public transportation provides.24, 25 The MTA will also put advertisements on buses and subways, directly reaching eligible riders. To gather community feedback, the MTA will collaborate with community-based organizations in low-income communities to run surveys to determine the effectiveness of advertising campaigns.
The Fair Fares expansion will coincide with the NYC congestion tax on January 5th, 2025.14 Advertising will start simultaneously and continue throughout 2025. The MTA will also conduct quarterly ridership and advertising effectiveness evaluations starting in 2026.
The success of this program will be measured using quarterly evaluations of ridership growth among Fair Fares users. Given that the MTA already tracks ridership using MetroCard swipes, those who swipe using the special Fair Fares MetroCard would be tracked separately to measure the success of this program specifically.
Overall, expanding the Fair Fares program would fight against New York City’s income inequality by providing low-income individuals with increased access to jobs that can support their upward economic mobility.
Works Cited
Kent, Ana Hernández, and Lowell Ricketts. “The State of U. S. Wealth Inequality.” The State of
U.S. Wealth Inequality. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, August 2, 2024.
https://www.stlouisfed.org/institute- for-economic-equity/the-state-of- us-wealth-inequality.
Chen, Stefanos. “New York Is Rebounding for the Rich. Nearly
Everyone Else Is Struggling.” New York Times, September 28, 2023. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/09/ 28/nyregion/nyc-income-gap- wages.html.
“Inequality in New York & Options for Progressive Tax Reform,” Fiscal Policy Institute, November 10, 2022. https://fiscalpolicy.org/inequality- in-new-york-options-for- progressive-tax-reform.
Wilkinson, Richard G., and Kate
E. Pickett. “The enemy between us: The psychological and social costs of inequality.” European Journal of Social Psychology, vol. 47, no. 1,
Feb. 2017, pp. 11–24,
https://doi.org/10.1002/ejsp.2275.
“Transportation Access.” Urban Institute. Accessed October 9, 2024. https://upward- mobility.urban.org/framework/neig hborhoods/transportation.
“Bus Commutes Are Significantly Longer for Low- Income, Black, and Latino Bus Riders. Dedicated Space for Buses Is the Solution.” Transportation Alternatives. Accessed November 14, 2024.
https://transalt.org/blog/bus- commutes-are-significantly-longer- for-low-income-black-and-latino- bus-riders-dedicated-space-for- buses-is-the-solution.
Sanchez, Thomas W. “Poverty, Policy, and Public Transportation.” Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 42, no. 5 (June 1, 2008): 833–41.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2008.01
.011.
“CSS Report: New Yorkers Struggle to Afford Mass Transit; Expanding Fair Fares Can Help,” Community Service Society of New York, March 14, 2024. https://www.cssny.org/news/entry/c ss-report-new-yorkers-struggle-to-
afford-mass-transit-expanding-fair- fares#:~:text=Overall%2C%2020% 20percent%20of%20all,over%20the
%20past%20three%20years.
“The State of Poverty and Disadvantage in New York City.” Columbia University Center on Poverty and Social Policy. Accessed November 1, 2024. https://www.povertycenter.columbi a.edu/nyc-poverty-tracker/the-state- of-poverty-and-disadvantage-in- 2022.
Perone, Jennifer. “Advantages and Disadvantages of Fare-Free Transit Policy.” NCTR-473-133. National Center for Transportation Research, October 2002. https://digitalcommons.usf.edu/cgi/ viewcontent.cgi?article=1216&cont ext=cutr_nctr.
“Working Day Payroll Calendar, 2024 | University Human Resources - The University of Iowa.” Accessed October 9, 2024. https://hr.uiowa.edu/pay/payroll- services/payroll-calendars/working- day-payroll-calendar-2024.
“Everything You Need to Know about Fares in New York.” Metropolitan Transit Authority. Accessed October 9, 2024. https://new.mta.info/fares.
“MTA Operating Budget Basics.” Accessed October 9, 2024. Metropolitan Transit Authority. https://new.mta.info/budget/MTA- operating-budget-basics.
Kaske, Michelle. “Hochul Plans to Revive NYC Congestion Pricing With $9 Toll.” Bloomberg, November 14, 2024. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/a rticles/2024-11-13/hochul-plans-to- revive-nyc-congestion-pricing-plan- with-9-toll.
Kaufman, Sarah, Mitchell Moss, Jorge Hernandez, and Justin Tyndall. “Mobility, Economic Opportunity and New York City
Neighborhoods.” The Rudin Center for Transportation at the NYU Wagner School, November 2015. https://wagner.nyu.edu/files/faculty/ publications/JobAccessNov2015.pd f.
“Making Transit More Affordable: MBTA Board Approves Low-Income Fare Program to Benefit Riders in 170+ Communities,” March 28, 2024. https://www.mbta.com/news/2024- 03-28/making-transit-more- affordable-mbta-board-approves- low-income-fare-program-benefit.
“Biography of Selvena Brooks- Powers” New York City Council. Accessed November 13, 2024. https://council.nyc.gov/selvena- brooks-powers/.
Transportation For America. “Home.” Transportation for America. Accessed November 1, 2024. https://t4america.org/.
APTAAdmin. “Home.” American Public Transportation Association. Accessed November 1, 2024. https://www.apta.com/.
“Guidebook to the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law | Build.Gov.” The White House. Accessed November 1, 2024. https://www.whitehouse.gov/build/ guidebook/.
Porath, Keiko, and Patricia Galilea. “Temporal Analysis of Fare Evasion in Transantiago: A Socio- Political View.” Research in Transportation Economics, Thredbo 16 conference, 83 (November 1,
2020): 100958.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.retrec.2020
.100958.
Stephen, Nessen. “Bloody Turn in NYC’s Fare Evasion Crackdown Raises Question: Is It Worth It?” Gothamist, September 20, 2024.
https://gothamist.com/news/bloody-
turn-in-nycs-fare-evasion- crackdown-raises-question-is-it- worth-it.
Ley, Ana. “Fare Evasion Surges on N.Y.C. Buses, Where 48% of Riders Fail to Pay.” The New York Times, August 26, 2024, sec. New York. https://www.nytimes.com/2024/08/ 26/nyregion/nyc-bus-subway-fare- evasion.html.
“New York City Metro Area Subway-Train Advertising - Ads on PATH and New Jersey Transit Subways-Trains.” Blue Line Media. Accessed December 2, 2024. https://www.bluelinemedia.com/sub way-advertising/new-york-city-ny.
Osman, Marc. “Economic Impact of Public Transit.” American Public Transportation Association (blog). Accessed December 2, 2024. https://www.apta.com/research- technical-resources/economic- impact-of-public-transit/.




Education Policy
Director: Sejal Sekhar Assistant Director: Danielle Berkowitz
Analysts: Reagan Allvin, Jaiden Fisher-Dayn, Claudia Nesin, Ben Nusbaum, Abigail Silverman, and Sanshray Singh
Eliminating Mandated Seniority-Based Teacher Layoffs in New York State to Ensure Educational Equity
By Reagan Allvin, rra49@cornell.edu
New York enforces a “last-in, first-out” policy by laying off new teachers first for firing public school teachers, threatening the careers of early-career educators and disrupting the classroom environment. Eliminating this mandate will maintain a diverse, supportive teacher workforce.

Background
Throughout the pandemic, states have spent a disproportionate amount of federal funds on hiring new teachers due to the influx of funding provided by the Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief Fund (ESSER).1 One estimate records that 20% of ESSER funds were spent on staffing. Despite the current teacher shortage, economists predict a sharp increase in layoffs as ESSER spending is cut off in the upcoming years.2
Ideally, teacher layoffs would not be necessary, allowing for an environment of mentorship between new and experienced educators. However, just as emergency funding created budget space for new educators, its absence leaves teacher reduction as the most commonly predicted budget cut among district leaders3. In the state of New York, this prediction has the potential for dire consequences.
New York currently mandates a layoff policy in which teachers must be fired in the order of reverse seniority.4,5 However, this perspective is outdated and ignores current research.
Frequently laying off less experienced teachers produces equity issues through widening the achievement gap. People of color
are approximately 45% more likely to be early-career teachers, which disproportionately serve low- income communities and minority students.6,7 Students experiencing high teacher turnover score lower in both reading and math, especially if they were already low-performing.6 A diverse teacher workforce supports students across the board, with teachers of color significantly increasing math and reading scores alongside feelings of self-efficacy among students.8 New York threatens this potential by placing seniority at paramount importance in the face of a possible wave of layoffs while failing to consider that in doing so, they also remove teachers of color from the classroom.6

Policy Idea
To resolve issues stemming from seniority-based layoffs, the New York state government should modify existing legislation. Articles 2510 and 2588 of New York State education law require teachers with the least seniority, including years of substitute and paraprofessional experience, to be laid off first in the case of a position termination.4,5 State legislators should modify the sections of these statutes describing layoff policy to eliminate seniority as the first line of discretion in
determining which teacher to lay off in the case of a position termination. In order to replace this first consideration for termination, a task force should be assembled to find another consideration with more research backing from New York communities.

Policy Analysis
While the post-pandemic educational era is like nothing observed before, those working in school hiring policy can look to the Great Recession as a reference, since it was the latest period of mass layoffs to date.7 States and districts had to determine how to lay off teaching staff while limiting the impact on students, and this practice will likely continue following the ESSER financial cliff. States who did not use seniority- based layoffs were found to significantly increase high-school graduation rates in the long term, compared with those who did not10.
When school districts were forced to look beyond seniority, they had to investigate other measures of teacher quality. New York State currently evaluates teacher performance through principal ratings, but research finds a positive slant too extreme to accurately determine real impact from most principal evaluations.11
Value-added measures, uses changes in test scores to link the presence of a given teacher to a given student’s improvement. These measures have strong research backing, with teachers who score highly on short-term value-added measures being linked to students’ increased college attendance and socioeconomic mobility later in life.12 However, policymakers must note that this measure is purely correlative and sensitive to external community factors outside of the teacher.13 A more sophisticated primary measure is necessary, but should be determined with thorough consideration. Through promptly beginning research on impactful teacher factors, New York can protect early-career and underrepresented educators and eliminate seniority as the foremost argument in personnel decisions sooner rather than later.

Highlights
Approximately 20% of COVID-19 K-12 emergency funding, which will run out in the coming years, was allocated toward paying staff.1 New York’s “first-in, last-out” mandates unfairly impact disadvantaged schools by disproportionately increasing already-rampant teacher turnover.7,8
Removing reverse-seniority layoff mandates would protect early-career educators, and, in turn, protect the diversity of the teacher workforce.6.
Other estimates of teacher quality (such as value added measures and principal evaluations) are adequate, but this policy should also
include provisions for increased research on impactful teacher factors.

Implementation
New York State should pass a bill to amend education statutes to omit the mandate of seniority-based layoffs within the upcoming legislative session. This legislative change will limit the immediate disproportionate quantity of post-
ESSER layoffs on newer educators. To convince lawmakers
to reform the statutes, advocates can develop and present case studies based on the successes of any of the 20 states which restrict “last-in.
first-out” policies.10
To best serve teachers and students alike, New York should pursue a more standardized approach. Prior to making any additional statutory change, the New York State Department of Education (NYSED) must analyze which aspects of teaching most accurately predict student outcomes. NYSED should launch a series of Randomly-Controlled Trials (RCTs) in schools across the state to analyze various factors of teacher performance, including short-term academic teacher value- added measures and teacher absenteeism. The exhaustive list of teacher effectiveness measures should be developed by a legislative task force composed of advocates for the aforementioned bill, with the input of teacher unions (to ensure fairness) and advocacy groups.
Over the course of the next two years, NYSED should measure engagement-based student outcomes such as changes in student-reported self-efficacy to thoroughly measure how different teacher factors affect students’ willingness to learn.
Following the data collection and analysis of this statewide study, NYSED or a separate legislative task force can determine impacts of specific agreed-upon teacher factors on student engagement outcomes.
Legislators should pass an additional bill modifying New York Education Law articles 2510 and 2588 to prioritize factors with the strongest empirical proof in layoff situations, and districts should recommend these factors as ongoing accountability measures.

Works Cited
“Esser Funding and School System Jobs: Evidence from Job Posting Data.” CALDER, April 1, 2024.
https://caldercenter.org/publications
/esser-funding-and-school-system- jobs-evidence-job-posting-data.
“Layoffs, Shortages, and the Esser Cliff: Making Sense of a Paradoxical Labor Market.” Learning Policy Institute, October 2024.
https://learningpolicyinstitute.org/bl og/layoffs-shortages-esser-cliff- paradoxical-labor-market.
Diliberti, Melissa Kay, and Heather L. Schwarz. “Districts’ Pandemic Recovery Efforts as COVID-Relief Aid Expires: Selected Findings from the Spring 2024 American School District Panel Survey.” RAND, July 30, 2024.
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research
_reports/RRA956-23.html.
“NYS Open Legislation.” NYS Open Legislation. Accessed October 9, 2024. https://www.nysenate.gov/legislatio n/laws/EDN/2510.
“2023 New York Laws;
EDN; Article 52; 2588 - Seniority, Retention and Displacement Rights
in Connection with Abolition of Positions in City School Districts of Cities Having More than One Million.” Justia Law. Accessed October 9, 2024. https://law.justia.com/codes/new- york/edn/title-2/article-52/2588/.
The inequitable effects of teacher layoffs: What we know and can do. Accessed October 2024. https://direct.mit.edu/edfp/article/17
/2/367/108661/The-Inequitable- Effects-of-Teacher-Layoffs-What- We.
Goldhaber, Dan, Vanessa Quince, and Roddy Theobald. “Has It Always Been This Way? Tracing the Evolution of Teacher Quality Gaps in U.S. Public Schools.” American Educational Research Journal 55, no. 1 (October 12,
2017): 171–201.
https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831217 733445.
Ronfeldt, Matthew, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff. “How Teacher Turnover Harms Student Achievement.” American Educational Research Journal, February 1, 2013. https://cepa.stanford.edu/content/ho w-teacher-turnover-harms-student- achievement.
Blazar, D. “Teachers of color, culturally responsive teaching, and student outcomes: Experimental Evidence from the Random Assignment of Teachers to Classes”, December 2021 https://edworkingpapers.com/sites/d efault/files/ai21-501.pdf.
A. Bekkerman, D. Boyd, R. Chetty, and D. Goldhaber. “Restricting Seniority as a Factor in Public School District Layoffs: Analyzing the Impact of State Legislation on Graduation Rates.” Economics of Education Review, December 7, 2019.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/scie nce/article/abs/pii/S0272775718305 028.
Grissom, Jason A., and Susanna Loeb. “Assessing Principals’ Assessments: Subjective Evaluations of Teacher.” Education Finance and Policy, June 27, 2017. https://cepa.stanford.edu/content/ass essing-principals-assessments- subjective-evaluations-teacher- effectiveness-low-and-high-stakes- environments.
Hanushek. “Value-Added Models of Teachers”. 2013. http://hanushek.stanford.edu/sites/d efault/files/publications/Hanushek 2013 Focus 29(2).pdf .
“ASA statement on using value-added models for Educational Assessment.” 2012.
https://www.amstat.org/docs/default
-source/amstat-documents/pol- asavam-statement.pdf.
Revamping Federal Mentorship Programs to Address ‘Hidden Curricula’ in Higher Education
By Danielle Berkowitz, db755@cornell.edu

Hidden curricula – the unspoken social, cultural, and academic expectations – have increasingly disadvantaged first-generation and low-income students. The Department of Education should revamp federal mentorship programs, such as TRIO, to make hidden curricula explicit, providing all students with a clear understanding of higher education expectations.

Background
Students across the United States experience vastly different learning opportunities, as many minority and low-income students face unequal access to resources compared to their affluent peers. This disparity not only affects students’ K-12 experience but also limits avenues for higher education and college readiness. As students transition to higher education, the effects of this inequality persist.
Students from wealthier backgrounds often come equipped with cultural capital, which helps them navigate the unspoken norms of higher education, like interacting with professors, understanding syllabi, and attending office hours.1 These informal but crucial skills, known as “hidden curricula,” are assumed to be universal; however, many first-generation and low- income students have never been exposed to them.2 As a result, hidden curriculum perpetuates educational inequities, putting these students at a disadvantage in higher education.
The federal government currently offers a series of eight mentorship programs, such as Upward Bound, Talent Search, and Student Support Services (TRIO) Programs, to help students overcome economic, social, academic, and cultural barriers in
education.3 Three of these programs
— Student Support Services, the McNair Post-Baccalaureate Achievement Program, and Veterans’ Upward Bound — specifically focus on barriers in higher education; nevertheless, these programs do not address components of hidden curriculum. Instead, they concentrate on other elements such as tutoring, academic coaching, and supplemental coursework. Furthermore, the programs lack clear, measurable objectives, making it difficult to assess their effectiveness.4 Program outcomes are defined by long-term student success without considering the specific determinants of that success. This approach perpetuates inequality, as it fails to address one of the root causes — hidden curricula — and instead relies on academic support as a supplementary fix.5

Policy Idea
The Department of Education (ED) should revamp federal TRIO programs in higher education to address challenges associated with the hidden curriculum. This revamped approach would introduce targeted initiatives focused on key aspects of hidden curricula, such as financial literacy, networking, career readiness, and academic navigation.
These programs will enable students to learn practical strategies for interacting with professors, understanding syllabi, attending office hours, navigating campus resources, and more. Additionally, the revamped programs should incorporate specialized training for mentors to equip them with the tools needed to guide students effectively through the hidden expectations of higher education.
The curriculum should be updated yearly to remain relevant and tailored to the norms of specific institutions, ensuring program effectiveness. The ED should also conduct annual reviews of the program content in collaboration with mentors and student representatives to take into account feedback from students about challenges and shifts in hidden curriculum.

Policy Analysis
Implementing a policy that addresses the knowledge gap between students of different socioeconomic backgrounds is essential to leveling the playing field in higher education.6 Without modifying federal mentorship programs to address hidden curricula, higher education opportunities for all Americans will continue to be limited by their financial constraints.
The structure of federal TRIO programs makes them ideal for implementing modules that address hidden curricula, as they effectively reach students who would benefit from them the most. Congress mandates that two-thirds of TRIO participants come from families with incomes at or below 150% of the federal poverty level and where neither parent has graduated from college. As a result, TRIO programs currently serve more than 880,000 first-generation and low-income students.
Additionally, with $48.8 million in annual funding, including 114 program grants and sponsorships from 50 historically Black colleges and universities coupled with funds from ED’s Higher Education Act, these programs have a proven track record of having the financial means to support underrepresented student populations and dismantle these hidden education barriers.7
In addition, research has shown that a simple, cost-effective intervention, such as a workshop, can effectively assess and address hidden curricula. The standardized workshop used in the study significantly improved students' understanding of hidden curricula and successfully improved their academic performance.8 Making hidden curricula explicit also helps build cultural capital, which is proven to boost academic success in higher education.9 Given these successful results, implementing similar workshops administered by existing federal mentorship programs should expect to yield similar results. By focusing on hidden curricula, TRIO can enhance its existing initiatives, ensuring that students not only gain access to educational opportunities but also develop the skills and knowledge
needed to navigate the complexities and expectations of higher education.

Highlights
Students from minority and low-income backgrounds face unequal learning opportunities and limited exposure to “hidden curricula” compared to their more affluent peers, perpetuating inequality in higher education.
Federal government mentorship programs such as TRIO, which are designed to help students overcome economic, social, academic, and cultural barriers in education do not address key elements of the hidden curriculum.
The federal government should revamp TRIO programs to focus on hidden curricula, offering targeted initiatives in financial literacy, networking, career readiness, and academic navigation to help students effectively engage with professors, syllabi, office hours, and campus resources.
Expanding federal TRIO programs to include initiatives on hidden curricula could better prepare students for the expectations of higher education, ensuring that low-income and first- generation students can successfully navigate the academic system.
Implementation
There is currently substantial bipartisan support for
TRIO, demonstrated by the continuous support of increased funding by Congress. In 2023, a funding deal included a $54 million (4.7%) increase for TRIO in Fiscal Year (FY) 2023.10 Additionally, the Senate Appropriations Committee recently approved a FY25 funding bill for TRIO, raising its budget by
$20 million over FY24. The bill passed with strong bipartisan support by a vote of 26-2.11 This reinforces the commitment to expanding the programs’ impact and highlights the feasibility of revamping programs to address hidden curricula. Given this, there should be broad support for ED to revamp TRIO programs.
Under the Every Student Succeeds Act, the federal government allocates Title I funds to educational facilities serving low-income student populations, determined primarily by federal census poverty estimates and the
cost of education in each state.12 To cover administrative needs — such as developing specific program modules, maintaining relevant information, and training staff — the federal government should bolster Title I funding to support the enhancement of these existing programs. This additional funding should extend to public higher education institutions, with private institutions also eligible to apply, provided they demonstrate financial need.
To design the new initiatives, ED should first conduct a baseline needs assessment among higher education institutions currently offering TRIO programs to identify hidden curriculum challenges. ED should then collaborate with institutions to design curriculum modules, ensuring that program content
aligns with the norms, expectations, and resources of differing institutions. To minimize additional costs of module implementation, ED should encourage institutions to partner with local organizations such as nonprofits and to connect with on-campus groups for guest speakers and peer mentors.
Before nationwide implementation, ED should pilot these modules within an existing TRIO program to empirically validate the effectiveness of learning modules. Testing the modules at a single institution will allow for evaluation and adjustments, ensuring they are effective before expanding to widespread implementation.
Following a successful pilot, TRIO funding from ED’s Higher Education Act, along with additional Title I funding, will support expanding the program across high-need institutions.
Works Cited
Hopkins, Laura, Lana Saciragic, Joanna Kim, and Glenn Posner. “The Hidden Curriculum: Exposing the Unintended Lessons of Medical Education.” Cureus, October 25, 2016.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/ articles/PMC5120972/.
Cornbleth, Catherine. “Beyond Hidden Curriculum?” Journal of Curriculum Studies 16, no. 1
(January 1984): 29–36. https://doi.org/10.1080/0022027840 160105.
Hamm, Terrance L., and Barbara Clapp. “Coe and Trio Programs.” Council for Opportunity in Education, June 20, 2024. https://coenet.org/coe-and-trio- programs/.
Tyson, Charlie. “Programs Should Try to Unveil Colleges’ ‘Hidden Curriculum.’” Inside Higher Education News, Events and Jobs. Accessed November 5, 2024. https://www.insidehighered.com/ne ws/2014/08/04/book-argues- mentoring-programs-should-try- unveil-colleges-hidden-curriculum.
Hidden curriculum as one of the current issues of Curriculum. Accessed November 5, 2024. https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1 083566.pdf.
Neuman, Susan B., and Donna Celano. “The Knowledge Gap: Implications of Leveling the Playing Field for Low‐income and Middle‐income Children.” Reading Research Quarterly 41, no. 2 (April
6, 2006): 176–201.
https://doi.org/10.1598/rrq.41.2.2.
Program Statute - Trio and Gear up (PDF). Accessed November 5, 2024.
https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/l ist/ope/trio/statute-trio-gu.pdf.
Hopkins, Laura, Lana Saciragic, Joanna Kim, and Glenn Posner. “The Hidden Curriculum: Exposing the Unintended Lessons of Medical Education.” Cureus, October 25, 2016.
https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.845.
Jin, Hui, Shi Jiao, Xu Ma, and Yunan Xia. “Cultural Capital as a
Predictor of School Success: Evidence and Gender Differences in Chinese Middle Schools.” Nature News, June 29, 2024. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41 599-024-03382-
x#:~:text=Recent%20research%20h as%20indicated%20that,settings%2 0(J%C3%A6ger%2C%202011).
“Congress Announces Bipartisan Funding Deal, Includes 4.7% Increase for Trio for FY 2023.” Council for Opportunity in Education, December 20, 2022. https://coenet.org/news- impact/advocacy-update/congress- announces-bipartisan-funding-deal- includes-4-7-increase-for-trio-for- fy-2023/.
“Senate Committee Approves
$20M Increase for Trio Programs: Here’s How to Keep the Momentum.” Council for Opportunity in Education, October 17, 2024. https://coenet.org/news- impact/advocacy-update/senate- approves-20m-increase-for-trio- programs-heres-how-to-keep-the- momentum/.
“Title I, Part A: Improving BASIC Programs Operated by Leas Fact Sheet.” New York State Education Department. Accessed November 5, 2024. https://www.nysed.gov/essa/title-i- part-improving-basic-programs- operated-leas-fact-sheet.
Combatting the School-to-Prison Pipeline: Removing Police Presence from New York City Public Schools
By Jaiden Fisher-Dayn, jf884@cornell.edu
In order to address racial inequities in K-12 education and enhance school safety, NYC public schools should remove NYPD school safety officers and implement restorative justice measures. By removing officers, responses to student behavior will be in the hands of school counselors who can handle situations through methods and diversion programs that reintegrate students into class rather than suspensions and expulsion.

Background
Since the 1970s, United States K-12 public schools have increasingly used on-site full-time police officers, increasing from fewer than 100 to 20,000.1 While police presence aims to promote safety, increased policing only creates the illusion of security without addressing real
issues.2 New York is one of just seven states where over 50% of schools have a police presence. As of late February 2023, the number of active New York City Police Department school safety agents totaled almost 3,900.3 In fact, research shows that school policing exacerbates inequity through disproportionate arrests of disabled, Black, Latinx, Indigenous, and LGBTQ+ students.4 From 2016 to 2020, 91% of all arrests at NYC schools are Black and Latinx young people, despite these students being only 66% of the enrolled population. Furthermore, the rise in school policing has come at the expense of other important school authorities. Almost one-third of American K-12 students attend schools with police presence, lacking sufficient nurses, counselors, or social workers.5
Instead of rehabilitative responses to misconduct, such as
peer mediating or using dialogue to resolve conflicts, many schools have taken a retributive approach. These retributive policing approaches result in suspensions and other disciplinary actions that disproportionately affect children of color.5 On average, 250 preschoolers face suspension or expulsion each day.6 More broadly, nearly 3 million K-12 students endure suspensions, and over 100,000 get expelled every year.7 These disciplinary actions have harmed educational outcomes. They lead to academic struggles, increased dropout rates, and feed into the school-to-prison pipeline, in which young students from low- income backgrounds are more likely to be jailed due to punitive policies that push students out of the classroom.8 For instance, a study from the University of California, Irvine found that high school students who experience suspension or expulsion are more than twice as likely to face criminal charges as young adults.9

Policy Idea
In order to address the issues of school policing, police officers should be removed from K-12 public schools in New York City.
Instead, funds should be reallocated
to alternative safety measures, which may include mental health professionals, counselors, and restorative justice programs.
Counselors and mental health professionals will be responsible for addressing student issues.
By focusing on root causes and addressing issues through dialogues, retributive approaches will not be necessary, even in violent interactions between students. The proposed approach prioritizes mental well-being and non-punitive approaches to student misconduct. There are many implemented models and blueprints for effective restorative justice models in schools. The NYCDOE will evaluate the funding needed using the money that they currently spend on police presence. Overall, this policy will reduce suspensions and expulsions, improve academic outcomes, and create a safer and more supportive learning environment for all students.
Policy Analysis
Transformative approaches to school safety have yielded positive results around the country. For example, in Chicago, removing School Resource Officers (SROs) led to a decrease in high-level discipline infractions.10 Schools
retaining SROs had a larger proportion of Black students and experienced higher suspension rates. Eliminating these officers would mitigate racial biases and keep more students in school.
Furthermore, in Des Moines, Black students were six times more likely to have contact with police than their white counterparts.11 When the Des Moines school board redirected funds from policing to restorative practices, student arrests decreased, and the sense of safety among students increased.12
These initiatives have yielded promising results, including reduced court referrals, reduced suspensions, and an increase in staff appropriately responding to behavioral crises.13 These results highlight that this policy is both effective and equitable. This policy is also cost-effective. The financial burden of employing police in schools diverts funds from other necessities that would address school safety without perpetuating inequities. In 2018, 26 states invested over $960 million in enhancing SRO presence and school security, while 60% of public schools did not offer mental health services, and 18% had no paid school nurses.14 In schools where Black students were the majority, 20.7% had more security staff than mental health professionals, compared to just 2.5% in majority White schools.15 If police were removed, schools would be able to afford mental health staff.
Funding for restorative justice programs would be cheaper,16 as training existing educators and staff would not require paying additional full time salaries. Furthermore, redirecting funds into rehabilitative training
and mental health resources will have a positive effect, rather than continuing to spend millions of dollars on a system that fails to keep students safe. Restorative policies have been proven to improve the average GPA and reduce student gang membership, depression, and substance abuse.17

Highlights
While the federal government has invested over $1 billion to increase police presence in schools over the past 25 years, these institutions still lack adequate mental health resources and school nurses.
Increasing school policing exacerbates inequity through disproportionate punishments with disabled, Black, LatinX, Indigenous, and LGBTQ+ students.
To address the inequities of school policing, New York City should eliminate police presence in public schools and resort to alternative safety measures that focus on mental health and dialogue between students and staff, ultimately leading to an environment where students aren’t punished through suspensions and expulsions, but reintegrated into the classroom.
Restorative justice programs around the country have been successful in over 40 school districts that have already transitioned from school policing to alternative and restorative methods.
Implementation
To successfully implement this policy, New York City should begin with a phase-out approach. The NYC Department of Education should start decreasing police presence in selected school buildings so schools can eventually transition away from NYPD presence. Fewer police officers will allow educators more opportunities to manage student behaviors.
Cutting down on police presence will allow funds to be reallocated to extracurriculars, teaching and learning improvements, mental health resources, and counseling.
Simultaneously, restorative school programs will be implemented at these schools.
In addition, increasing funding for restorative school programs should be a city priority. To successfully transition from school policing to rehabilitative and restorative approaches, New York City needs to significantly reallocate funds for restorative justice. In 2024, 6.5 million dollars was budgeted for restorative justice programs in comparison to over
$300 million dollars spent on NYPD School Safety Officers.1,2 Research indicates that the cost to implement restorative programs in the first year is about $48,000 per school.18 A substantial reallocation in school safety funding would allow the development and implementation of safe and successful alternatives to policing in public schools.
Even without policing, safety within schools is paramount. The process of implementing alternative forms of school safety should include soliciting feedback and suggestions from school and community members, advocacy groups, students, and parents. These key agents should provide feedback
on safety protocols and mental health resources. Including school members, advocacy groups, students, and parents will effectively help develop and revise training programs that educators and counselors must complete at the start of every school year, using successful programs as a model for implementation.

A committee within the NYC Department of Education would oversee and implement training programs into schools, collaborating with community and advocacy groups. This committee would oversee school safety responses and ensure the prioritization of mental health and restorative practices over punishments and suspensions.
Funding for this would be accounted for in the initial reallocation of funds.
Advocacy groups, including Integration and Innovation Initiative at NYU Metro Center, Dignity in Schools New York, and the NYCLU, can help support city policymakers in implementing new restorative justice programs. These organizations have specialized in understanding policing in schools and researching how to implement successful alternatives.
Addressing potential challenges and backlash from other policymakers is imperative for ensuring the feasibility of this program. Current NYC Mayor Eric Adams has increased NYPD school safety officers in his tenure, indicating that this proposal would face political backlash.19 However, research shows that students are not safer with police officers in schools. Furthermore, building a broad coalition of community leaders, educators, and parents will
strengthen the case for ending school policing. Previously, under community pressure, former Mayor DeBlasio agreed to move control of thousands of school safety agents to the education department from the police department.20 It is time for an alternative that will not only work to combat racial inequities perpetuated by retributive policing in schools but that will keep students safe.

Works Cited
“The End of School Policing.” California Law Review. Accessed December 15, 2024. https://www.californialawreview.or g/print/the-end-of-school-policing.
Morrison, Nick. “Police on Campus Criminalize Students Instead of Keeping Them Safe, Study Finds.” Forbes, November 10, 2023.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/nickm orrison/2023/11/10/police-on- campus-criminalize-students- instead-of-keeping-them-safe- study-finds/.
“City Eliminates Hundreds of Vacant School Safety Positions After More Than 20 Percent Decline in Safety Agent Staffing in City’s Public Schools over Three Years.” New York City Independent Budget Office, March 2023. https://www.ibo.nyc.ny.us/iboreport s/city-eliminates-hundreds-of- vacant-school-safety-positions- after-more-than-20-percent-decline- in-safety-agent-staffing-in-citys- public-schools-over-three-years- march-2023.pdf.
“We Spend Millions Policing Students. It Doesn’t Make Our Schools Safer.” Vera Institute of Justice. Accessed December 15, 2024.
https://www.vera.org/news/we-
spend-millions-policing-students-it- doesnt-make-our-schools-safer.
“Juvenile Justice: School-to- Prison Pipeline.” ACLU. Accessed December 15, 2024. https://www.aclu.org/issues/juvenil e-justice/juvenile-justice-school- prison-pipeline.
“Preschool Suspensions, Expulsions Harmful but Common.” Chalkbeat, January 18, 2023. https://www.chalkbeat.org/2023/1/1 8/23559188/preschool-suspensions- expulsions-harmful-common.
“The School-to-Prison Pipeline.” Learning for Justice, Spring 2013. https://www.learningforjustice.org/ magazine/spring-2013/the-school- to-prison-pipeline.
“School Discipline Research.” UCI School of Education. Accessed December 15, 2024. https://education.uci.edu/penner_sc hool_discipline_2022.html.
“Removing School Resource Officers Hasn’t Led to More Disciplinary Issues or Made Students Less Safe.” WTTW News, June 26, 2024.
https://news.wttw.com/2024/06/26/r emoving-school-resource-officers- hasn-t-led-more-disciplinary-issues- or-made-students.
“Des Moines Students Win Our Mannheimer Youth Advocacy Award.” ACLU of Iowa. Accessed December 15, 2024. https://www.aclu- ia.org/en/news/des-moines- students-win-our-mannheimer- youth-advocacy-award.
"The City That Kicked Cops Out of Schools and Tried Restorative Practices Instead." In These Times. Accessed December 15, 2024.
https://inthesetimes.com/article/the- city-that-kicked-cops-out-of-
schools-and-tried-restorative- practices-instead.
“Do We Need Police in Schools? Creating Safety for All Students.” Center for Policing Equity. Accessed December 15, 2024.
https://policingequity.org/resources/ blog/do-we-need-police-in-schools- creating-safety-for-all-students.
“Research to Consider as Schools Address Community Demands to Renegotiate School- Police Partnerships.” Child Trends. Accessed December 15, 2024. https://www.childtrends.org/publica tions/research-to-consider-as- schools-address-community- demands-to-renegotiate-school- police-partnerships.
“Compared to Majority-White Schools, Majority-Black Schools Are More Likely to Have Security Staff.” Child Trends. Accessed December 15, 2024.
https://www.childtrends.org/publica tions/compared-to-majority-white- schools-majority-black-schools-are- more-likely-to-have-security-staff.
“The Impact of Restorative Practices on School Climate.” Learning Policy Institute. Accessed December 15, 2024. https://learningpolicyinstitute.org/pr oduct/impact-restorative-practices- report.
“The Prevalence and the Price of Police in Schools.” UConn Neag School of Education, October 27, 2020.
https://education.uconn.edu/2020/1 0/27/the-prevalence-and-the-price- of-police-in-schools/.
“Which Districts Have Cut School Policing Programs?” Education Week, June 2021. https://www.edweek.org/leadership/ which-districts-have-cut-school- policing-programs/2021/06.
“Mayor’s Office and CUNY Invest $6.5M in Restorative Justice for 16 NYC Organizations.” Make the Road New York. Accessed December 15, 2024. https://maketheroadny.org/mayors- office-and-cuny-invest-6-5m-in- restorative-justice-for-16-nyc- organizations/.
“NYPD Budget Report.” New York City Council. Accessed December 15, 2024. https://council.nyc.gov/budget/wp- content/uploads/sites/54/2021/03/05 6-NYPD.pdf.
“Rejecting the Mayor's Militarization of Schools and Communities in NYC.” Alliance for Quality Education of New York, June 11, 2024.
https://www.aqeny.org/2024/06/11/ rejecting-the-mayors-militarization- of-schools-and-communities-in- nyc/.
How Universal Pre-K Threatens Child Care Accessibility: A Case for Mixed Delivery
By Claudia Nesin, can89@cornell.edu

The implementation of universal pre-K programs in many states threatens the economic viability of childcare centers, exacerbating the childcare crisis. States expanding access to universal pre-K should be mandated to do so through a mixed delivery model.

Background
Advocates tout universal access to preschool as critical for accessibility and equality in early childhood care and education (ECCE). President Biden’s 2021 American Families Plan called for universal access to preschool for all three- and four- year-olds, and many states have since begun implementing state-funded pre-K programs.1,2 However, these programs have had an unforeseen consequence, putting their benefits at risk and threatening to further degrade our already fraught early childhood system. As public pre-K expands, it drives childcare providers out of business, exacerbating preexisting childcare deserts and driving up childcare costs.3,4 One study found that implementation of public pre-K in NYC reduced one day care seat for every seven four-year-olds who enrolled in the program; alarmingly, every seat lost was in a high- poverty area. The quality of centers near public pre-K facilities also diminished.4
In Tulsa, Oklahoma, where 70% of four-year-olds are enrolled in public pre-K, 43% of all licensed ECCE providers have closed and ECCE costs have risen by an average of 33%.5,6 This issue occurs because private childcare providers derive nearly all of their profit from three- and four-year-olds —
providing infant and toddler care actually loses money due to the high staff-to-children ratio it requires.7 The rise of publicly funded pre-K has diminished the number of preschool-aged children in private care, despite the sustained demand for infant and toddler care. A study of nine states and Washington, D.C. found that for every slot of licensed childcare, there are more than five infants and toddlers, over three times the ratio when measuring preschool-aged children.8 Furthermore, 95% of counties studied were classified as childcare deserts, a deficit especially pronounced in rural and low-income areas. This absence of childcare forces parents out of the workforce, a burden falling largely upon mothers.9
Additionally, the earliest investments in children bear the highest returns, so inadvertently sacrificing the accessibility of childcare for that of preschool is likely to harm children’s success.10
Policy Idea
To mitigate growing threats to already limited childcare accessibility, states implementing subsidization of preschool should utilize a mixed-delivery system that includes both private center-based and home-based care. Mixed- delivery systems enable state and federal funding to support preschool
programs in various settings — public schools, center-based care, federally-funded means-tested Head Start preschool programs, religious centers, and, in some states, family or home-based childcare.11 Despite the fact that home-based care serves about three million children, only about half of states that implement mixed-delivery allow family childcare (FCC) providers to receive state funding.12 Home-based care is most utilized by rural families, families of marginalized racial groups, and low-income individuals who prioritize affordability, convenience, and flexible scheduling.2,13 It is also disproportionately provided by women of color.14 The FCC inclusive mixed-delivery funding structure subsidizes the care of private and FCC providers along with public pre-K facilities, helping them retain their preschool-aged children and remain economically viable.

Policy Analysis
The implementation of a mixed-delivery childcare system that includes FCC providers would facilitate family access to local, high-quality, culturally and linguistically responsive care, available even during non- traditional hours. Mixed-delivery has demonstrated to meet these goals. A report by the Virginia
Early Childhood Foundation found that the state’s mixed-delivery program successfully increased the accessibility of high-quality ECCE, particularly for low-income families.15 The study also found that the mixed-delivery program’s investment in ECCE providers enabled them to bolster program quality. Additionally, Colorado has mandated a family childcare inclusive mixed-delivery system for their universal pre-K program in order to prevent the loss of providers and consequent increase in costs and decrease in availability; leverage all existing childcare facilities to maximize accessibility; prioritize familial choice; and account for the diverse needs of distinct communities. The state has already seen success for these initiatives in Denver and Summit County.16
Enabling family childcare providers to access additional funding, such as that obtained through inclusion in preschool subsidization programs, has been demonstrated to prevent closures. In Minnesota, access to Child Care Stabilization Grants through the American Rescue Plan decreased the risk of family childcare provider closure — just 5% of providers who received funding closed during the pandemic, as opposed to 26% of providers who did not.17 This illustrates that the loss of FCC providers is rooted in inadequate funding, rather than disinterest in the field.
For underappreciated childcare providers, particularly those responsible for FCC, this mixed-delivery model would denote them as a legitimate facet of the childcare team. It would enable them to maintain financial viability by preventing the loss of profitable
three- and four-year-old children, preserving the jobs of a group disproportionately composed of racial and ethnic minority women.18

Highlights
The implementation of public pre-K programs nationwide is putting private childcare providers out of business, exacerbating the lack of availability and affordability within the childcare market.4
To resolve this issue, public pre-K should be subsidized through mixed-delivery systems, which fund preschool programs in many settings, including public schools, center-based care, Head Start programs, religious centers, and family or home-based childcare.11
Mixed-delivery systems provide parents with the agency to choose between a range of preschool options, enabling access to high- quality, local, culturally and linguistically appropriate care, available during non- traditional hours.16
A mixed-delivery pre-K system is feasible due to bipartisan support, successful examples across the nation, and its efficient use of pre-existing childcare infrastructure.20, 21, 6
Implementation
Due to high bipartisan support for the measure, the implementation of mixed-delivery funding for subsidized pre-K is very feasible.19 This ability to generate bipartisan support was exemplified during the 2024 vice presidential
debate, in which both candidates supported a mixed-delivery system in order to strengthen parent choice in childcare.20 Additionally, as mixed-delivery pre-K utilizes pre- existing infrastructure, implementation is time- and cost- efficient.6
When implementing a mixed-delivery model, states should look to the models provided by previously established systems.
Successful examples of mixed- delivery include Washington’s Early Childhood Education and Assistance Program, North Carolina’s Smart Start Network, and West Virginia’s WV pre-K.21 The methods adopted by these states vary, and those considering implementation should determine which model would work best for them by performing a comparative analysis of their demographics, political ideologies, and the availability of funding as compared to example states. Next, states should develop a clear and comprehensive legislative framework defining their mixed- delivery model, outlining eligibility criteria, funding mechanisms, and quality standards. States should ensure that both center- and home- based childcare providers are eligible for funding, ensuring the financial viability of FCC providers. As subsidization is chronically underutilized by FCC providers even when technically available, states should develop a mechanism for clearly communicating the funding opportunities available to these providers, and create a program to help assist them with the paperwork necessary for participating. Once the mixed- delivery model is established, the state should put a robust monitoring and evaluation system in place to
assess the system’s effectiveness and address any issues that may materialize. This system ought to measure and analyze enrollment numbers, child outcomes, and provider and family satisfaction, enabling the state to make adjustments to the program accordingly. States should implement mixed-delivery pre-K systems immediately. Until a change to the childcare landscape is made, providers will continue to go out of business, and families will continue to lose essential childcare services.

Works Cited
The White House. “FACT SHEET: The American Families Plan,” 2021.
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefin g-room/statements- releases/2021/04/28/fact-sheet-the- american-families-plan/.
Workman, Simon. “The True Cost of High-Quality Child Care Across the United States.” Center for American Progress, 28 June 2021,
https://www.americanprogress.org/a rticle/true-cost-high-quality-child- care-across-united-states/.
Stanford, Libby. “Which States Offer Universal Pre-K? It's More Complicated Than You Might Think.” 25 January 2023, https://www.edweek.org/teaching- learning/which-states-offer- universal-pre-k-its-more- complicated-than-you-might- think/2023/01.
Brown, Jessica H. “Does Public Pre-K Have Unintended Consequences on the Child Care Market for Infants and Toddlers?” SSRN Scholarly Paper. Rochester, NY, December 8, 2018. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.336061 6.
Gilreath, Ariel. “Tulsa Study Offers More Evidence of Pre-K’s Benefits into Adulthood.” The Hechinger Report, September 29, 2022.
http://hechingerreport.org/tulsa- study-offers-more-evidence-of-pre- ks-benefits-into-adulthood/.
Early Care & Education Consortium. “A MIXED- DELIVERY SYSTEM IS THE MOST SUSTAINABLE AND EFFICIENT SOLUTION TO MEET POLICY OBJECTIVES,” 2021.
https://www.ececonsortium.org/wp- content/uploads/2021/07/ECEC- Solutions-Paper-Mixed- Delivery.pdf.
American Experiment. “Free Pre-K Is Hurting the Childcare Industry,” May 2, 2024. https://www.americanexperiment.or g/free-pre-k-is-hurting-the- childcare-industry/.
Jessen-Howard, Steven. “Understanding Infant and Toddler Child Care Deserts.” Center for American Progress, 31 October 2018,
https://www.americanprogress.org/a rticle/understanding-infant-toddler- child-care-deserts/.
Lyons, J'Taime. “Narrowing the Gender Wage Gap with Universal Child Care – Michigan Journal of Public Affairs.” Michigan Journal of Public Affairs, 10 April 2020, https://mjpa.umich.edu/2020/04/10/ narrowing-the-gender-wage-gap- with-universal-child-care/.
Heckman, James. “The Heckman Curve.” The Heckman Equation, https://heckmanequation.org/resour ce/the-heckman-curve/.
First Five Years Fund. “ED and HHS Urge States to Make Headway on Mixed Delivery Preschool.” First Five Years Fund,
1 March 2024, https://www.ffyf.org/2024/03/01/ed
-and-hhs-urge-states-to-make- headway-on-mixed-delivery- preschool/.
Harmeyer, Erin. “Including Family Child Care (FCC) Programs in Publicly-Funded Pre-K: Conditions for Success,” n.d. https://nieer.org/sites/default/files/2 023-08/homegrown-nieer-fcc- report-final.3.31.pdf.
Weisenfeld, GG. “Including Family Child Care Homes in Publicly-Funded Pre-K Programs: Estimating the Cost of Supporting Quality.” National Institute for Early Education Research, 1 March 2024,
https://nieer.org/sites/default/files/2 024-03/homegrown-nieer-fcc-pre-k- cost-study-design-draft3.pdf.
Mefferd, Eve. “The US Child Care System Relies on Women of Color, but Structural Barriers Systematically Disadvantage Them.” Urban Institute, 14 June 2023, https://www.urban.org/urban- wire/us-child-care-system-relies- women-color-structural-barriers- systematically-disadvantage.
Virginia Early Childhood Foundation. “2024 Mixed Delivery Evaluation Report,” June 2024. https://vecf.org/wp- content/uploads/2024/06/2024Mixe dDeliveryEvaluationReport.pdf.
Early Milestones Colorado. “SUPPORTING FAMILIES THROUGH MIXED DELIVERY IN COLORADO’S UPK PROGRAM,” n.d.
https://earlymilestones.org/wp- content/uploads/2023/03/UPK- Mixed-Delivery.pdf.
Office of the City Auditor Policy and Research Division. “Early Care and Education Report,” 2024.
https://lims.minneapolismn.gov/Do
wnload/FileV2/45323/PAR-Report- and-Analysis-of-Early-Care-and- Education.pdf.
Melvin, Samantha. “A Transformative Vision for the Authentic Inclusion of Family Child Care in Mixed-Delivery PreK Systems,” 2022. https://www.erikson.edu/wp- content/uploads/2022/09/PKFCC- Conceptual-Framework-final.pdf.
First Five Years Fund. “The First Five Things to Know About: The Child Care and Development Block Grant Reauthorization Act of 2024,” 2024.
https://www.ffyf.org/resources/202 4/08/the-first-five-things-to-know- about-the-child-care-and- development-block-grant- reauthorization-act-of-2024/.
CBS News. “Walz and Vance Address Child Care Concerns and
Costs,” October 2024. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v= WwxNXDEozwA.
Morris, Suzann. “Examples of Mixed-Delivery Early Care and Education Systems.” Bipartisan Policy Center, 2021. https://bipartisanpolicy.org/blog/exa mples-of-mixed-delivery-early- care-and-education-systems/.
Securing Financial Futures: A Proposal for Financial Literacy Education
By Ben Nusbaum, bbn24@cornell.edu

Students lack necessary financial skills to make smart life decisions. Therefore, New York should implement a financial literacy course that covers budgeting, investing, and other personal financial skills into the 12th-grade curriculum.

Background
The role of education is to provide students with the knowledge and skills to navigate life and become productive members of society. One skill crucial to becoming a successful adult and leading a happy, fulfilling life is financial literacy. Financial literacy is the ability to understand and use financial skills, such as budgeting, investing, understanding taxes and saving for retirement.1 However, over half of teens report feeling unready to handle their finances.2 A 2019 survey of 30,000 college students found 47% do not feel prepared to manage their money, with only 37% of Gen Z students planning to follow a budget and 47% planning to pay off their credit card on time.3 It is clear that students don’t feel financially prepared for their futures. However, public schools have the ability to bridge this gap, and it is important they take all measures to educate and prepare their students.
More than half of states require high school students to take a semester-long financial literacy course before graduating.4 However, New York lags behind, only requiring an economics course, which is also its own graduation requirement.5,6 New York State (NYS) high school economics courses focus on large-scale market concepts, not practical financial
skills students can use in everyday life. The course recommended in New York has four main standards, and only one of the standards, “Individual Responsibility and the Economy,” has sub-standards on personal finance.7 Within New York, only 20 high schools, about 1.3% of those in the state, require a semester-long personal finance course to graduate.8,9 Evidently, American students lack the financial literacy necessary for long-term success as adults, and NYS must do its part to improve its insufficient financial curriculum.

Policy Idea
Education should prepare students for life after graduation; therefore, schools must teach financial literacy skills that will be crucial to student well-being in life, regardless of the path they take after graduation. The NYS Legislature should create a graduation requirement that all high schoolers must complete a semester-long financial literacy course. This course will be taken in 12th grade and will teach students the fundamentals of financial literacy, including personal financial knowledge, investment skills, and basic budgeting skills. Students should graduate high school with an understanding of the importance of credit scores, savings accounts, and other practical financial skills.

Policy Analysis
Research consistently shows that financial literacy education improves financial behaviors and outcomes. States that offer financial literacy courses, such as Georgia, Texas, and Idaho, have reported higher credit scores and lower loan delinquency rates among students who complete these courses.8 Additionally, students who receive a financial literacy education tend to struggle less with debt and report a better quality of life as adults.10 Financial literacy education fosters a sense of security and independence, reducing stress and improving mental health, contributing to overall life satisfaction by equipping students with the knowledge to make informed financial decisions, manage their budgets, and avoid excessive debt.11 Given the success of financial literacy courses in other states, implementing one in NYS is expected to yield similar results.
Now more than ever, college is becoming increasingly expensive, with the price increasing 3.63% every year, forcing more students to take out loans than in the past.12,13 Additionally, Gen-Z has the worst debt management skills out of any generation, proving their inability to handle these loans responsibly.14 As this trend continues, it is clear students need help managing their
debt, and a financial literacy course would provide significant
support. Furthermore, studies show that students who received financial instruction in class were more likely to utilize low-interest college loans compared to their peers.14 Additionally, researchers found that financial literacy courses increased repayment rates among low-income and first-generation students.15 The ideal time to offer the course is 12th grade because students must be versed in financial literacy once they graduate high school, however the topic should be fresh in their minds as they become adults and begin to navigate their finances.
The financial literacy requirement for NYS is extremely important, as students will not only be better equipped to finance their postsecondary education but will gain necessary financial skills that will help them lead happier, more successful lives.
Highlights
Many teenagers feel unprepared to manage their finances, as about half of college students lack confidence in their money management skills.
NYS does not mandate a dedicated financial literacy course, leaving most students without essential financial skills for everyday life.
The NYS Legislature should require all high school students to complete a semester-long financial literacy course in 12th grade, covering crucial topics like budgeting, credit scores, and savings.
Implementing this course would likely improve
students’ financial behaviors, leading to better debt management, higher credit scores, and enhanced overall life satisfaction, as demonstrated by successful programs in other states.

Implementation
In 2023, the NYS Senate introduced Bill S4860A to the State Senate’s Education Committee.16 This bill requires a stand-alone financial literacy course as a graduation requirement, mirroring the policy proposed above. State Senator Leroy Comrie sponsored the bill alongside eleven cosponsors, including two Republicans, indicating some bipartisan support. Although this seems like promising news, a version of this bill has been introduced in every legislative cycle for the past fifteen years. The bill has never managed to make it to the floor for a vote, likely due to a lack of political priority and sufficient advocacy. Therefore, more must be done to grow appeal among lawmakers and the public.
Financial education experts should back the proposal to help it gain support and reach the floor for a vote. Experts should work with school administrators, lawmakers, and other key stakeholders to form a comprehensive curriculum that covers crucial topics including budgeting, investing, saving, and credit. These experts could be compensated for their work designing the bill by nonprofit organizations focused on financial literacy, corporate sponsors with a vested interest in the bill’s passing, or it could be conducted as pro bono work. A key stakeholder that is often overlooked are students, who can help the effort by demonstrating
their interest for financial literacy in their schooling.17 State Senator Leroy Comrie should incorporate students into a social media campaign advocating for the bill, growing public attention while connecting with a large younger audience. Testimonials from students who would welcome financial literacy education could be used to raise awareness and motivate the public.
After the New York State legislature passes the bill, it is important that it is implemented in a timely manner. Teachers should be required to attend professional development meetings with financial education experts who are well-versed in the curriculum to ensure the class is taught effectively. Once the policy is implemented, schools should monitor and evaluate the policy’s success. Student and teacher concerns should be addressed on a school-by-school basis through administrative avenues. Researchers will assess the policy’s efficacy by studying whether young New Yorkers are making better financial decisions after 10 years, measuring metrics including higher credit scores and lower loan delinquency rates.
Despite the potential for strong support, several obstacles must be addressed. Budget constraints may raise concerns about the costs associated with curriculum development and teacher training. To address this, NYS should partner with local financial institutions that are interested in helping the community. These institutions have incentive to aid financial literacy among students, and could help mitigate costs with funding and curriculum planning support.17
However, even without these measures, no changes to the education budget would be necessary due to the policy’s low price, as there are minimal costs associated with curriculum design and a short training session.18 Additionally, concerns over another graduation requirement may be calmed by the widespread support for the course.19
In conclusion, despite possible implementation challenges, a financial literacy course in NYS high schools is feasible and would be extremely helpful for students. It is imperative to equip students with essential skills to confidently manage their financial futures, setting them on a path toward long- term stability and success.

Works Cited
Investopedia. “Financial Literacy: What It Is, and Why It Is So Important To Teach Teens.” Accessed November 12, 2024. https://www.investopedia.com/term s/f/financial-literacy.asp.
USA, Junior Achievement. “New Research Shows The Majority of Teens Feel Unprepared to Finance Their Futures.” Junior Achievement USA. Accessed November 12, 2024. https://jausa.ja.org/news/press- releases/new-research-shows-the- majority-of-teens-feel-unprepared- to-finance-their-futures.
AIG. “Buckling under Debt and a Lack of Financial Knowledge, College Students Feel Toll of Financial Stress,” May 2019. https://aig.gcs-web.com/news- releases/news-release- details/buckling-under-debt-and- lack-financial-knowledge-college.
Solutions, Ramsey. “Which States Require Financial Literacy for High School Students?” Ramsey
Solutions. Accessed November 12, 2024.
https://www.ramseysolutions.com/fi nancial-literacy/states-require- financial-literacy-in-high-school.
Nation’s Report Card. “New York Report Card Vision 2020.” Accessed November 12, 2024. https://www.thenationsreportcard.or g/new-york.
NYC Public Schools. “Graduation Requirements.” Accessed November 12, 2024. https://www.schools.nyc.gov/learni ng/student-journey/graduation- requirements.
“Increasing Number of States to Require Stand Alone Financial Literacy Classes in High School.” Accessed November 12, 2024. https://www.nysscpa.org/news/publ ications/the-trusted- professional/article/increasing- number-of-states-to-require-stand- alone-financial-literacy-classes-in- high-school-051222.
New York State Education Department. “Commissioner Rosa Op-Ed: We Should Be Teaching Financial Literacy in New York’s High Schools.” Accessed November 12, 2024. https://www.nysed.gov/news/2024/ commissioner-rosa-op-ed-we- should-be-teaching-financial- literacy-new-yorks-high-schools.
“New York High Schools.” Accessed November 12, 2024. https://high- schools.com/directory/ny/.
“SPI Addresses Student Financial Literacy Benefits Year 2023 (CA Dept of Education).” Accessed November 12, 2024. https://www.cde.ca.gov/nr/ne/yr23/ yr23rel22.asp.
Bai, Ruofan. “Impact of Financial Literacy, Mental Budgeting and Self Control on Financial Wellbeing: Mediating
Impact of Investment Decision Making.” PLOS ONE 18, no. 11
(November 14, 2023): e0294466.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone
.0294466.
Education Data Initiative. “College Tuition Inflation [2023]: Rate Increase Statistics.” Accessed November 12, 2024. https://educationdata.org/college- tuition-inflation-rate.
Cilluffo, Richard Fry and Anthony. “5 Facts about Student Loans.” Pew Research Center, September 18, 2024. https://www.pewresearch.org/short- reads/2024/09/18/facts-about- student-loans/.
Reporter, Suzanne Blake, Consumer, and Social Trends. “Gen Z Has a Serious Debt Problem.” Newsweek, February 9, 2024. https://www.newsweek.com/gen-z- struggling-pay-debt-student-loans- 1868611.
Engle, Jeremy. “Should Financial Literacy Be a Required Course in School?” The New York Times, December 2023. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/12/ 14/learning/should-financial- literacy-be-a-required-course-in- school.html.
“NY State Senate Bill 2023- S4860A.” Accessed November 12, 2024.
https://www.nysenate.gov/legislatio n/bills/2023/S4860/amendment/A.
Johnson, Monique. “How Banks Can Bridge the Financial Literacy Gap and Empower Communities.” Forbes, November 6, 2024.
https://www.forbes.com/councils/fo rbesfinancecouncil/2024/11/06/how
-banks-can-bridge-the-financial- literacy-gap-empower- communities/.
Boser, Ulrich. “The Hidden Value of Curriculum Reform.” The
Center for American Progress, October 14, 2015. https://www.americanprogress.org/a rticle/the-hidden-value-of- curriculum-reform/
Intuit Blog. “Intuit Survey:
U.S. High School Students Want Financial Education at School.” April 2, 2024.
https://www.intuit.com/blog/innova tive-thinking/intuit-survey/.
Incorporating Culturally Responsive Teaching into School to Increase Academic Success
By Sejal Sekhar, scs326@cornell.edu

Over 25 states have introduced anti-DEI bills targeting higher education, which have put students of color at a disadvantage socially and academically. To counter these laws, culturally responsive teaching needs to be implemented.

Background
In recent years, party lines have reshaped America’s education system. With anti-Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) bills introduced in over twenty-five states, education differs heavily from state to state.1 Of the 86 proposed bills, 14 have received final legislative approval and become law, which aims to restrict mandatory DEI training, DEI offices and staff, diversity statements, and identity-based preferences for hiring and admissions.2 The start of 2023 marks the push by Republican politicians to limit and ban DEI initiatives, and with the Supreme Court’s decision to ban affirmative action, the agenda was furthered.3 Polling found approximately 77% of Republicans believe discrimination against white and black people is equally problematic, which underscores why some lawmakers are pushing for DEI restriction.4
One of the main groups affected by DEI policies, bans, and restrictions is college students.
When asked what they would do if their college abolished DEI initiatives, 55% of polled college students reported they would consider transferring schools.5 In addition, 59% of students stated that they would reconsider enrolling in their respective universities if they lacked DEI initiatives.6 While many
lawmakers believe establishing anti- DEI bills is better for the country, most college students clearly disagree. Beyond college students, around 61% of the American public support DEI programs.7 One of the main harms caused by banning or limiting DEI in schools is the threat to cultural competence and the undermining of the student community, which is why colleges need to continue supporting their students by developing alternative solutions to ensure equal representation.

Policy Idea
Colleges should implement culturally responsive teaching as an effective way to counter anti-DEI legislation, which creates an inclusive learning space by using student’s diverse backgrounds to add cultural nuance to the curriculum.8 Through implementing culturally responsive teaching, inclusion begins in the classroom and focuses on building student-to- student and student-to-teacher relationships. To allow the program to be implemented and sustained, qualitative and quantitative data must be consistently gauged. The quantitative way to determine if culturally responsive teaching is effective is by analyzing students’ academic performance prior to and post-implementation. Additionally, the retention rates within classes
and majors should be used to determine if culturally responsive teaching effectively encourages students through engagement and participation. Adding these techniques into daily lessons will make individuals more empathetic and culturally informed inside and outside of the classroom.

Policy Analysis
Culturally responsive teaching has proven to improve academic outcomes and the development of ethnic-racial identity due to culturally responsive teaching being more effective than traditional teaching methods.10 Although teachers feel ill-prepared to lead conversations about race, a University of Pittsburgh study revealed that they would be willing to implement culturally responsive teaching in their classrooms if they received adequate
training.11 Furthermore, the ease of implementing culturally responsive teaching through simple curriculum changes, such as changing the literature being studied, makes universities more inclined to implement the program. The primary issue with traditional learning is that it does not address the realities of today’s society and only supports a certain demographic: middle-class, white, and English-speaking families.13 A simple solution is increasing
diversity among teachers. Since 80% of full-time professors are white, conversations about race become easier when students of color feel connected to their teachers because of shared experiences.13 It has been noted that students are, in fact, not the blank slates they are made out to be; they start to develop their own understandings of the world very early on, and it is key to utilize this within classrooms rather than repress it.14
To counter the argument of the Republican lawmakers who do not find it beneficial to the economy to invest in DEI initiatives, research shows a correlation between attending a racially diverse institution and income earnings.5 Therefore, implementing culturally responsive teaching can counter the anti-DEI legislation and assist the future economy.
The qualitative measure of student participation increases active learning, therefore enhancing problem-solving and collaboration between students. Since DEI policies create equitable resources for all students and foster a sense of community where everyone feels valued, it is vital to create substitute programs amidst the recent legislation targeting DEI practices.
Highlights
The increasing attacks on efforts to ensure minorities have an equal playing field makes culturally responsive teaching essential for creating an immediate impact.
Over 100 bills in 30 states are working to limit or ban DEI policies such as DEI training, DEI offices and staff, diversity statements,
and identity-based preferences for hiring and admissions within higher education.2
To counter anti-DEI legislation, culturally responsive teaching can be implemented to ensure equity remains at the forefront of education.
Culturally responsive teaching fosters a more inclusive classroom by creating a space where individuals can learn from each other’s backgrounds, become more informed, and therefore increase collaboration and problem- solving skills.8

Implementation
Implementing culturally responsive teaching is simple and has significant benefits. This teaching increases face-to-face communication, open dialogue, and integration of current world issues to better understand students’ backgrounds into the curriculum.9 Therefore, culturally responsive teaching can work to create the same environment DEI policies promote by making students conscious of biases while increasing students’ academic performance.
Implementing culturally responsive teaching should begin at higher education levels, as anti-DEI laws primarily target these institutions. It would be beneficial for school boards to look at New York City’s framework that affirms racial, linguistic and cultural identities by preparing students for rigorous learning through making them aware of differing perspectives to adequately enact culturally responsive teaching.12 Aiding students as well as teachers
is key to making sure the plan can be successful. To understand the benefits in the long term, student and teacher surveys should be sent out at the beginning and end of each academic year to evaluate the progression of culturally responsive teaching. Increasing teacher diversity through recruiting from Minority-Serving Institutions, such as HBCUs, not only helps students due to culturally responsive teaching but also counters backlash from states that are anti-DEI. This way, schools are still able to push for representation and bridging cultural divides amidst hostile states working to eliminate DEI.
To determine if culturally responsive teaching is effective, school boards should analyze students’ academic performance prior to and post-implementation in addition to a survey to gauge qualitative and quantitative data about the program, therefore allowing for improvement.
Additionally, the retention rates within classes and majors should be used to determine if culturally responsive teaching effectively encourages students through engagement and participation. By collecting data and highlighting success progress, the school board can allocate more money to increasing culturally responsive teaching.
Given the banning or limiting of DEI policies in higher education, the money spent on DEI can be reallocated to culturally responsive teaching. Typically, the widely accepted authors who have studied in traditional academic curricula are white. While there is the acknowledgment that there is nothing wrong with traditional readings, there is a push to incorporate more worldly
literature.14 Through teachers adding more multicultural works into the curriculum, students can make their own interpretations about today’s society and become more informed citizens under culturally responsive teaching.

Works Cited
NBC News. “Map: See Which States Have Introduced or Passed Anti-DEI Bills,” March 2, 2024. https://www.nbcnews.com/data- graphics/anti-dei-bills-states- republican-lawmakers-map- rcna140756.
Seligman, Lara D. “Here Are the States Where Lawmakers Are Seeking to Ban Colleges’ DEI Efforts.” The Chronicle of Higher Education, October 23, 2023. https://www.chronicle.com/article/h ere-are-the-states-where- lawmakers-are-seeking-to-ban- colleges-dei-efforts.
Seligman, Lara D. “The Assault on DEI.” The Chronicle of Higher Education. https://www.chronicle.com/package
/the-assault-on-dei.
“Home of the Marist Poll | Polls, Analysis, Learning, and More.” https://maristpoll.marist.edu/polls/a pril-2024-presidential-election/.
BestColleges.“Most Students Would Consider Transferring If DEI Initiatives Were Abolished: Survey”
https://www.bestcolleges.com/resea rch/most-students-would-consider- transferring-if-dei-initiatives- abolished/.
Collinson, David L., and Ryan
M. Calo. “The Causes and Consequences of Ending Diversity.” Scholars Strategy Network, September 2023. https://scholars.org/contribution/cau ses-and-consequences-ending- diversity.
Suter, Tara. “Most Americans Support Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Programs: Poll.” Text. The Hill (blog), June 18, 2024. https://thehill.com/homenews/race- politics/4727744-americans-favor- dei-programs-poll/.
Understood, Educators Team at. “What Is Culturally Responsive Teaching?” Understood. Accessed November 6, 2024. https://www.understood.org/en/artic les/what-is-culturally-responsive- teaching.
Education, University of San Diego-Professional & Continuing. “Culturally Responsive Teaching Guide (+10 Examples).” University of San Diego - Professional & Continuing Education, March 21, 2022.
https://pce.sandiego.edu/culturally- responsive-teaching-guide-10- examples/.
Byrd, Christy M. “Does Culturally Relevant Teaching
Work? An Examination From Student Perspectives.” Sage Open 6, no. 3 (July 2016):
2158244016660744.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244016 660744.
Anderson, Melinda D. “How Teachers Are Learning to Discuss Racism in Class.” The Atlantic (blog), January 9, 2017. https://www.theatlantic.com/educati on/archive/2017/01/how-teachers- learn-to-discuss-racism/512474/.
New York State Education Department. Culturally Responsive- Sustaining Education Framework. 2018.https://www.nysed.gov/sites/d efault/files/programs/crs/culturally- responsive-sustaining-education- framework.pdf.
Will, Madeline, and Ileana Najarro. “What Is Culturally Responsive Teaching?” Education Week, April 18, 2022, sec. Teaching & Learning, Teaching. https://www.edweek.org/teaching- learning/culturally-responsive- teaching-culturally-responsive- pedagogy/2022/04.
Burnham, Kristin. “Culturally Responsive Teaching: 5 Strategies for Educators.” Graduate Blog, July 1, 2024.
https://graduate.northeastern.edu/res ources/culturally-responsive- teaching-strategies/.
Addressing the Special Education Teacher Shortage: Retention, Job Satisfaction, and Burnout
By Abigail Silverman, ahs266@cornell.edu

The national shortage of special education teachers poses a significant threat to the success of students with diverse abilities. Using discretionary grants from the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, the government can address the issues that this field is facing.

Background
The increasing nationwide demand for special education teachers (SET) is a critical issue that demands immediate attention. Improving the low retention, job satisfaction, and burnout in this field is essential to meeting students’ needs. While SETs are often assumed to work exclusively in schools, their roles extend beyond. Many serve in hospitals, residential facilities, and other settings, providing pivotal educational support to students with diverse needs in various environments.1 SETs are essential in providing personalized instruction to students with diverse learning needs, ensuring they receive the tailored education necessary for success.2
In 2023 through 2024, more than 80% of states reported a shortage of SETs, and the number of students needing special education has risen due to improved identification and a deeper understanding of how to support those with learning differences.3 This shortage significantly affects the quality of education for students with learning differences, leading to larger class sizes, less individualized attention, and increased burnout among existing teachers.4 In 49 states, up to 50% of special education teachers face burnout within five years, and an
alarming 75% leave the profession entirely within ten years.5 Teacher burnout occurs when educators undergoing stress for a long period experience emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, and lack of personal accomplishment.6
When looking at laws pertaining to special education, The
U.S. Department of Education’s Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) is a law that provides children with disabilities nationwide access to free public education, including special education.7 The IDEA oversees how states and public agencies deliver early intervention, special education, and related services to over 7.3 million eligible infants, children, and youth with disabilities.7 Besides this, Congress has yet to successfully introduce, pass, and send a comprehensive bill addressing the need to alleviate the shortage of SETs.

Policy Idea
The IDEA authorizes discretionary grants, providing states with the flexibility to allocate funding toward novel solutions that directly address the challenges faced by SETs. These grants offer a critical opportunity to develop targeted programs that can have a lasting impact on teacher burnout, job satisfaction, and retention rates. Congress should mandate individual
states to use their IDEA-authorized grants to create programs that teach SETs Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT), a promising practice for solving teacher burnout, and ensuring each SET has the administrative support needed to maintain the level of materials and resources needed to educate their students.8
By strategically utilizing discretionary grants, states can provide immediate relief to SETs while also creating a sustainable foundation for SETs to thrive long term. Moreover, the discretionary nature of these grants allows states to tailor solutions to their specific needs, taking into account factors like student population, regional differences, and current resources.
Policy Analysis
As the student population grows, policymakers often focus on the supply shortage of special education teachers.3 However, it is more important to first implement policies that help retain current teachers in the field before focusing on recruiting new ones. By directing public agencies to use discretionary grants for new programs, challenges with job retention, satisfaction, and burnout can become much more manageable.
When considering teacher burnout, research has shown that
burnout in special education stems from difficult student behaviors, insufficient support from administration, and overwhelming job responsibilities.9 The overarching goal of ACT is to emphasize staying in the present moment while simultaneously encouraging psychological flexibility that is in line with one’s values and goals. If SETs can manage the inherent challenges of their work without facing mental exhaustion through programs funded by IDEA's discretionary grants, burnout will be greatly reduced. In employment settings outside of education, researchers have linked ACT to reductions in stress and burnout.8 For example, it was found that for a population of counselors with few resources and little agency support, ACT treatment was associated with a reduction of the symptoms of burnout.8
A lack of administrative support is one of the most common reasons that SETs consider or ultimately decide to leave special education.8 Insufficient support can include limited access to teaching materials and resources as well as inadequate assistance from central and building office personnel.10 A study of 391 SETs found that those reporting higher levels of principal support were more likely to demonstrate greater commitment and job satisfaction.8 By allocating additional funds and dedicated personnel to support SETs, schools could alleviate much of the pressure and stress that SETs face, leading to increased job satisfaction and job retention.

Highlights
The growing number of students benefiting from
specialized and tailored education programs has led to a significant shortage of special education teachers.3
Low job retention rates, rising job dissatisfaction, and heightened levels of burnout contribute to the shortage of special education teachers.
Congress should enhance the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act to help teachers manage burnout and increase administrative support.
These programs should use Acceptance and Commitment Therapy because it alleviates burnout symptoms in other professions.8 Teachers who feel strong administrative support are more likely to report job satisfaction.8
Implementation
To effectively address the special education teacher shortage, this proposal leverages IDEA’s discretionary grants to fund ACT training and enhanced administrative support. States must apply for these grants by demonstrating how their proposed programs align with the objectives of IDEA while simultaneously addressing the local needs of the individual state.
Each state should submit a comprehensive application to the US Department of Education detailing how they intend to use the discretionary grant funds to improve SET retention and job satisfaction and reduce burnout.11 Each application will include a comprehensive needs assessment that identifies and elaborates on local challenges, such as teacher-to-
student ratios, retention trends, and existing resource deficiencies. The plan will also include ACT training and improvements to administrative support. States can develop a budget breakdown demonstrating efficient and targeted use of grant funds by employing structured budget templates, conducting thorough research and development to justify expenditures, and aligning the budget closely with the Grant Narrative.12 This approach ensures that every dollar is accounted for, supports the proposed objectives, and addresses the specific needs highlighted in the application. By integrating clear, measurable goals into the financial plan, states can present a compelling case for how funds will directly benefit their constituents and achieve the desired outcomes.12
After administering discretionary grant plans for specific states, policymakers can tailor ACT programs to align with the needs of SETs. ACT training should emphasize mindfulness, value-driven action, and psychological flexibility to alleviate burnout in high-stress professions. This training can occur through professional development days, online platforms, or weekend workshops for SETs.13 In addition to a portion of the fund allocated directly to ACT programming, another portion should be allocated for an increase in administrative support, such as hiring instructional aides and support staff to assist SETs with non-teaching tasks and increasing classroom resources and teaching materials.8
Navigating the passage of these grants through Congress presents a significant challenge, especially when considering a GOP-dominated legislature. These
grants will receive funding by shifting the budget of the existing IDEA funds, but some lawmakers may view it as an expansion of federal spending or fear that it sets a precedent for budget increases. That said, it is crucial to present this policy initiative effectively, supported by a clear and detailed explanation of budget reallocation.
Furthermore, engaging stakeholders such as teachers, unions, administrators, and parents can greatly influence state policymakers to address infrastructure challenges affecting SET’s poor work environments.14 Fostering a relationship between these groups and state policymakers strengthens policy implementation and ensures the inclusion of diverse perspectives when making significant changes to the status quo.14
The initial states that are granted the funds from the Department of Education should submit annual progress reports and data on teacher retention rates, job satisfaction, and burnout. These grants can receive funding by shifting the current IDEA budget to prioritize these changes. With real- world feedback, more and more states can implement the same steps followed, ultimately correcting the SET shortage throughout the country.

Works Cited
University, Gwynedd Mercy. “The Growing Need for Special Education Teachers in the U.S.” Gwynedd Mercy University. Accessed November 13, 2024. https://www.gmercyu.edu/academic s/learn/demand-for-special- education-teachers.
Kristy Pruitt Dean, and Kristy Pruitt. “Home.” Careers in Special
Education: Benefits, Reasons & Challenges. Accessed November 13, 2024.
https://www.alliant.edu/blog/consid ering-career-special-education- reasons-rewards-and-challenges.
Aldeman, Chad. “Where Are All the Special Educators?” Education Next, October 29, 2024. https://www.educationnext.org/whe re-are-all-the-special-educators- teacher-shortage/.
Cross, Freddie. “Teacher Shortage Areas Nationwide Listing 1990–1991 through 2017–2018,”
May 2017.
https://www.ed.gov/sites/ed/files/ab out/offices/list/ope/pol/bteachershor tageareasreport201718.pdf.
Miller, Megan L. Teacher Burnout. Master’s thesis, Bethel University, 2022. Spark Repository. https://spark.bethel.edu/etd/866.
Maslach, Christina, and Susan
E. Jackson. Maslach Burnout Inventory Manual. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press, 1986.
https://www.researchgate.net/public ation/277816643_The_Maslach_Bu rnout_Inventory_Manual?enrichId= rgreq- aa9160883404b8ba1c5a16ebb7d7ca fc- XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQY WdlOzI3NzgxNjY0MztBUzoyMzc 4NjA2ODI5ODk1NjhAMTQzMzc
yMTgxNDkxMA%3D%3D&el=1_ x_2
Pendharkar, Eesha. “The Number of Students in Special Education Has Doubled in the Past 45 Years.” Education Week, August 1, 2023.
https://www.edweek.org/teaching- learning/the-number-of-students-in- special-education-has-doubled-in- the-past-45-years/2023/07.
Emery, Debra W., and Branden Vandenburg. “Special Education
Teacher Burnout and Act,” n.d. Accessed November 13, 2024.
Brunsting, Nelson C., Melissa
A. Sreckovic, and Kathleen Lynne Lane. “Special Education Teacher Burnout: A Synthesis of Research from 1979 to 2013.” Education and
Treatment of Children 37, no. 4
(2014): 681–711.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/4468394 3.
Conley, Sharon, and Sukkyung You. ‘Key Influences on Special Education Teachers’ Intentions to Leave: The Effects of Administrative Support and Teacher Team Efficacy in a Mediational Model." Educational Management Administration & Leadership 45, no. 3 (2017): 521-540.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143215 608859.
U.S. Department of Education. “Getting Started with Discretionary Grant Applications.” Accessed November 28, 2024. https://www.ed.gov/grants-and- programs/apply-grant/getting- started-discretionary-grant- applications.
OpenGrants. “Creating an Effective Budget Template for Grants.” Accessed November 28, 2024. https://opengrants.io/creating- an-effective-budget-template-for- grants/.
Firestone, Lisa. “Psychological Burnout and Acceptance and Commitment.” Psychology Today, March 22, 2022. Accessed
November 28, 2024. https://www.psychologytoday.com/ us/blog/the-mindful-path-to-self- acceptance/202203/psychological- burnout-and-acceptance-and- commitment.
Arend, Phillip. “Engaging Stakeholders in Education Research, Dissemination, and Advocacy.” TeacherPH, July 27,
2020. Accessed November 28,
2024.
https://www.teacherph.com/engagin
g-stakeholders-education-research- dissemination-advocacy/.
Excellence, Equity, and Enrichment: Spreading the Schoolwide Enrichment Model in Broward County
By Sanshray Singh, ss4379@cornell.edu

Gifted education is currently implemented in a variable, inequitable fashion, raising concerns about its effectiveness in enhancing student performance. Elementary schools in Broward County should end separated classes for gifted students and implement the SEM method coupled with accelerated instruction.

Background
Across the country, “gifted and talented” programs have received increasing scrutiny over both entrenching socioeconomic inequities through issues with racial diversity and ability to substantively influence student trajectories. 1 Thus, it is important to ensure that such programs are both effective and equitable in their selection of gifted students who need specialized learning resources of these resources.
At the elementary school level, Broward County, one of the largest districts in South Florida, currently implements a policy of creating “tracked” classes, which are separate classes created for children classified as “gifted” by an IQ test score.2 When there are not enough gifted students to fill an entire class, they are combined with “high achieving” students who are not “gifted” but have the highest performance in their grade on state- standardized tests of the previous year. These classrooms must have “gifted specific programming” and “differentiated instruction,” leaving it up to individual schools to develop practices that vary from school to school.2 Thus, differences in tax base (wealthier areas have more municipal money to draw from than poorer areas) may create differences, such as lack of gifted trained staff, lesser access to
specialized materials and resources, etc., following trends of lower quality programming for poorer children. A 2019 survey of 2000 elementary schools found that most 3rd grade level teachers were not using differentiated/accelerated instruction in gifted classrooms.2
Research shows that class separation may have minimal impact on gifted students’ learning, often showing little increase above grade-level math and reading achievement. National surveys find gifted students earning in the 75th to 80th percentile, which is within the average score range.3Another study followed students from 3rd grade to 7th grade, comparing test scores of children just above the cutoff to be placed into gifted- tracked classes and just below this cutoff. They found weak associations between being in a gifted class and better performance on math and reading test scores.3

Policy Idea
Elementary schools in Broward County should replace tracked gifted and talented classes with integrated enrichment activities for all students, emphasizing accelerated instruction for specific subjects (math, reading, or science) through district administrative action. This enhanced, accelerated curriculum will produce more tangible,
replicable impacts on not only math and reading scores but also non- achievement metrics such as student engagement and enjoyment. The Schoolwide Enrichment Model, credited to the National Center for Research on Gifted Education, works through asking teachers to identify “gifted behaviors” including sustained interest in a particular subject, higher-order thinking, etc. Teachers would create enrichment clusters designed around certain areas, such as science, debate, literature, or math, which engage students in creative, critical thinking-oriented tasks. For instance, they create projects around advanced material to build synthesis and application-based problem- solving skills.4 Simultaneously, selected students may receive accelerated instruction to take advantage of their quicker learning curve.

Policy Analysis
Creating separate classes leads to inequality in learning resources and environments based upon very early demonstrated potential. By waiting to split classrooms until secondary school, there are more opportunities for children to learn from their peers at an elementary level. Studies have shown that while gifted children see insignificant gains in test scores from separating classrooms, there is
harm imparted to lower-achieving students.4,5 A literature review of various gifted education studies found that underperforming groups in 6 different studies had boosted student performance from “detracking”, or recombining classes.5 Thus, detracking rectifies some issues with creating separation at an age where socialization is as important a facilitator in development as tested IQ.
Additionally, models of accessible enrichment introduce critical thinking skills that do not explicitly cater to “state standards” but have longer term core development benefits for students. Together, these more comprehensive approaches can enhance educational quality for all students. For example, the “CLEAR” model out of the University of Virginia showed an advantage in achievement on ELA exams compared to the regular curriculum for gifted 3rd graders.6 CLEAR-mandated readings, including above grade level poetry, coupled with a research project, which forces synthesis of ideas, both of which emphasized analytical skills like structural understanding, main ideas, and rhetorical choice.6 Another study on SEM implementation found students reported “greater creative productivity” and generally more time spent in school on self-defined “topics of interest” after implementation.7 Such critical thinking skills carry through to all further education. For math, acceleration is clear-cut and could follow models employed in middle schools where state standards of
1.5-2 academic years are covered in one year instead. A 2013 study found that accelerated math
increased feelings of engagement and enjoyment among gifted students, while teaching content that was useful for advanced standardized testing.8

Highlights
Gifted education is implemented in an inconsistent, inequitable manner across school districts and the country generally.1
Broward County currently provides separate gifted programming for students beginning in elementary school, which harms “lower ability” students while also not creating noticeable improvements in performance.2,7
Implementing a top- down Schoolwide Enrichment Model to all schools in BCPS and detracking will enhance
education by standardizing strong enrichment practices.5-9
SEM remedies harms caused by early class separation, builds critical thinking skills, and increases student engagement and test scores.6,11
Implementation
Following the Nation Council on Gifted Research and Education’s framework for bringing SEM to schools, Broward County should convene a committee of elementary teachers from each of 28 school zones, at least one teacher specializing in gifted and nongifted education for grades 3-5.9 This committee should assess current awareness of SEM methods and document which schools, if any, are
already using these enrichment methods in partial or full capacity. Parent-focused sessions, consisting of informational presentations and public forums, will be needed to build support and address any concerns parents may have. Next, a working group of curriculum experts, primarily teachers, will write specific grade-level guidelines for the SEM curriculum. These guidelines could include creating recommended book/activity lists for reading and a monthly schedule of higher grade-level math that should be covered by accelerated programming. This working group would also incorporate input on how students may socioculturally and academically receive specific materials from teachers around the county and present these findings to the school board, who’ll vote on whether to pass such a policy and begin allocating resources towards it.
To pass the policy, potential members of local government to target for endorsement include Dr. Barbara Sharief, an influential figure in local politics and former Mayor of Broward County. She is currently running for State Senate with the endorsement of the entire Florida Education Association, a prominent teacher’s union.11
Following the example of the Washington DC school districts, certain schools that represent the spectrum of schools by average household income and letter grade should trial SEM.10 The district should appoint a task force, including the county Coordinator of Broward Gifted Services, who will work with school administrators and teachers to tailor their implementation of SEM to their school while ensuring county-wide standards are met. To verify the
impact of SEM, data on students’ test scores and measures of classroom engagement, such as attendance and enjoyment, should be tracked over a 3-5 years. After this testing period, the school board and Coordinator of Broward Gifted Services can use these findings to decide whether and how to expand SEM into various elementary schools each year.
Works Cited
Barshay, Jill. “PROOF POINTS: What Research Tells Us about Gifted Education.” The Hechinger Report, October 18, 2021.
https://hechingerreport.org/proof- points-what-research-tells-us-about- gifted-education/
“Procedural Guide for Gifted Education.” Broward County Public Schools, August 2018. https://www.browardschools.com/c ms/lib/FL01803656/Centricity/Dom ain/13483/2018_Procedural_Guide. pdf
Hamilton, “What Really Happens in Gifted Education: A Portrait of Three States.” Pushing the Boundaries of Gifted Education, 2019. https://ncrge.uconn.edu/wp- content/uploads/sites/982/2019/04/ What-Really-Happens-in-Gifted- Education-A-Portrait-of-Three-
States.pdf
Barton, Paul E. “Parsing the Achievement Gap: Baselines for Tracking Progress. Policy Information Report.” Policy Information Center, Mail Stop 19- R, Educational Testing Service, Rosedale Road, Princeton, NJ 08541-0001 ($15, prepaid), 2003.
https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED482932.
Redding, C., & Grissom, J. A. “Do Students in Gifted Programs Perform Better? Linking Gifted
Program Participation to Achievement and Nonachievement Outcomes.”, Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 43(3), 520-544. 2003.
https://doi.org/10.3102/0162373721 1008919.
Reis, S. M., & Renzulli, J. S. . “Developing High Potentials For Innovation In Young People Through The Schoolwide Enrichment Model.” In The International Handbook on Innovation (Ed.), Larisa Shavinia. New York: Pergamon Press, pp. 333–
346. 2003 ://www.researchgate.net/ profile/Joseph- Renzulli/publication/279719545_D eveloping_High_Potentials_for_Inn ovation_in_Young_People_Throug h_the_Schoolwide_Enrichment_Mo del/links/5a36becbaca27247ede1c2 25/Developing-High-Potentials-for- Innovation-in-Young-People- Through-the-Schoolwide-
Enrichment-Model.pdf
Rui, Ning. “Four Decades of Research on the Effects of Detracking Reform: Where Do We Stand?—A Systematic Review of the Evidence.” Journal of Evidence- Based Medicine, 2(3), 164–183. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1756- 5391.2009.01032.x.
Callahan, Carolyn M., Tonya R. Moon, Sarah Oh, Amy P. Azano, and Emily P. Hailey. “What Works in Gifted Education: Documenting the Effects of an Integrated Curricular/Instructional Model for Gifted Students.” American Educational Research Journal, 52(1), 137–167.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/245467 24.
Vahidi, Siamak. “The Effectiveness of the Schoolwide Enrichment Model on Selected
Aspects of Elementary School Change.” Renzulli Center for Creativity, Gifted Education, and Talent Development, February 11, 2015.
https://gifted.uconn.edu/schoolwide
-enrichment-model/semeffct/.
Guyton, Kori Nicole. . "Impact of Acceleration on Gifted Learners' Academic Achievement and Attitudes Toward Mathematics." Order No. 3722953, Piedmont College. 2013 https://www.proquest.com/dissertati ons-theses/impact-acceleration-on- gifted-learners- academic/docview/1723062775/se- 2.
Vahidi, Siamak. “Implementing the Schoolwide Enrichment Model: A Five Stage Planning Process for Consensus Building and the Development of a Mission Statement.” Renzulli Center for Creativity, Gifted Education, and Talent Development, February 10, 2015. https://gifted.uconn.edu/schoolwide
-enrichment- model/implement_sem/.
“SEM Directory—District of Columbia.” Renzulli Center for Creativity, Gifted Education, and Talent Development, June 20, 2019. https://gifted.uconn.edu/schoolwide
-enrichment-model/semdirdc2/.
6 News. “Dr. Barbara Sharief Receives Florida Education Association Endorsement.” April 16, 2024.
https://www.wate.com/business/pre ss- releases/cision/20240416FL88739/d r-barbara-sharief-receives-florida- education-association- endorsement/.


Environmental & Technology Policy
Director: Krislyn Michel Assistant Director: Jack Turner
Analysts: William Dignam,
Noah Duguma, Alix Kerebel, Thej Khanna, Kashyap Rajesh, Harrison Sachs, and Connor Weiss
Agricultural Solutions to Water Resource Issues in the American Southwest
By William Dignam, wed45@cornell.edu

With wildfires and droughts becoming more common in the American Southwest as a result of climate change, developing sustainable agricultural practices and new technologies can help defend against the water issues the region will face.

Background
Agriculture practices use around 70% of global freshwater resources.1 Current agriculture practices and water resource management face increasing pressure to meet the rising global demand for food sustainably while concurrently conserving water and protecting the environment.
Furthermore, certain areas of the world are more prone to drought issues and weather events that affect water resources. The Southwestern United States is particularly vulnerable to drought and water scarcity due to its arid climate and reliance on limited water sources.
According to a recent study published in the Nature Climate Change journal the 22-year drought affecting Southwestern North America has been the region's most severe megadrought since at least the year 800 AD.2
The Southwest is home to three main watersheds that stretch across Texas, Arizona, Utah, California, New Mexico, Colorado, Wyoming, and Nevada. The Colorado River watershed is especially significant as it provides water for millions of people, supports large agricultural areas, and sustains ecosystems.3 However, droughts and increasing water demands from urban and agricultural systems are decreasing the river‘s flow rates and depleting
its reservoirs.3 The intricate network of watersheds in the Southwest highlights the need for collaborative water management practices and technologies among Southwestern states to allocate water resources equitably and efficiently.
Innovative solutions, such as improving irrigation methods using analysis tools, utilizing AI and machine learning for resource efficiency, addressing water adoption, drought-resistant crop varieties, and investing in water recycling and desalination technologies, are essential to address the region‘s water challenges. Using these and other agricultural technologies in the Southwest and the rest of the United States will drastically improve water resources.
Policy Idea
Congress could enact a comprehensive Southwest Agricultural Innovation and Resilience Program (SAIRP), which combines federal and state efforts under a single, unified framework. The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) would manage a $5 billion federal loan and grant initiative to fund this program. It would provide federal backing targeting innovative companies in Silicon Valley, such as vertical farming start-ups like Plenty and Bowery Farming, and agri-tech
leaders like John Deere, as well as large agricultural ventures in the Southwest, including groups like Driscoll‘s Farms that specialize in water conservation.4,5 The program would allocate funding to businesses developing water- efficient irrigation systems,
drought-resistant crop varieties, and advanced soil health monitoring technologies, supporting the development and implementation of innovative water-saving and crop- enhancing technologies. States can initiate pilot programs and demonstration projects that showcase the potential of agricultural technologies in real- world settings.
Policy Analysis
Specific technologies show potential in the Southwest.
Solutions like N-Drip‘s gravity- powered drip irrigation system help farmers conserve water by replacing the outdated flood irrigation method still used in nearly 40% of the region‘s farms.6 This system can reduce water use by up to 70% without requiring pumps or energy, which is particularly suited to areas like California and Arizona where water scarcity is a more pressing issue.6 Digital tools, such as Acuity Agriculture's dashboard, provide farmers with real-time data on soil moisture and climate conditions to help them optimize irrigation
practices and meet strict water usage regulations. Additionally, indoor and vertical farming technologies, which use recycled water and AI-controlled systems, have emerged as key innovations for growing crops with up to 95% less water, helping reduce issues with the region‘s water supply draining. Together, these technologies are essential for adapting to the Southwest‘s rapidly changing water landscape, which is driven by both population growth and climate change.
The USDA and Congress could maximize the effectiveness of these technologies through SAIRP‘s joint loan program by providing essential funding for initial implementation and scaling. By backing innovations like N-Drip‘s energy-free irrigation and Acuity Agriculture’s data-driven soil monitoring, SAIRP helps farmers transition from outdated methods without bearing high upfront costs. Additionally, USDA-led coordination ensures farmers have access to training and technical support, minimizing barriers to adoption. While initial costs are high, the long-term savings in water and increased crop yields can offset these expenses, investing in a sustainable solution for both the government and farmers.
Highlights
Increasing droughts and wildfires threaten water resources in the Southwestern United States, highlighting the need for sustainable agricultural practices and new technologies to protect water availability.1
Agriculture uses roughly 70% of global freshwater.1
The Southwest’s reliance on limited water sources and vulnerable watersheds calls for innovative resource management and conservation.
The Southwest Agricultural Innovation and Resilience Program (SAIRP) would provide $5 billion in federal loans and grants through the USDA, targeting irrigation, drought-resistant crops, and digital monitoring technologies.4,5
With federal support, technologies like N-Drip irrigation and AI soil monitoring can reduce water use by up to 70%, improve crop yields, and adapt farming practices to the region’s evolving climate challenges.6

Implementation
To implement SAIRP once approved, Congress and the USDA could model the initiative on existing green energy acts, such as the Rural Energy for America Program (REAP - H.R. 5051),
which provides grants and loan guarantees to agricultural producers and rural businesses for energy- efficient projects.7 Similar to REAP, SAIRP could offer grants and subsidized loans specifically targeting water-saving technologies and data-driven agricultural practices that align with the program’s environmental goals.
Additionally, SAIRP could draw on lessons from the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA), which allocates funding for clean energy and sustainable farming practices, providing tax credits to incentivize eco-friendly investments.8 A portion of the IRA’s clean energy and agricultural
sustainability funding could be redirected or earmarked specifically for SAIRP’s objectives. Through SAIRP, USDA-led workshops, and outreach programs could help inform farmers about the economic and environmental benefits of adopting technologies like N-Drip’s drip irrigation or Acuity Agriculture’s soil monitoring dashboards mentioned previously.
SAIRP’s success will depend on addressing several challenges. Reaching and educating farmers in the Southwest, where political ideologies vary widely, will require careful planning and community-based outreach.
Farmers may be skeptical about adopting new practices, especially if they perceive them as government- imposed. Creating workshops for local needs and involving respected agricultural leaders in the process may help build trust. Workshops should focus on practical, actionable solutions to challenges faced by the community, such as improving soil health, managing water resources, or adopting sustainable farming techniques.
Including agricultural leaders, who understand the unique cultural and economic aspects of the region, lends credibility to the initiative and creates a sense of collaboration.
Second, the cost of advanced technologies may be prohibitive for lower-income farmers. Even with subsidies, upfront investments in tools like precision irrigation systems and digital monitoring may seem too high. The program would counter this by providing tiered financial aid options, such as higher grants for small farmers or long- term, low-interest loans that allow for gradual repayment. This approach would make SAIRP accessible to a broader range of
farmers, allowing access to water conservation solutions needed for the region.

Works Cited
Kashiwise Haruna, Tony Fujs. World Bank Blogs. “Strains on freshwater resources: The impact of food on production on water consumption”, August 23rd, 2023.https://blogs.world bank.org/en/opendata/strains- freshwater-resources-impact-food- production-water- consumption#:~:text=Today%2C% 20around%2070%20percent%20of, goes%20to%20the%20industrial%2 0sector.
Williams, Briana. Columbia Climate School, State of the Planet. “Megadrought in Southwest Is Now the Worst in at Least 1,200 Years, Study Confirms”, February 14, 2022.  https://news.climate.columbi a.edu /2022/02/14/megadrought-in- southwest-is-
now-the-worst-in-at-least-1200- years-study-confirms/.
Food and Water Watch. “Colorado River: The Challenges of a Critical Water Source”, February 28, 2023.
https://www.foodandwaterwatch.or g/2023/02/28/colorado-river/.
Lempert, Phil. Forbes. “Supermarkets and Shoppers Must Embrace Vertical Farming—Our Future Depends on It”, September 15, 2023.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/phille mpert/2023/09/
15/supermarkets-and-shoppers- must-embrace-vertical-farming-our- future-depends-on-it/.
Growing Returns Blog. “Driscoll’s Berry Company Invests in Water Conservation”, January 23, 2019. Environmental Defense Fund.
https://blogs.edf.org/growingreturns
/2019/01/23/ driscolls-berry- company-water-conservation/.
PG Signal. “Western Farmers Are Strapped for Water—These Technologies May Help." November 8, 2022.
https://pgsignal.com/2022/11/08/we stern-farmers-are-strapped-for- water-
these technologies-may-help/.
United States Department of Agriculture, Rural Development. “Rural Energy for America Program: Renewable Energy Systems and Energy Efficiency Improvement Guaranteed Loans.” Accessed December 19th, 2024. https://www.rd.usda.gov/programs- services/energy-
programs/rural-energy-america- program-renewable-energy- systems-energy-efficiency- improvement-guaranteed-loans.
The White House, Statements and Releases. “Fact Sheet: How the Inflation Reduction Act Helps Rural Communities”, August 17, 2022. https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefin g-room
/statements- releases/2022/08/17/fact-sheet-how- the-inflation-reduction-act-helps- rural-communities/.
Unlocking the Potential of New York City’s Vacant and Underutilized Lots
By Noah Duguma, ndd32@cornell.edu

New York City has one of the world’s most expensive property markets since the housing supply is constantly strained. New York City should increase housing stock by building housing on vacant lots.

Background
In recent decades, New York City’s housing market has skyrocketed in value. The average price per square foot in the city has doubled since the 1990s.1 Combined with extremely high demand for housing, it is more difficult than ever for a populace with a median monthly income of
$5,344 per month to find their way onto the New York City property ladder.2 At the same time, New York City is home to over 25,000 vacant and underutilized lots and tens of thousands of vacant properties. The number of vacant and underutilized lots could be even higher because the private housing system in New York City is not well studied.3, 4 In addition, massive potential exists within subdividing former single-family homes to create multiple-family dwellings.
Much of New York City's new construction comes from rezoning for increased density, a process called “upzoning.”5 This practice, which started during the Bloomberg and De Blasio administrations, has proved to be extremely effective in creating new housing stock. A third of recent housing development has happened in upzoned areas.6 Despite upzoning’s promise, New York City’s vacant lots continue to lay sallow. If New York City repurposes all of its vacant and underutilized lots and properties to
their fullest potential, tens of thousands of new housing units could be built in neighborhoods where housing is most needed.

Policy Idea
The first part of this policy will direct the New York City government to jettison any vacant or underutilized lots in public holding. On the private end, New York City will impose a five percent property tax on vacant and underutilized lots and properties in private holding. This tax would not only generate revenue for the city government, but it would also incentivize private landowners to sell or develop their vacant lots.
Development on the remaining lots within New York City will be exclusively multifamily units, and any new construction will be architecturally representative of the vacant lot neighborhoods. Building efforts on these undeveloped and underutilized lots will be concentrated on affordable housing initiatives.
Single-family homeowners will also be incentivized to subdivide or build onto their property through counseling the city will provide and generous tax credits for every extraneous unit added onto a respective parcel.

Policy Analysis
In a city with such a complicated public-private property
market, this policy could face considerable challenges from varying actors. Private property owners could object significantly against the mandatory property tax on vacant lots. Residents against neighborhood development could also push back against any initiatives to redevelop vacant lots into residences rather than repurposing vacant lots for other forms of community good.
Architecture firms might also face difficulty trying to build homes on vacant lots because some of the remaining vacant lots in New York City have unique dimensions. At the same time, residents in more economically depressed New York City neighborhoods (where more vacant and underutilized lots tend to be) would benefit from new stocks of housing.
Vacant lot repurposing fits into the broader land use category of brownfield revitalization.
Brownfields are areas of land that are currently fallow due to previous industrial activity. The revitalization of brownfields has a storied history in the Northeastern United States. Specifically in New Jersey, a state with a long industrial past, hundreds of brownfield sites have been revitalized for new residential and commercial uses.
The Hovnanian Building Company has even specialized in turning New Jersey’s brownfield zones into affordable and luxury housing units
for four decades.7 The Hovnanian company’s success story should show that brownfield revitalization is a viable and scalable way of creating new housing.

Highlights
New York City’s housing market is one of the most expensive and congested in the world.1
At the same time, thousands of lots in New York City are laying fallow or being underutilized.3,4
This policy proposal aims to develop the existing undeveloped and underutilized lots in public possession and put pressure on private landowners to develop these lots through the implementation of a specialized 5% property tax on undeveloped and underutilized lots; building efforts will be concentrated on constructing affordable housing.
In addition, single-family homeowners in New York City will be incentivized to subdivide or add to their lots through generous tax credits and free counseling from the city.
Implementation
This policy proposal has an exclusive focus on New York City, and as such will only need to be passed on the citywide level. This policy proposal will be proposed to the New York City Council. There might be potential pushback from certain council districts with higher- income residents due to this policy focusing on constructing affordable housing. Recently, within New York City, there has been fierce
local opposition to the construction of affordable housing within wealthy neighborhoods, as evidenced by recent disputes in Windsor Terrace.8 However, with effective advertising of the policy proposal’s extremely pertinent benefits of increased housing availability and decreased property prices to New York City’s Council Members, the Council floor will surely push the policy to be approved.
If passed, the first step of this policy proposal entails an extensive geographical survey (conducted by the New York State Geological Survey) of all the underutilized, unused, and single- family lots within New York City. Due to New York City’s capacious area and diverse intra-district needs, such a survey will take well over a year to complete. After the survey is completed, neighborhoods with the highest number of underutilized and unused lots will be prioritized over neighborhoods with fewer underutilized lots. Emptier neighborhoods must be prioritized because empirical evidence states that the neighborhoods with the highest number of unused lots in New York City are economically depressed.3 Conveying the funds from the five percent property tax on unused and underutilized lots to the most economically depressed New York City neighborhoods will allow New York City to perform directed residential development in the most in-need neighborhoods (based on numerical figures from vacantlandnyc.com).
Civil society organizations and advocates for affordable housing (such as the Metropolitan Council on Housing) would be the most ardent supporters of such a policy proposal. In fact, advocacy
from the aforementioned groups for this policy proposal would ensure that this policy proposal would pass on the Council floor, thereby ameliorating New York City’s dire housing crisis.
Works Cited
Rothman, Larry. “Analyzing 100 Years of Real Estate Price History in Manhattan.” ELIKA New York, 18 Oct. 2016, www.elikarealestate.com/blog/traci ng-buying-real-estate-new-york- past-100-years/.
“What Are the Average Salaries in New York City? (2023).” HousingAnywhere, housinganywhere.com/New-York-- United-States/average-salary-in- nyc.
“NYC Vacant Land.” Vacantlandnyc.com, 2024, vacantlandnyc.com/.
“Vacancy Market in New York.” ATTOM, 23 Aug. 2023,
www.attomdata.com/solutions/mark et-trends-data/zombie-foreclosures- report/vacancy-market-in-new- york/.
Cartier, Brad. “What Is Upzoning, and What Does It Mean for Investors?” The Motley Fool, www.fool.com/investing/stock- market/market-sectors/real-estate- investing/commercial-real- estate/upzoning/.
“The Geography of New Housing Development.” Furmancenter.org, furmancenter.org/stateofthecity/vie w/the-geography-of-new-housing.
Sichelman, Lew. “Brownfield Sites Become Gold for One Company.” Builder, 11 Feb, 2004, www.builderonline.com/building/re gulation-policy/brownfield-sites- become-gld-for-one-company_o. Accessed 8 Nov. 2024.
Brand, David. “In Windsor Terrace, a Housing Dispute Ensnares Mayor Adams’ Sweeping
Reform Plan.” Gothamist, 2024, gothamist.com/news/in-windsor- terrace-a-housing-dispute-ensnares-
mayor-adams-sweeping-reform- plan. Accessed 8 Nov. 2024..
Growing Towards Equity: Tackling Food Desserts and Emissions through Community Gardens
By Alix Kerebel, ak2755@cornell.edu

Our current food production and distribution system leaves vulnerable Americans and our planet behind. The US government can close gaps in food security through new grants for community gardens in lower-income communities.

Background
Millions of Americans do not have access to the food necessary for a healthy lifestyle, a condition described as food insecurity. As of 2024, nearly 14% of Americans experience food insecurity.1 This proportion has remained relatively constant since 2001, despite numerous advancements in agriculture and technology.1 While food insecurity touches Americans across demographics, certain groups are disproportionately impacted.
Namely, as of 2023, 23% of African American households, 22% of Latino households, and nearly 39% of impoverished households experienced food insecurity.1
Many lower-income households live in so-called “food deserts”. Food deserts are communities in which there is a lack of grocery stores, and where traveling to the nearest grocery store is inefficient and difficult at best. The high prices of healthy food compound the effects of food deserts, causing detrimental health impacts on low-income individuals.2,3 Specifically, the lack of nutritious food in a food desert increases the risks of various health issues, leading to a 0.8-4.7 years shorter life expectancy.3
Simultaneously, food production as a whole faces serious sustainability issues. Food
production emissions (excluding those associated with land use) account for nearly a third of greenhouse gas emissions. Namely, the transportation of produce and its packaging in stores drive up food production’s environmental footprint.4 To protect both citizens and our planet, the US government should invest in sustainable and accessible food production methods.
Policy Idea
Congress should encourage the development of community gardens by providing application- based grants to USDA-designated Low-Access (LILA) neighborhoods (food deserts). To receive these grants, government leaders of towns must complete a simple application in which they outline their community’s eligibility for the program and their detailed plans to establish a community garden large enough for the demonstrated interest in the program. The application process should be made simple, but, if needed, government leaders should be encouraged to seek support from private corporations or the Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production (OUAIP). City leaders should reapply for this program every couple of years and be subject to various accountability measures.
Policy Analysis
Providing grants for community gardens provides the initial incentive needed to kickstart the efforts despite upfront administrative burdens.5 Gardens initiated through a grant program would reduce the effects of food desert inhabitation. Citizens participating in a community garden are 3.5 times more likely to eat the recommended amount of fruits and vegetables.6 Additionally, one study finds that those in food deserts could save approximately $84 per month on food by utilizing community gardens.7 By increasing the consumption of healthy foods, community gardens were linked to improving physical and physiological health, helping close the health gap between citizens.8
Community gardens are also key in decreasing greenhouse gas emissions.9 A study published in the Landscape and Urban Planning Journal found that a kg produced in community gardens “had 2 kg lower emissions than one purchased.10 However, a recent study by the University of Michigan found that, if implemented incorrectly, community gardens may increase food production emissions. Creating the material needed for opening and maintaining the garden releases greenhouse gases that are not offset if the garden doesn’t remain open for long enough.11 The study
explains that to reduce overall greenhouse gas emissions, community garden programs should extend the lifetime of necessary infrastructure (raised beds, fabric nets, paths, etc.) and practice urban symbiosis.11 Integrating these best practices into the grant program is essential to maintaining its long- term sustainability benefits.

Highlights
Rates of food insecurity in the US are high, posing serious health consequences for vulnerable Americans.1,2,3
The food production process is not sustainable, with many emissions coming from transport.4
The United States should provide an application-based grant program for food- insecure neighborhoods to create and maintain community gardens.
The program would provide a crucial source of healthy nutrition while cutting emissions from obtaining food.5,6,7,8,9,10
Implementation
The United States should implement an application-based grant program for American cities to support the creation and maintenance of community gardens, which should be administered through the OUAIP. These grants will help fund materials, land purchases, and crops, amongst other necessary purchases. Since the federal government is funding materials, the OUAIP should also restrict what materials should be purchased with the money to ensure high-quality infrastructure is used to lengthen the life span and, if
possible, local compost material is used for soil enrichment.
Emphasizing these sustainable practices will amplify the gardens’ environmental impact.11
To qualify for the grant, cities must be a USDA-designated low-access neighborhood (a food desert) and submit plans for a community garden large enough to support interested residents–which they should measure through public polls. The community gardens must be available to all citizens free of charge and be created on public- owned vacant lots or public gardens to not limit other economic opportunities. While cities themselves should submit the grant applications, they will be encouraged to utilize the help of private corporations, which are currently helping manage community gardens and thus have more expertise. The grant process should be designed to be as simple as possible. However, if needed, the OUAIP should assist cities in the application process to overcome the initial application burden and ensure accessibility.5
The grants should be made available for application immediately, be valid for three years (before renewal is required), and be subject to regular auditing to ensure upkeep and maintenance. If the cities are not properly utilizing funds, the OUAIP should provide direct intervention and assistance to resolve obstacles. Funding for this program should come from general tax revenue.
Political opposition may stem from this funding mechanism, though, as some politicians may see the program as costly. To counter it, politicians should emphasize the fact that, since the program is application-based, the OUAIP can
decide to allocate funds to only the most needy cities, depending on available resources. The same can be argued against opponents who believe the job is already being done by nonprofits: the OUAIP can choose to allocate funding only in cities without preexisting gardens. To further address the issue of funding, politicians should emphasize that as public health outcomes increase thanks to the gardens, which may help reduce Medicaid and Medicare spending.6,7,8

Works Cited
“Interactive Charts and Highlights.” USDA ERS - Interactive Charts and Highlights. Accessed December 18, 2024. https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/foo d-nutrition-assistance/food-security- in-the-u-s/interactive-charts-and- highlights/.
“Access to Foods That Support Healthy Dietary Patterns.” Access to Foods That Support Healthy Dietary Patterns - Healthy People 2030. Accessed December 18,
2024.
https://odphp.health.gov/healthypeo ple/priority-areas/social- determinants-health/literature- summaries/access-foods-support- healthy-dietary-patterns.
“Living in Food Deserts Is Associated with Shorter Life Expectancy in the US, New Research Shows.” American Cancer Society MediaRoom. Accessed December 18, 2024. https://pressroom.cancer.org/release s?item=1237.
Crippa, M., E. Solazzo, D. Guizzardi, F. Monforti-Ferrario, F.
N. Tubiello, and A. Leip. “Food Systems Are Responsible for a Third of Global Anthropogenic GHG Emissions.” Nature Food 2,
no. 3 (March 8, 2021): 198–209.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-021- 00225-9.
Boekelheide, Don, and Lucy Bradley. “Funding and Resources.” NC State University. Accessed December 18, 2024. https://content.ces.ncsu.edu/collard- greens-and-common-ground-a- north-carolina-community-food- gardening-handbook/funding-and- resources.
Manzanete, Lisa. “Community Gardens: An Effective Approach to Food Equity.” Loma Linda University Institute for Health Policy and Leadership. July 13, 2021.
https://ihpl.llu.edu/blog/community- gardens-effective-approach-food- equity.
Kan-Rice, Pam. “Urban Gardens Improve Food Security.” University
of California, October 8, 2021. https://www.universityofcalifornia.e du/news/urban-gardens-improve- food-security.
“Community Gardens.” County Health Rankings & Roadmaps. N.d. University of Wisconsin Population Health Institute. https://www.countyhealthrankings.o rg/strategies-and-solutions/what- works-for- health/strategies/community- gardens.
Puigdueta, Ivanka, Eduardo Aguilera, José Luis Cruz, Ana Iglesias, and Alberto Sanz-Cobena. “Urban Agriculture May Change Food Consumption towards Low Carbon Diets.” Global Food Security 28 (March 2021): 100507. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2021.1 00507.
Cleveland, David A., Noelle Phares, Krista D. Nightingale, Robyn L. Weatherby, William Radis, Jane Ballard, Madia Campagna, et al. “The Potential for Urban Household Vegetable Gardens to Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions.” Landscape and Urban Planning 157 (January 2017): 365–
74.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbpla n.2016.07.008.
“Study Finds That Urban Agriculture Must Be Carefully Planned to Have Climate Benefits.” University of Michigan News. January 22, 2024. https://news.umich.edu/study-finds- that-urban-agriculture-must-be- carefully-planned-to-have-climate- benefits/.
Regulating Personalized Pricing in the Big Data Era: Toward a Fair Market Framework
By Thej Khanna, tkk28@cornell.edu

Personalized pricing—using personal information to set prices—is not a new phenomenon. In an age where data is everything, however, there is an urgent need for clear and proactive regulation to define acceptable data usage boundaries and protect American consumers.

Background
Surveillance pricing refers to the use of algorithmic pricing systems, artificial intelligence, and related technologies to determine individualized prices based on consumer data including location, demographics, credit history, or browsing history1. The practice of personalized pricing is not novel; product costs have historically been variable, with factors including overhead, customer desire, and competitor prices all contributing to historical examples of individualized pricing.2 Studies additionally highlight potential consumer benefits, as personalized pricing profiles enable corporations to charge customers closer to their perceived willingness to pay, maximizing profit and market share.3
Personalized pricing schemes pose more harm than benefit, with these schemes often stifling market innovation, eviscerating consumer rights and privacy, and setting a dangerous precedent for how much control the public is willing to give algorithms over our daily lives. Potential risks include the exploitation of less knowledgeable consumers, the targeting of behavioral biases, violations of national discrimination law, and shifting market share towards corporations with the
resources to engage in large-scale data collection and analysis.4
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has recently issued an investigative probe requesting information regarding the use of surveillance pricing methods across four key areas: types of products and services offered, data collection and inputs, customer and sales information, and impact on consumers and prices.1 This investigative probe is not intended to result in policy action, instead focusing on further establishing the current landscape of surveillance pricing.
Policy Idea
The FTC should implement the following initiatives: establish a dedicated algorithmic marketing investigative division within the Bureau of Consumer Protection (BCP) focused primarily on enforcement and consumer reporting, establish data disclosure requirements for corporations including specific details data collection practices and usage in pricing schemes, and create a third-party auditing and certification system for companies that adhere to consumer data privacy standards. By
implementing this three- pronged policy approach, the FTC can effectively provide a sense of regulatory stability to the sphere of algorithmic consumer protection, set up a foundation for future data privacy standards, and place power back in the hands of individual consumers.
Policy Analysis
Establishing a dedicated algorithmic marketing investigative division within the BCP would allow the FTC to effectively leverage pre-existing administrative structures to enforce the second prong of this policy proposal, specifically data disclosure. The current focuses of the BCP include their work within the Division of Privacy & Identity Protection, which operates online assistance and a call center for victims of identity theft.5 Implementing a similar structure for algorithmic pricing schemes would increase the efficacy of the other two prongs of this proposal, as well as offer consumers an avenue for individual recourse and advisement.
Additionally, the division’s placement within the BCP would leverage already existing organizational structures, with divisions such as the Division of Financial Practices currently
focusing on emerging technology broadly.6
Establishing data disclosure requirements would similarly pressure corporations to adhere to equitable pricing schemes.
Structuring a data disclosure requirement similar to the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) would require companies to disclose what data is being collected and for what purpose.7 The efficacy of this policy is demonstrated by the effects of GDPR, with a survey of EU citizens finding that 60% of respondents were aware of their ability to access personal data held by public administrations, and 51% were aware of their ability to access data held by private companies.8 This requirement would check back against one of the major concerns regarding surveillance pricing: lack of transparency on how algorithms determine individual pricing.9 The benefits of data disclosure requirements extend beyond consumer protection.
Finally, creating a third- party auditing and certification system would help incentivize companies to adhere to new algorithmic pricing regulations by enabling the attainment of a displayable certificate.
Additionally, a third-party auditing system would reduce the administrative load placed on the FTC: by focusing on certifying accrediting services rather than performing audits, the FTC would experience the same outcomes for a fraction of the workload. Third- party audits additionally increase consumer confidence, with a Deloitte report finding that 78% of respondents believe that third-party audits enhance the credibility of a company's financial and other disclosure practices.10

Highlights
The creation of algorithmically determined individualized prices poses potential risks to consumer welfare, including violating national discrimination laws, exploiting unaware consumers, and creating monopolies.
Personalized pricing models are not necessarily predatory; fair and balanced pricing systems can maximize profit margins, increase accessibility to goods and services, and enhance market competitiveness. Achieving this balance requires government oversight and safeguards to ensure transparency, anti- discriminatory development, and consumer privacy.
Through a three-pronged approach including the founding of a new algorithmic marketing investigative division, the creation of data disclosure requirements for algorithmic pricing schemes, and the introduction of a third-party accrediting system for consumer data usage, the FTC can effectively provide clarity to the field of algorithmic pricing models.
Implementation
A multi-phased and chronological approach is necessary. The FTC should first establish the proposed surveillance pricing investigative division within the BCP. This division would leverage resources from existing divisions, particularly the Office of
Technology given its established focus on advising the FTC on policy and research initiatives in the fields of artificial intelligence, machine learning, and human- computer interaction.11 To ensure the success of this new division, the BCP should allocate additional funding and personnel, recruiting experts focused on algorithmic transparency, consumer privacy, and data ethics. The division would become responsible for monitoring emerging algorithmic pricing practices, enforcing the data disclosure standards outlined in prong two of this policy, and providing an accessible reporting system for consumers affected by discriminatory pricing practices.
Given the upcoming administration’s focus on deregulation and reducing expenditures, the FTC may need to first begin with voluntary partnerships and industry collaboration, gradually expanding enforcement as market conditions and administrative interest evolve.
The second stage of this proposal is the development of a standardized data disclosure framework for corporations using algorithmic personalized pricing models. To achieve this, the FTC must first complete its ongoing probe into surveillance pricing practices. Without a deeper understanding of the current landscape of algorithmic pricing models the FTC risks hampering market competition, with a 2018 joint report between the DOJ and the FTC finding that equitable personalized pricing models enhance market competition, efficiency, and welfare.12 An additional intermediate step to help determine effective requirements would be a period of public
comment, inviting feedback from consumer advocacy groups, algorithmic justice experts, and industry representatives. Finally, before fully implementing the data disclosure requirements, the FTC should provide a grace period for companies to prepare; hasty implementation could put a massive strain on businesses, particularly smaller organizations without dedicated privacy teams. Given surveyed costs of GDPR compliance ranging from $1.7 million for small to medium-sized businesses and up to $70 million for larger corporations, immediate implementation of this data framework would have major economic impacts.13
The third prong, the third- party auditing and certification program, involves developing a transparent auditing process to certify organizational adherence to the new data disclosure requirements outlined in the second prong. Mirroring existing FDA third-party certification programs, where the FDA officially recognizes accreditation bodies, the FTC would offload enforcement and investigative responsibilities, thereby reducing additional strain on the agency.14
To ensure the efficacy of these policy changes, the FTC should engage in a targeted communications campaign to ensure consumers are aware of their rights. Additionally, the FTC should provide guidance documents and host workshops to assist businesses in complying with new data disclosure requirements, particularly smaller to mid-range companies that may experience financial difficulty. These three prongs will likely succeed under the Trump administration, with
incoming FTC Chair Andrew Ferguson having already expressed support for increased scrutiny of surveillance pricing methods.15 By implementing this policy, the FTC will set a global precedent for responsible algorithmic pricing, ensuring consumer rights are safeguarded in the evolving digital economy.

Works Cited
Federal Trade Commission. “FTC Issues Orders to Eight Companies Seeking Information on Surveillance Pricing.” Federal Trade Commission, July 23, 2024. https://www.ftc.gov/news- events/news/press- releases/2024/07/ftc-issues-orders- eight-companies-seeking- information-surveillance-pricing.
Wallheimer, Brian. “Are You Ready for Personalized Pricing?” The University of Chicago Booth School of Business, February 26, 2018.
https://www.chicagobooth.edu/revie w/are-you-ready-personalized- pricing.
Elmachtoub, Adam N., Vishal Gupta, and Michael L. Hamilton. “The Value of Personalized Pricing.” Management Science 67, no. 10 (April 5, 2021). https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2020.3 821.
Mozilla, and Consumers International. A Consumer Investigation into Personalised Pricing, n.d. https://www.consumersinternational
.org/media/369070/personalized_pri cing.pdf.
Federal Trade Commission. “Division of Privacy and Identity Protection.” Federal Trade Commission, n.d. https://www.ftc.gov/about- ftc/bureaus-offices/bureau-
consumer-protection/our- divisions/division-privacy-and- identity.
Federal Trade Commission. “Division of Financial Practices.” Federal Trade Commission, n.d. https://www.ftc.gov/about- ftc/bureaus-offices/bureau- consumer-protection/our- divisions/division-financial- practices
European Commission. “What Information Must Be given to Individuals Whose Data Is Collected?” European Commission, n.d. https://commission.europa.eu/law/la w-topic/data- protection/reform/rules-business- and-organisations/principles- gdpr/what-information-must-be- given-individuals-whose-data- collected_en.
“Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council Data Protection as a Pillar of Citizens’ Empowerment and the EU’s Approach to the Digital Transition - Two Years of Application of the General Data Protection Regulation.” EUR-Lex, June 24, 2020. https://eur- lex.europa.eu/legal- content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A 52020SC0115.
Beam, Christopher. “Welcome to Pricing Hell.” The Atlantic, April 16, 2024.
https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/a rchive/2024/04/surge-pricing-fees- economy/678078/.
Tamboly, Nilofeur. “Understanding the Third Party Audit Process” AuditGuru, January 22, 2024.
https://audit.guru/understanding- the-third-party-audit- process/#:~:text=According%20to
%20a%20survey%20conducted,pos
itive%20reputation%20in%20the% 20market
Federal Trade Commission. “Office of Technology.” Federal Trade Commission, n.d. https://www.ftc.gov/about- ftc/bureaus-offices/office- technology.
U.S. Department of Justice,
U.S. Federal Trade Commission, Personalised Pricing in the Digital Era – Note by the United States, 2018.
https://www.justice.gov/atr/page/fil e/1313091/dl?inline. 
Demirer, Mert, Diego J. Hernández, Dean Li, and Sida Peng. “Data, Privacy Laws and Firm Production: Evidence from the GDPR.” National Bureau of Economic Research, February 2024. https://doi.org/10.3386/w32146.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. “Accredited Third- Party Certification Program.” U.S. Food and Drug Administration, October 26, 2023. https://www.fda.gov/food/importing
-food-products-united-
states/accredited-third-party- certification-program.
United States, Congress, Office of Commissioner Andrew N. Ferguson, and Andrew N. Ferguson. Concurring Statement of Commissioner Andrew N. Ferguson, Surveillance Pricing Intermediaries Matter Number P246202, 23 July 2024.
https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc
_gov/pdf/surveillance-pricing-6b- ferguson-concurrence.pdf.
Unmasking the Digital Deception: Combatting Deepfake Misinformation in Politics
By Kashyap Rajesh, kr583@cornell.edu

As deepfake technology blurs the line between fact and fiction in politics, implementing mandatory labeling for AI-generated content safeguards democracy by ensuring transparency, enabling informed decision-making, reducing misinformation, and holding creators accountable for deceptive or altered media.

Background
In the past few years, there has been an exponential increase in the use of deepfakes, AI-generated videos and audio clips that look and sound incredibly real but are not. In fact, deepfake content grew by 900% between 2019 and 2020, with forecasts predicting up to 90% of online content could be synthetically generated by 2026.1 They have caused a growing concern over the distortion of truth and have blurred the lines between fact and fiction.2 In 2023, Reuters found that roughly 500,000 video and voice deepfakes were shared on social media around the world.3 By 2025, we can expect to see 8 million deepfakes shared online, consistent with the rate of doubling deepfakes every six months.3
AI-generated misinformation is already impacting elections. Just two days before Slovakia’s recent parliamentary vote, social media was flooded with a fake audio clip of a prominent party leader allegedly discussing plans to buy votes.4 This incident resulted in a significant loss for the implicated party, spotlighting the risks of AI-powered misinformation.4 The problem is borderless: in January 2024, during New Hampshire’s presidential primary season, a deepfake audio of President Joe Biden, which falsely
claimed that primaries did not matter was widely circulated.
The risk is clear: the next generation of voters may eventually lose faith in not only what we read and see but in the political system itself. About 63% of Americans believe that altered or fabricated videos and images cause significant confusion around the facts of current events and issues.6 At a time when political polarization is high and civic engagement is low, the rapid development of AI-driven disinformation threatens to overwhelm our ability to discern what is real, eroding the very essence of our democracy.7
Policy Idea
To combat misinformation and increase trust in the electoral process, an AI-Generated Content Disclosure Law is necessary. This law would require all media platforms—social media sites, news outlets, and streaming services—to label content created or significantly modified by AI. The label must be visible and state that the content was generated or altered using artificial intelligence (defined as advanced AI systems capable of generating or altering content that misleads audiences). Enforcement would involve private companies implementing detection tools internally, under government oversight, to monitor and flag
content. This ensures consumers can engage with online content more transparently and confidently.
Policy Analysis
The ease with which these technologies can now create hyper- realistic content creates a massive political liability.8 This aforementioned AI-Generated Content Disclosure Law addresses the root of this problem by increasing transparency for the public when they engage with this media. Instead of just restricting this content, the policy focuses on educating viewers and building trust. When viewers know whether AI created something, they can engage more critically and responsibly with the media, as suggested by President Biden’s executive order last fall.9
Additionally, there is existing precedent. For example, the European Union’s Digital Services Act includes provisions for flagging disinformation, though it fails to specifically address AI-generated content specifically.10 Similarly, some platforms have voluntarily introduced their own labels for AI content, but these efforts are often inconsistent across media platforms.11 By mandating such a labeling initiative across platforms across the US, this law would create a more unified approach to resolving the issue.
Enforcing this policy would require platforms to develop or obtain advanced detection tools for identifying AI-generated content, leading to increased administrative and operational costs.12 Additionally, funding for these efforts would need to come from both government and platforms, potentially with support from media literacy grants, which would be challenging.
However, studies have shown that disinformation costs the global economy over $78 billion annually, and AI-generated deepfakes pose growing threats to political stability and trust.3 Hence, by investing in detection and transparency tools, both platforms and governments can reduce these costs by contributing to a more informed and engaged electorate, mitigating the spread of harmful AI- driven misinformation. In the long run, these savings, combined with increased public trust, make this a worthwhile investment for safeguarding media integrity.13

Highlights
AI-generated misinformation poses a threat to the strength of democratic institutions.1
Any piece of media (i.e., images, videos, audio) produced or altered by AI must carry a label similar to “This content was generated using artificial intelligence.”
Platforms would be responsible for identifying AI-generated content through AI detection tools, ensuring that the proper labels are applied.
If a platform fails to flag AI- generated content appropriately, penalties
ranging from fines to content removal would be imposed by a regulatory agency, such as the Federal Communications Commission.
Ensures that consumers can easily identify AI-generated or AI-altered content, thereby reducing misinformation and enhancing the legitimacy of online information.
Implementing the AI- Generated Content Disclosure Law requires bipartisan support, public outreach, FCC incentives for compliance, and transparent success metrics like reduced flagged AI content, with penalties funding media literacy programs and input from a community advisory board to refine guidelines.
Implementation
Implementing the AI- Generated Content Disclosure Law would require coordinated legislative efforts and public outreach to ensure compliance and build public trust in political media. Platforms should be mandated to label all AI-created or altered media with clear disclaimers, ensuring users are informed about the nature of the content they interact and engage with online.
However, since public trust is at an all-time low, platforms may initially resist compliance, citing increased costs and operational burdens.14,17 In response, the FCC should create incentive programs or grants for smaller platforms to adopt detection tools, reducing financial barriers to compliance.15 If additional funding becomes necessary, penalty revenue from
non-compliant platforms and grants from public-private partnerships would help sustain the program. If funding falls short, additional measures like increased public- private partnerships, reallocation of FCC resources, or supplemental government appropriations would be necessary to sustain the program. Additionally, early-stage outreach to nonprofit media literacy organizations and advocacy groups would help raise awareness of the need for transparent labeling practices, preventing the companies from framing the policy as excessively burdensome.
Considering resistance from tech companies and political lobbying, securing bipartisan support would be essential. Pre- committee support can be garnered by engaging bipartisan caucuses like the Problem Solvers caucus and hosting stakeholder roundtables with legislators, industry leaders, and public interest groups.
Representative Cathy McMorris Rodgers, Chair of the House Committee on Energy and Commerce, could introduce the bill due to her prior leadership on tech issues, in alignment with existing federal efforts around AI regulation, such as Biden’s executive order. 9 Given that this issue directly affects the elections for sitting lawmakers, who are at risk of being deepfaked themselves, conversations have already been widespread.18 These existing discussions help set the foundation for strong legislative support. Once introduced, hearings would feature AI ethics experts, media representatives, and technology researchers who can testify on the urgency of managing AI-driven misinformation. The Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation would
then refine the bill, paving a smoother path through a potentially polarized legislature.
Measuring success would involve several metrics, such as reducing flagged AI-generated content, improving public trust in media, and the efficacy of the compliance rates amongst platforms. Monthly compliance reports would be submitted to the FCC, with third-party audits ensuring detection tools are working effectively.16 Platforms failing to comply would face fines, with the revenue generated from these fines back into social media literacy programs that train consumers to engage with information more carefully.
The FCC would gather public feedback throughout the rollout, with a community advisory board established to collect input from users, advocacy organizations, and technology companies. This feedback would allow the FCC to adjust implementation guidelines as needed, ensuring the policy remains relevant and effective as the technology evolves.
Works Cited
World Economic Forum. “How Can We Combat the Worrying Rise in Deepfake Content?” World Economic Forum, May 19, 2023. https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2 023/05/how-can-we-combat-the- worrying-rise-in-deepfake-content/.
Mackenzie, James. “South Korea: The Deepfake Crisis Engulfing Hundreds of Schools.” BBC News, September 3, 2024. https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/ cpdlpj9zn9go?eicker.news.
Jacobson, Noah. “Deepfakes and Their Impact on Society.” CPI OpenFox, February 26, 2024.
https://www.openfox.com/deepfake s-and-their-impact-on-society/.
Nadal, Lucas de, and Peter Jančárik. “Beyond the Deepfake Hype: AI, Democracy, and 'The Slovak Case.” HKS Misinformation Review, August 30, 2024. https://misinforeview.hks.harvard.e du/article/beyond-the-deepfake- hype-ai-democracy-and-the-slovak- case/.
Swenson, Ally, and Will Weissert. “New Hampshire Investigating Fake Biden Robocall Meant to Discourage Voters Ahead of Primary.” AP News, February 6, 2024.
https://apnews.com/article/new- hampshire-primary-biden-ai- deepfake-robocall- f3469ceb6dd613079092287994663
db5.
Gottfried, Jeffrey. “About Three-Quarters of Americans Favor
Steps to Restrict Altered Videos and Images.” Pew Research Center, June 14, 2019.
https://www.pewresearch.org/short- reads/2019/06/14/about-three- quarters-of-americans-favor-steps- to-restrict-altered-videos-and- images/.\
Journal of Democracy. “How AI Threatens Democracy.” Accessed November 27, 2024. https://www.journalofdemocracy.or g/articles/how-ai-threatens- democracy/.
Columbia Journalism Review. “Artificial Intelligence in the News: How AI Retools, Rationalizes, and Reshapes Journalism and the Public Arena.” CJR. Accessed November 27, 2024.
https://www.cjr.org/tow_center_rep orts/artificial-intelligence-in-the- news.php.
The United States Government. “Fact Sheet: President Biden Issues Executive Order on Safe, Secure,
and Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence.” The White House, October 30, 2023. https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefin g-room/statements- releases/2023/10/30/fact-sheet- president-biden-issues-executive- order-on-safe-secure-and- trustworthy-artificial-intelligence/.
European Commission. “Questions and Answers on the Digital Services Act.” Accessed November 27, 2024. https://ec.europa.eu/commission/pre sscorner/detail/en/qanda_20_2348.
Ahlman, Andrea. “Platforms Take the First Step on Labeling AI Content.” Center for Journalism & Liberty, June 10, 2024. https://www.journalismliberty.org/p ublications/platforms-labeling-ai- content.
The Economist Newspaper. “Businesses Are Finding AI Hard to Adopt.” The Economist. Accessed November 27, 2024. https://www.economist.com/technol ogy- quarterly/2020/06/11/businesses- are-finding-ai-hard-to-adopt.
Tiernan, Peter, Eamon Costello, Eavan Donlon, Magdalena Parysz, and Mairéad Scriney. “Information and Media Literacy in the Age of AI: Options for the Future.” MDPI, September 7, 2023. https://www.mdpi.com/2227- 7102/13/9/906.
Financial Times. “Europe's Rushed Attempt to Set the Rules for AI.” Financial Times. Accessed November 27, 2024. https://www.ft.com/content/6cc784 7a-2fc5-4df0-b113- a435d6426c81?utm_source=chatgpt
.com.
Federal Communications Commission. “Compliance Assistance for Small Businesses.” FCC. Accessed November 27,
2024.
https://www.fcc.gov/communicatio ns-business- opportunities/compliance- assistance-small-businesses.
Federal Communications Commission. “FCC Strengthens Requirements for Third-Party Authentication Solutions.” FCC. Accessed November 27, 2024.
https://www.fcc.gov/document/fcc- strengthens-requirements-third- party-authentication- solutions?utm_source=chatgpt.com.
Brenan, Megan. “Americans' Trust in Media Remains Near Record Low.” Gallup, October 18, 2022.
https://news.gallup.com/poll/40316
6/americans-trust-media-remains- near-record-low.aspx.
Nazzaro, Miranda. “Lawmakers Call for Crackdown on AI Deepfakes after Grok Backlash.” The Hill, August 27, 2024. https://thehill.com/policy/technolog y/4850752-lawmakers-crackdown- ai-deepfakes-grok-backlash/.
Dual-Use Solar for New York: a Win-Win for Energy Development and Agriculture
By Harrison Sachs, hls89@cornell.edu

Establishing a dual-use solar policy for New York State will allow for the expansion of solar energy infrastructure needed to meet existing goals, promote the protection of agricultural land, and diversify farmer’s incomes.

Background
Dual-use solar also known as agrivoltaics is the practice of using the same land for solar energy and agricultural production. Solar grazing is the practice of raising livestock, mostly sheep on solar land. Policies are expanding solar and renewable energy, yet solar array sites need to be maintained through fossil fuels to run lawnmowers and the spraying of pesticides.1,2,3 By 2030, New York State must source 70% of its electricity through renewable sources and, by 2040, commit to a zero-emission electric grid per the 2019 New York Climate Act.1,4
In 2021, there were 2,113 farms in the state raising sheep, and as of January 1st 2024, there were 86,000 sheep in the state.2 Currently, contracting farmers with solar providers is challenging due to small herd sizes in the state; developers would rather talk with one entity that can represent several different farms rather than having to coordinate with many farms to manage solar sites.2 Additionally, solar panels for agricultural purposes have higher upfront costs for developers, which can discourage investment in agrivoltaics. In 2021, New York ranked second to last in average farm real-estate value per acre compared to other northeastern states.5
In 2013, the state established the New York Sun Act to expand solar energy in New York by offering incentives for installations, lowering energy costs, and creating jobs.6 However, New York State has no policies to specifically address or incentivize agrivoltaic production, despite the benefits and the region’s high demand.
Amending New York’s renewable energy policies to include agrivoltaics is crucial for reaching clean energy goals while preserving farmland—an opportunity New York cannot overlook.
Policy Idea
Amend the New York Sun Act to establish a program that promotes dual-use solar. The program should directly target farmers and solar providers for maximum impact. Solar companies should be incentivized to build agriculturally focused projects through a payment on top of the base rate. The program will grant preservation status to farms that join, preventing future land development. As farmers cannot often establish relationships with other farms interested in agrivoltaics and with solar companies, the Department of Agriculture and Markets and Energy Research and Development Authority (NYSDERA) should involve staff to manage the
initiative. New York State should begin with a two-year, multi-phase pilot program featuring quarterly assessment and input sessions.
Then, the policy should be adapted, such as alterations to budget and staff allocation, before being turned into permanent legislation. The ten- year goal of this policy is for 5% of all NY solar acreage to be dual-use.

Policy Analysis
Solar grazing offers diverse benefits that solve climate problems, such as managing the landscape without fossil fuels, increasing biodiversity, improving soil health, and promoting local sheep farmers.1 The policy mitigates small-scale farmers’ limited access to solar sites by providing agency support staff to bridge the gap between farmers and energy providers. In addition, strong incentives for solar providers ensure that their sites become dual-use and they can lease the land for minimal cost. The program should be similar to the structure of the Solar Massachusetts Renewable Target (SMART) Project, which has achieved high levels of success and public perception.7 In Massachusetts 15%, of solar sites (7 sites) are incentivized by the SMART program to have dual-use solar, and there are additionally 14 more sites that are on their way to use the program to adopt agrivoltaic
practices.8 The SMART program has received strong support by both policymakers and its stakeholders, which will lead to its continued funding.9 It is important to note the slow progress the SMART program had, implementing support staff will increase the number of farms joining the agrivoltaic initiative.
Unlike policies in other states, this policy will have an agricultural focus in addition to an energy-based focus. As farms join the project, the land will become conserved, with the ability to conserve hundreds of thousands of acres of New York farmland in just the first decade of implementation. This could lead to the creation of more jobs, a stronger local economy of farmers, and more resilient farms.
Highlights
A dual-use solar policy will conserve agricultural land and diversify farmers’ incomes.2
The role of designated staff at NY Ag and Markets and NYSERDA will be vital to connecting farmers with energy companies.
The adoption of solar grazing practices will lead to increased carbon sequestration, biodiversity, pollinator populations, and soil health.1
Agricultural producers can help meet New York state’s goals in switching to renewable energy.2

Implementation
This policy would likely get strong bipartisan support. For example, the New York Sun Act S8415 passed the New York State Senate with 59 votes in favor and only three against.6 An additional
program would probably get as good or greater support from New York policymakers due to their similar goals. As solar infrastructure rapidly expands across the state, now is the ideal time to address
dual-use solar incentives. In 2021, two bills were proposed to address solar grazing in New York State.10 However, both failed, as the policy was likely too small to gain broad support. Coupling the bill with the NY Sun Act could attract enough attention for support from the New York state legislature.
A key legislator could be State Senator Rachel May.11 She is the Chair of the Legislative Commission on Rural Resources and has co-sponsored a bill (S7081) focused on providing funding for dual-use solar research. The American Farmland Trust would also likely be a main actor in having this bill pass.12 They could use their national resources to promote the bill, contact legislators, and get farmers to give testimonies. They have done work around the country in supporting policy that promotes dual-use solar and could potentially partner with the American Farmland Trust, which has several staff members in New York.
In the pilot, NYSERDA and NY Ag and Markets will establish focus groups with farmers and solar providers to address viability concerns. The first year of the pilot would focus on education and awareness, with both agencies hosting workshops to explain how to form relationships and fair contracts between farms and solar providers. The second year of the pilot will aim to resolve conflicts between farmers and energy providers and continue to limit barriers. The policy would be funded through a joint budget
between the New York Department of Agriculture and Markets and the Department of Energy Research and Development. This project appears to be very feasible with their budgets and aligns with both of the agency’s missions. Funding would mainly come from the state through rate-payer funding. Utility companies collect money from customers' monthly electricity bills to support various state energy programs. Unlike in the broader funding for the NY Sun Act, this project’s budget would be managed by NY Ag and Markets, in addition to NYSERDA. The project would also rely on public-private partnerships with energy companies that own the solar array sites. The policy would result in increased relationships between agricultural producers and energy companies.
Legislators should view this act as a way to conserve agriculture while recognizing its benefits in expanding solar energy infrastructure. This approach will also help gain the support of legislators who may be resistant to expanding solar array sites in rural landscapes.

Works Cited
Kochendoerfer, Nikola, and Michael Thorney. “Grazing Sheep on Solar Sites in New York
State: Opportunities and Challenges.” Department of Animal Science, Cornell University, February 2021, 10. https://solargrazing.org/wp- content/uploads/2021/02/Solar-Site- Sheep-Grazing-in-NY.pdf.
Harris, Lisa. “NEW YORK STATE: Leading the Flock.” American Solar Grazing Association, January 15, 2022. https://solargrazing.org/new-york- state-leading-the-flock/.
Gashler, Krisy. “Electric Sheep: Grazing in Arrays Supports Economy, Climate,” October 14, 2021.
https://news.cornell.edu/stories/202 1/10/electric-sheep-grazing-arrays- supports-economy-climate
NY Climate Act, Pub. L. No. Senate Bill S6599 (2019). https://www.nysenate.gov/legislatio n/bills/2019/S6599.
USDA, NASS. “Northeastern Region Land Values Report.” United States Department of Agriculture National Agricultural Statistics Service,
2021.	https://senecacountycce.org
/agriculture/northeastern-region- land-values-report.
Harckham, Peter. NY Sun Act (2022).
https://www.nysenate.gov/newsroo m/press-releases/2024/pete- harckham/harckham-bill-help-mu
nicipalities-create-renewable.
“Solar Massachusetts Renewable Target (SMART).” Massachusetts Department of Energy
Resources, n.d. https://www.mass.gov/solar- massachusetts-renewable-target- smart.
“Solar Massachusetts Renewable Target (SMART) Programmatic Review.” Sustainable
Energy Advantage, LLC, May 16, 2024.
https://www.mass.gov/doc/evaluati on-of-potential-smart-program- improvements/download.
Palano, Gerald, MA Ag Energy Specialist, interview by Sachs,
Harrison, Oct. 30, 2024
NY Dual Use Energy Bills (2021).
https://advance.lexis.com/document
/?pdmfid=1519360&crid=e7a1991d
-d87f-4bd2-9363-14c12 
b51465&pddocfullpath=%2Fshared
%2Fdocument%2Fstatutes- legislation%2Furn%3AcontentIte m%3A64MH-6RH1-F27X-63NM- 00000-
00&pdcontentcomponentid=4988& pdteaserkey=sr1& pditab=allpods&ecomp=hc- yk&earg=sr1&prid=f0a5832d-42f5- 44d3-b085-155be82c6d5d.
NY State Senate. “Senator Rachel May,” n.d. https://www.nysenate.gov/senators/ rachel-may.
American Farmland Trust. “Smart Solar,” n.d. https://farmland.org/solar/.
Essential Car Service: Renewing America’s Commitment to Rural Communities Through EV Charging
By Jack Turner, jt797@cornell.edu
The US spends billions of dollars on subsidies for gas cars, air service, and farmers. Though all are undoubtedly crucial services, the lack of direct subsidization of charging infrastructure has hampered the transition to renewable transportation, particularly in rural America.

Background
Rural America produces upwards of 36% of all domestic CO2 emissions.1 Many of these communities are based around agricultural practices where adaptation to climate-friendly practices is slow.2 An excessive urgency exists to make changes so that electric vehicles can be affordable to drive without seeking out chargers in distant locations.
Rural drivers consume 25.6% of all light-duty gas (typically smaller cars) despite only constituting 18.8% of drivers in the US, and only 17% of rural Americans live within a mile of an electric vehicle charger.3 Even worse, rural drivers who drive the most— roughly 3.6% of the US population —consume around 1,950 gallons of gas annually, or nearly 13% of total gas consumption in the United States.4 This consumption, in turn, leads to a lack of vertical equity in gas purchasing. Rural “superusers” — many of whom earn below the national median income— are spending roughly a quarter of their income on gas alone.4 In rural America, where incomes are often below the national median, electric vehicles save families upwards of
$1,900 to $2,800 a year.5
The United States has been relatively aggressive under the
Biden Administration in transitioning towards a decarbonized transportation sector. The Inflation Reduction Act allotted hundreds of millions of dollars towards electric vehicle initiatives, and earlier this year, the Biden Administration announced grants upwards of $623 million to construct new electric vehicle charging stations.6 This is progressive but does not sustain charging in extremely sparsely populated communities. The public investment from federal dollars has so far not spread deep into rural America though it has still only been three years since the passage of the Inflation Reduction Act.
Rural drivers have a 40% lower adoption rate of electric vehicles than non-rural counterparts, and this divide continues to grow.7

Policy Idea
Using the Essential Air Service program as a template, the United States Federal Government should expand upon the initial spending of the Biden Administration and fully subsidize the construction and long-term usage of electric vehicle chargers in rural areas more than 20 miles from a public electric vehicle charger.
The program will primarily involve implementing charging
stations in areas currently not served or near chargers, and the funding will continue to subsidize chargers in areas that are not commercially viable in the long term. Similar to the Essential Air Service, states should condition continued deployment of charging on minimum usage thresholds that can vary depending on distance from the next closest existing, non- subsidized charging station.

Policy Analysis
The success of charging stations in rural America is built around the greater adoption of electric vehicles and a sustained reduction in carbon emissions from motor vehicles more broadly.
Access to an electric vehicle charger is the greatest factor in an individual’s decision to switch from gasoline cars; according to the Pew Research Center, 49% of those who live within a mile of an electric vehicle charging station support switching their car to electric.3
The greater density of chargers in rural America potentially tackles the extremely pressing range issue that EVs face: drivers are hesitant to use electric vehicles for long drives out of fear that there will be long gaps without access to chargers. A Harvard Business study found that the
largest concern over electric vehicles among drivers today is the insatiable pricing at charging stations driven by the inconsistent supply of electricity and charging infrastructure.8
This program will have lasting economic benefits for rural drivers. Switching to electric vehicles is estimated to save rural drivers, who drive the most, upwards of $4,000 a year in gasoline costs.9 The return on investment for the subsidies will likely take time as demand for electric vehicles grows with the program. That said, a recent study found that drivers spending money at local businesses while waiting for their vehicles to charge boosted local revenue by 0.8 percent from January 2021 to June 2023 for an average charging location, and this number is higher for chargers near a greater density of businesses.10

Highlights
A lack of electric vehicle charging capacity in rural America has stalled an otherwise quick transition from gas-guzzling cars to carbon-friendly transport in the U.S.
Congress should increase direct subsidies to states for the implementation of electric vehicle charging stations that are unprofitable.
Access to charging stations increases the propensity of drivers to switch to EVs. A 2022 Consumer Report survey found that 61% of drivers choose not to switch because of charging logistics and 55% choose not to switch due to range anxiety.11

Implementation

This policy has political appeal to both moderate Republicans and Democrats.12 The environmental and economic benefits that the policy targets would be broadly popular among liberals and progressives owing to their prior support of similar components of the 2021 Bipartisan Infrastructure law. Moreover, the key target demographics are rural, gas-car- owning Americans who typically skew conservative.13 While some initial reluctance to switch is expected given prior trends, the gradual switch among those in rural America prior to the implementation of this policy is encouraging. There is still a sizable portion of Republicans in Congress including Senator-Elect John Curtis (R-UT) who are members of the Conservative Climate Caucus, and several key elements of this proposal will address needs of their districts/states.
To obtain the money for subsidization, the best course of action is for Congress to shift federal funds for highway expansion and, instead, invest in EV fast chargers. The US has historically invested heavily in highway expansions that, while necessary for many smaller cities, often increase traffic in large cities.14 15 While this policy is likely to be broadly popular among constituents, who will not be taxed additional money for its implementation, hardline conservative Republican lawmakers may have a difficult time supporting an initiative that caves into people they view as climate change alarmists. The Republican caucasus is highly fractured on support for
climate change legislation, but Democrats will not have to win over each one to push the new legislation across the finish line. As many major automakers are now well-established in the electric vehicle market, they will likely support the policy too, as it might induce non-car owners to purchase an EV as their first car. A bipartisan group of senators, akin to the legislative process for the Bipartisan Infrastructure Bill, could be highly effective at working out a comprehensive framework that appeals to conservatives invested in climate solutions.
The implementation of the policy can follow the existing legislation signed into law by President Biden subsidizing EVs (the 2021 Bipartisan Infrastructure Law), but this new legislation will have to be more spatially targeted. The legislation will have to target communities of concern, namely those that are not located near any existing charging stations, and the legislation language will have to be strict that funds are conditional on being spent in said communities.

Works Cited
“Report: The Overlooked Climate Impact of Rural America.” Rural Climate Partnership. Accessed October 11, 2024. https://ruralclimate.org/rural- emissions-report-2024/
“The Hard Truths of Trying to ‘Save’ the Rural Economy.” The New York Times. Accessed October 11, 2024. https://www.nytimes.com/interactiv e/2018/12/14/opinion/rural- america-trump- decline.html?action=click&module
=Opinion&pgtype=Homepage.
Shah, Samuel Bestvater and Sono. “Electric Vehicle Charging
Infrastructure in the U.S.” Pew Research Center (blog), May 23, 2024.
https://www.pewresearch.org/data- labs/2024/05/23/electric-vehicle- charging-infrastructure-in-the-u-s/.
Simmons, Daisy. “How Rural Families Are Saving Thousands with Electric Vehicles.” Yale Climate Connections, July 2, 2024. http://yaleclimateconnections.org/2 024/07/how-rural-families-are- saving-thousands-with-electric- vehicles/.
The Equation. “5 Ways Rural Drivers Benefit from Electric Vehicles,” November 4, 2021. https://blog.ucsusa.org/cecilia- moura/5-ways-rural-drivers-benefit- from-electric-vehicles/.
“Biden-Harris Administration Announces $623 Million in Grants to Continue Building Out Electric Vehicle Charging Network”. FHWA.https://highways.dot.gov/ne wsroom/biden-harris- administration-announces-623- million-grants-continue-building- out-electric.
“Driving an EV in Rural America: What You Should Know.” CarMax.
Harvard Business School. “The State of EV Charging in America: Harvard Research Shows Chargers 78% Reliable and Pricing like the ‘Wild West’. Institute for Business in Global Society,” June 26, 2024. https://www.hbs.edu/bigs/the-state- of-ev-charging-in-america.
“New Research Shows Climate and Economic Benefits in Rural Transition to EVs.” Rural Climate Partnership. Accessed October 11, 2024. https://ruralclimate.org/new- research-rural-transition-to-evs/.
“New MIT Study Suggests That EV Charging Stations Boost Business.” Accessed October 11, 2024.
https://www.caranddriver.com/news
/a62371896/mit-study-suggests-ev- chargers-improve-business/.
Administrator. “EV Charging Infrastructure: Trends, Requirements & Costs.” SEPA, February 8, 2024. https://sepapower.org/knowledge/ev
-charging-infrastructure/.
Chien, Lia. “U.S. Senate Panel Looks for Ways to Aid Electric Vehicle Industry • Missouri Independent.” Missouri Independent (blog), August 1, 2024.
https://missouriindependent.com/20 24/08/01/u-s-senate-panel-looks- for-ways-to-aid-electric-vehicle- industry/.
Wolf, Michael. “Rural Identity Emerging as Key Factor in Politics
Indiana Capital Chronicle.” Indiana Capital Chronicle (blog), June 27, 2024.
https://indianacapitalchronicle.com/ 2024/06/27/rural-identity-emerging- as-key-factor-in-politics/
“It’s Time to Stop Pretending That Roads Pay for Themselves.” Streetsblog USA, November 25, 2015.
https://usa.streetsblog.org/2015/11/ 25/its-time-to-stop-pretending-that- roads-pay-for-themselves.
Cervero, Robert. “Road Expansion, Urban Growth, and Induced Travel: A Path Analysis.” Journal of the American Planning Association 69, no. 2 (June 30,
2003): 145–63.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0194436030 8976303.
Building Resilience through a Climate Change Superfund
By Connor Weiss, cjw273@cornell.edu

New Jersey is warming faster than any other state in the Northeast United States. It is time for the New Jersey State Legislature to pass a climate change superfund law to hold corporations accountable for climate change.

Background
While most states around the US have seen increases in temperature around 2.5ºF since 1970, New Jersey has seen a rise of
3.5ºF.1 Dense urban development creating an urban heat island effect is particularly responsible for this vast increase.1 Studies have found that Newark, the largest and most densely populated city in New Jersey, has the second worst urban heat island effect in the US, with an average temperature increase of 8.4ºF, in comparison to what the temperature would be without the effect.2
As a small coastal state that sees jobs and tourism generate $40 billion each year at the shore, increases in temperature uniquely jeopardize New Jersey. While the state generates revenue through the pharmaceutical and financial services industries, New Jersey is most widely recognized for its shore.4 A study by Climate Costs 2040 found that the safeguarding of homes, businesses, and livelihoods under a moderate sea level rise scenario would cost the state $25 billion by 2040.5 This sea level rise would not only affect those at the shore, but also harm communities along the Delaware River and New York Bay as well. Moreover, private insurance companies only cover a small fraction of the damage of climate change, leaving the American taxpayer to pay three
times the amount of private insurance to cover the costs of extreme weather events.6
Unless New Jersey starts to invest now, there is no clear way for the state to raise $25 billion to safeguard our cities without causing harm to its citizens. Yet, the top five US-based oil and gas companies have seen record profits since 2021, making more than $250 billion combined.7 This disparity shows the urgent need for policy action to build resilience in our communities.
Policy Idea
The New Jersey State Legislature should pass a law that creates a Climate Change Superfund under the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP). The law will require companies that significantly contribute to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to pay into a fund that will support climate change resilience and infrastructure initiatives, like flood resistance. It will be the responsibility of the agency to determine who is “responsible” for the damages caused, and how much they will owe. The NJDEP must also proliferate methodologies to calculate how much and who will owe the money to the state. The state must only collect compensatory payments from companies who have emitted more than 1 billion global GHG
emissions from 2000 to 2024, and have a physical or economic connection with the state.
Policy Analysis
This type of policy is novel, and currently, most implementations across states and nations are either in infancy or currently in legal trouble.8 To ascertain the effectiveness of this type of policy, lawmakers should look to the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) passed by the US Congress in 1980. This law created a tax on the toxic waste industry to be put into the Superfund so that the EPA could act when something happened that threatened public health or the environment.9 When these events occur, the EPA is given the power to seek out potentially responsible parties and compel them to perform the cleanup or pay for the cleanup to be done.9 This allows the EPA to quickly contain the contaminated area once identified and provide restitution to those who need it. In 2023 alone, the EPA sought out more than $900 million in responsible party commitments, showing that 44 years later, the policy is still effective.10 In application to my proposed policy, this framework from CERCLA shows that this type of policy is effective in collecting funds and providing restitution to
those who are affected by negative events, such as in my case, from extreme weather.
Other research has found that after the cleaning of a Superfund site, homeowner’s property values rose by 14.7% if they lived within 3 blocks of the site.11 Superfunds have a quantifiable positive impact on the local communities’ health, by cleaning up a toxic site, and helping them economically by raising their land prices.
Highlights
The New Jersey State Legislature should pass a law allowing the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection to collect funds and damages from oil and gas companies to help pay for damage associated with climate change.
Research has found that it would take nearly $25 billion by 2040 to safeguard the livelihoods of New Jerseyans under a moderate sea level rise scenario, given New Jersey’s increased susceptibility to climate change.5
A similar federal policy in the US, called the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, has collected funds from toxic chemical companies to aid with cleanup when they were responsible for toxic contamination and has seen extensive success.
This policy should act as a model for potentially interested lawmakers to see
the positive effect the Superfund has had on local communities. After a Superfund site had been cleaned up, homeowners saw their property values rise by 14.7%.11

Implementation
The law’s passage is contingent on a simple majority vote by both the Assembly and Senate, followed by the New Jersey Governor’s signature. Incumbent Governor Phil Murphy has supported climate action and has set a goal of reducing emissions by 100% by 2035. Democrats also hold solid majorities in both chambers of the legislature, which bodes well for the policy.
In the NJ State Legislature, a similar version of this bill has been introduced (S3545/A4696), which recently passed out of the Senate Environment Committee and was referred to the Senate Budget and Appropriations Committee. The author of the bill, Senator John McKeon, said in an interview that he believes that his version of the bill will definitely make it out of committee and the Assembly will most likely pass it, but he was unsure about the Senate.12 To rally support, important state environmental organizations and lobbyists, such as the New Jersey League of Conservation Voters and the New Jersey Environmental Lobby, should reach out to lawmakers and help organize civic action. Significant effort must be put into organizing support for the bill among lawmakers within the NJ State Legislature to ensure that the votes are there to pass the bill. The bill has not seen any significant opposition yet because it is in committee, but there is a possibility
that as the bill progresses, it will see opposition from industry associations and trade groups about its potential impact on the oil industry. A common critique of the bill is that the oil and gas industry will pass on the price to the consumer, increasing prices. The Fiscal Policy Institute analyzed the similarly structured New York bill and found that the policy would not lead to fossil fuel companies increasing prices for consumers.13 The bill would punish them for previous behaviors, which would not influence current or future decisions from fossil fuel companies. If a specific large emitter were to raise its prices in response to being charged by the Superfund, other companies would simply outcompete them.
Once the law is passed, the state of New Jersey should direct the DEP to create specific guidelines detailing how a party’s responsibility is evaluated and how to calculate their emissions. The DEP will have to create a set of regulatory guidelines that allows the state to collect money proportionally to the amount of GHG emissions and the costs incurred by the state from the event. The DEP should also specifically define what makes a “responsible party” and have guidelines to ensure that this party has the necessary economic or physical ties to the state. These guidelines ensure that the laws will be applied equally to companies, enabling quick and accurate application.

Works Cited
Howard, Hilary. “New Jersey Is One of America’s Fastest-Warming States, Data Shows.” The New York Times, July 3, 2024. https://www.nytimes.com/2024/07/
03/nyregion/new-jersey-warming- climate-change.html.
Hsu, Angel, Vivek Shandas, Diego Manya, and Daniel Vecellio. “Urban Heat Hot Spots.” Climate Central. Accessed October 11, 2024.
https://www.climatecentral.org/clim ate-matters/urban-heat-islands- 2023.
Goel, Samaksh (Sam). “Ecotourism at the Jersey Shore... Will It Work?” Youth STEM 2030, March 11, 2024. https://www.youthstem2030.org/yo uth-stem-matters/read/ecotourism- at-the-jersey-shore-will-it- work#:~:text=The%20Jersey%20Sh ore%20generates%20%E2%80%9C
%2440,in%20New%20Jersey%20in creases%20exponentially.
“What Are New Jersey’s Principal Industries?” Business.NJ.gov. Accessed October 17, 2024.
https://business.nj.gov/faqs/what- are-new-jerseys-principal- industries.
LeRoy, Sverre, and Richard Wiles. “New Jersey - Climate Costs in 2040.” Climate Costs 2040, June
2019.
https://www.climatecosts2040.org/f iles/state/NJ.pdf.
Lashof, Daniel, and Andy Stevenson. “Who Pays for Climate Change? U.S. Taxpayers Outspend Private Insurers Three-to-One to Cover Climate Disruption Costs.” Natural Resource Defense Council, May 2013.
https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/fi les/taxpayer-climate-costs-IP.pdf.
Delouya, Samantha. “Why Oil Companies Are Raking in Record Profits under Joe Biden.” CNN, June 11, 2024.
https://www.cnn.com/2024/06/11/e conomy/oil-industry-profits-under- biden/index.html.
“Vermont and New York Climate Acts Are First in a Wave of Likely Climate Change Cost Recovery Laws.” Insights | Sidley Austin LLP, June 20, 2024. https://www.sidley.com/en/insights/ newsupdates/2024/06/vermont-and- new-york-climate-acts-are-first-in- a-wave-of-likely-climate-change- cost-recovery-laws.
“Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA).” Legal Information Institute, September 2023.
https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/co mprehensive_environmental_respon
se_compensation_and_liability_act
_(cercla).
Benincasa, Meghan. “EPA’s Superfund Program Turns 44 This Year: It’s Making a Difference.” Nobis Group, April 22, 2024. https://nobis-group.com/blog/epas- superfund-program-turns-44-this- year-its-making-a-difference/.
Gamper-Rabindran, S., & Timmins, C. (2013). Does cleanup of hazardous waste sites raise housing values? Evidence of spatially localized benefits. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 65(3), 345–360. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2012. 12.001
D’Alessandro, Dave. 2024. “Making Big Oil Pay for Climate Damage in N.J.: A Q&a with Sen. John McKeon.” Nj.com. August 7, 2024.
https://www.nj.com/opinion/2024/0 8/making-oil-companies-pay-for- climate-damage-in-nj-a-qa-with- sen-john-mckeon.html.
Gusdorf, Nathan. 2024. “Fact Sheet: Climate Change Superfund Act - Fiscal Policy Institute.” Fiscal Policy Institute. September 23, 2024. https://fiscalpolicy.org/fact- sheet-climate-change-superfund-act.


Foreign Policy
Director: Bingsong Li Assistant Directors: Olivia LaBonte and
Krystlove Yeboah
Analysts: Zaki Ahmad, Zain Ali, Naina Kalra, Jorge Mariño, and Olivia Pham
Foreign Doctors Can Save Italy’s Vulnerable Healthcare System
By Zaki Ahmad, zmaa4@cornell.edu
Italy currently faces a shortage of doctors that increasing student enrollment alone cannot solve. Therefore, Italy should introduce a Skilled Workers Act to directly recruit foreign doctors and advertise the new streamlined bureaucracy to them.

Background
Italy’s rapidly aging population, with 22.8% of its people over the age of 65—the second- highest percentage worldwide—has led to a growing demand for healthcare services.1,2 Meanwhile, 31% of general practitioners are estimated to have left the industry since 2021, while funding and planning issues have prevented those positions from being filled.1,3,4 Healthcare provider shortages are associated with increased wait times and poorer quality of care for patients, and grueling shifts and limited benefits for providers.5,6,7 The severity of the current situation was seen during a doctors’ strike in 2023 over working conditions.6 While population aging and increases in health expenditures are potent challenges across the European Union, Italy’s unique circumstances make its healthcare system extremely vulnerable.8,9
The Italian government has now allocated 3.3 billion euros for healthcare worker contract renewals after years of underinvestment; however, this funding fails to fully address the healthcare shortage.4 Only one-third of contracts were filled between 2023 and 2024, despite increased training contracts over the past three years.4 Current residents’ criticisms of the Italian residency system may
disincentivize the already small population of Italian students from entering the industry.6
Many European countries have implemented specific policies to recruit doctors to alleviate shortages.8,10,11 In contrast, Italy has not introduced a comprehensive plan to do so and has one of the lowest percentages of foreign doctors, at 0.9%.12 The Italian government is generally anti- immigration and has not taken cohesive action to recruit migrant workers.13 Further, language barriers, slow recognition of foreign degrees, and the complex process for obtaining a visa are barriers for interested migrant doctors.14,15,16 Italy should consider taking cohesive steps to recruit foreign doctors to address its current healthcare shortage.
Policy Idea
While Italy is increasing medical school enrollment, they cannot fill all vacant positions with students alone.17 To address the immediate shortage of doctors and mitigate the associated risks for providers and patients, the Italian government should implement a modified version of Germany’s Skilled Workers Act (SWA). This centralized policy would increase the recruitment of foreign doctors to fill vacant positions that students
are unable or unwilling to fill. Italy would directly recruit of foreign doctors, which is not currently part of the German SWA, and advertise the advantages of their new streamlined migration process.
These advantages include reducing language training barriers, recognizing degrees from abroad, and increasing access to EU Blue Cards.
Policy Analysis
Italy recognizes that increasing migration and expanding its workforce are necessary to reverse the migratory trend that began with a surplus of doctors.18,19,20 Italy has an interest in bolstering the medical industry and, despite its anti-immigration stance, has taken steps to increase migrant doctors, raising the likelihood of an Italian SWA.18,20
Development-oriented partnerships that recruit foreign workers by promoting location and settlement program advantages are effective, leveraging existing initiatives without incurring additional costs.21,22,23 This recruitment would give Italy an edge, as countries like Germany do not recruit directly.21 Recruitment benefits Italy, as policy shifts alone do not trigger migratory pull effects.24 The lack of pull effects would alleviate concerns about
illegal immigration from the policy, allowing directly recruited migrant doctors to fill roles that students and current doctors avoid due to their unattractiveness.25,26
Recruitment would be effective because the SWA tackles obstacles disincentivizing skilled worker migration. The SWA would increase funding for teaching Italian abroad and supporting Italian abroad upon arrival.13,27 Furthermore, more foreign degrees would be recognized faster, and vocational training would fill gaps to meet Italian standards.13,27 Once foreign doctors are in Italy, access to the EU Blue Card would be expanded by adding eligible jobs and lowering salary requirements to 45% of the annual pension insurance contribution, allowing family unification for Blue Card holders.28
Employing migrant doctors is also a low-cost option that could help achieve Italy’s recommended 7% of GDP spending on health.29 The low cost would alleviate the economic concern that immigrants can trigger a recession, a primary reason for Italian opposition to immigration.26 The SWA would be a centralized policy, enabling Italy to address regional healthcare inequities by strategically placing foreign doctors.30,31
Highlights
Italy’s pressing shortage of doctors, which causes a decrease in quality of
care, must be addressed to care for its rapidly aging population.1,2,3,4,5,6,7
Italy should implement a Skilled Workers Act to directly recruit foreign doctors from abroad to strategically fill vacancies
nationwide that current doctors and students find unattractive.14,15,16,17,18,20,24,26
Recruiting foreign doctors is cost-effective and would enable Italy to achieve their recommended 7% of GDP on public health.29
During recruiting, Italy should advertise the streamlined bureaucratic process that makes migrating to Italy more efficient and attractive.13,27,28
Implementation
To engage public opinion and key stakeholders, the Italian government should emphasize the SWA’s potential benefits for patients and healthcare providers. Outreach through media and healthcare advocacy groups could foster community support.32 This support is important to overcome potential objections to the current relatively anti-immigration climate in Italy.33 To gain buy-in from healthcare unions, the government should demonstrate how the SWA complements initiatives that alleviate burdens on current doctors and improve working conditions through the German example.
Furthermore, since the policy enables strategic alignment with EU objectives to tackle illegal migration while promoting necessary and legal migration, Italy could receive funding for the SWA through the EU’s Asylum, Migration, and Integration Fund.29 EU funding would further reduce cost-based opposition to the policy.
Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni has strong approval ratings and is known for a tough stance on illegal immigration. However, she has shown the ability to advance moderate reform proposals without
alienating her anti-immigration supporters.29,34 Meloni has specifically decried immigration while simultaneously taking steps to expand skilled workers in other industries.36 Thus, Prime Minister Meloni and Minister of Health Orazio Schillaci, should use their political capital to introduce the bill in the Chamber of Deputies.
Through individual meetings, they should appeal to the left-wing Democratic Party and the centrist Five Star Movement, which collectively accounts for 120 members of the Chamber of Deputies, to increase support.
Furthermore, Meloni and Schillaci should encourage young doctors who went on strike to stage rallies in favor of the bill to demonstrate popularity. Young doctors would likely do so because the bill addresses many of the concerns that caused them to strike. To address criticism of immigration, they should emphasize that the policy specifically targets a doctor shortage that Italians alone cannot resolve. By emphasizing this aspect, the Italian government can reduce opposition to the plan and limit hostility towards foreign doctors.32 Additionally, they can highlight how Germany has implemented similar policies while increasing border controls, demonstrating that passing the SWA does not signal weakness in immigration policy.
Another potential criticism is that hiring foreign doctors may strain resources. Prime Minister Meloni and Minister Schillaci should emphasize the policy’s cost- effectiveness and how migrant doctors would contribute economically by filling positions left vacant by locals.33 Although Italy’s right-wing government may be more inclined than others to pass
a Skilled Workers Act, no right- wing government with anti- immigration rhetoric has yet passed a pro-immigration bill. Thus, the bill is unlikely to pass in the near future but could pass if a more centrist or left-wing government was elected.

Works Cited
“Countries With the Oldest Populations in the World.” 2020. Population Reference Bureau. https://www.prb.org/resources/coun tries-with-the-oldest-populations-in- the-world/.
Breyer, F., J. Costa-Font, and S. Felder. “Ageing, Health, and Health Care.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 26, no. 4 (December 1,
2010): 674–90.
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxrep/grq03 2.
Cristea, Mirela, Gratiela Georgiana Noja, Petru Stefea, and Adrian Lucian Sala. “The Impact of Population Aging and Public Health Support on EU Labor Markets.” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 17, no. 4 (February 24,
2020): 1439.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17041 439.
Greco, Giuseppe, Antonio Giulio de Belvis, Michela Meregaglia, Giovanni Fattore, and Walter Ricciardi. Feburary. “Challenges for the Italian National Health Service in 2024. How to plan the future health workforce?” European Health Observatory. https://eurohealthobservatory.who.i nt/monitors/health-systems- monitor/analyses/hspm/italy- 2023/challenges-for-the-italian- national-health-service-in-2024.- how-to-plan-the-future-health- workforce.
Melchiorre, Maria Gabriella, Marco Socci, Sabrina Quattrini, Giovanni Lamura, and Barbara D’Amen. 2022. "Frail Older People Ageing in Place in Italy: Use of Health Services and Relationship with General Practitioner" International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 19, no. 15: 9063. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19159 063.
Paterlini, Marta. “Young Doctors in Italy Protest and Threaten to Strike over Working Conditions.” BMJ, September 29, 2023, p2259.
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.p2259.
Smith, Yolanda. 2023. “Effects of Physician Shortage.” News- Medical. https://www.news- medical.net/health/Physician- Shortage.aspx.
Morina, Drenusha. 2024. “7 EU Countries in Dire Need of Doctors & Nurses Are Offering Visas to Foreign Medical Professionals.” Schengen News. https://schengen.news/7-eu- countries-in-dire-need-of-doctors- nurses-are-offering-visas-to- foreign-medical-professionals/.
Paterlini, Marta. “Warnings over Doctor Shortages amid Italian Health Reforms.” The Lancet 399, no. 10341 (June 2022): 2093.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140- 6736(22)01009-1.
European Commission. 2015. “Recruitment and Retention of the Health Workforce in Europe.” European Comission. https://health.ec.europa.eu/system/fi les/2016- 11/2015_healthworkforce_recruitm ent_retention_frep_en_0.pdf.
“Skilled immigrants: an asset to our country.” n.d. Federal Ministry of the Interior and Community. Accessed December 2,
2024.
https://www.bmi.bund.de/EN/topics
/migration/immigration/labour- migration/skilled- immigration/skilled-immigration- node.html.
“Health at a Glance 2023.” n.d. OECD. https://www.oecd- ilibrary.org/sites/7a7afb35- en/1/3/8/11/index.html?itemId=/con tent/publication/7a7afb35- en&_csp_=6cf33e24b6584414b817 74026d82a571&itemIGO=oecd&ite mContentType=book.
Meloni, Giorgia. 2023. “President Meloni’s opening address at the International Conference on Development and Migration.” Italian Government. https://www.governo.it/en/articolo/ president-meloni-s-opening- address-international-conference- development-and-migration/23279.
Ciato, Leopoldo, Luigi Bertinato, Irene A. Glinos, and Elisa Boscolo. 2011. “Oversupplying doctors but seeking carers: Italy’s demographic challenges and health professional mobility.” European Observatory. https://who-
sandbox.squiz.cloud/	data/assets/p df_file/0017/152324/Health- Professional-Mobility-Health- Systems.pdf#page=276.
“Italy Work Visa.” n.d. Visaguide.world. https://visaguide.world/europe/italy- visa/long-stay/work/.
“Flows 2023-25: new quotas for entering Italy to work.” Integrazione Migranti, Accessed 28 October 2024. https://www.integrazionemigranti.g ov.it/en-gb/Dettaglio- approfondimento/id/54/Flows- 2023-25-new-quotas-for-entering- Italy-to-work.
European Commission - OECD. 2023. “Italy: Country
Health Profile 2023.” European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies. https://eurohealthobservatory.who.i nt/publications/m/italy-country- health-profile-2023.
Balmer, Crispian, and Angelo Amante. 2023. “Italy's Meloni faces reality check as migrant flows rise relentlessly.” Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/world/euro pe/italys-meloni-faces-reality- check-migrant-flows-rise- relentlessly-2023-07-13/.
Nowak, Sylwia. 2023. “Italy: Selected Issues in: IMF Staff Country Reports Volume 2023 Issue 274 (2023).” IMF eLibrary. https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/j ournals/002/2023/274/article-A001- en.xml.
World Health Organization. 2023. “The health workforce crisis in Europe is no longer a looming threat – it is here and now. The Bucharest Declaration charts a way forward.” World Health Organization (WHO). https://www.who.int/europe/news/it em/22-03-2023-the-health- workforce-crisis-in-europe-is-no- longer-a-looming-threat---it-is-here- and-now.-the-bucharest-declaration- charts-a-way-forward.
Genrich, Tom. 2023. “Germany is Looking for Foreign Labour.” Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik.
https://www.swp- berlin.org/10.18449/2023RP03/.
Lobasso, Fabrizio. 2021. “Italy and Africa: "Value Oriented Diplomacy" in Action.” Istituto Affari Internazionali. https://www.iai.it/en/pubblicazioni/i taly-and-africa-value-oriented- diplomacy-action.
Tuscany Regional Government. n.d. “Bando “Residenzialità in montagna 2024”:
contributi per l'acquisto di un immobile come residenza e dimora abituale.” Regione Toscana.
Accessed October 9, 2024. https://www.regione.toscana.it/-
/bando-residenzialit%C3%A0-in- montagna-2024-contributi-per-l- acquisto-di-un-immobile.
Tjaden, Jasper, and Tobias Heidland. “Did Merkel’s 2015 Decision Attract More Migration to Germany?” European Journal of Political Research, March 6, 2024,
1475-6765.12669.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1475- 6765.12669.
Longo, Francesco, Franco Locatelli, Mario Del Vecchio, Paola Di Giulio, Silvia Giordano, Anna Odone, Vito Marco Ranieri, and Paolo Vineis. “Tackling the Crisis of the Italian National Health Fund.” The Lancet Public Health 9, no. 1 (January 2024): e6–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2468- 2667(23)00277-3.
OECD and European Union. Health at a Glance: Europe 2018: State of Health in the EU Cycle. Health at a Glance: Europe. OECD, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1787/health_glanc e_eur-2018-en.
Federal Ministry of the Interior and Community. n.d. skilled immigration. Accessed October 8, 2024.
https://www.bmi.bund.de/EN/topics
/migration/immigration/labour- migration/skilled- immigration/skilled-immigration- node.html.
German Federal Government. 2024. “The new Skilled Immigration Act at a glance.” Make it in Germany.
https://www.make-it-in- germany.com/en/visa- residence/skilled-immigration-act.
Bludau, Heidi. “Article: Aging Societies Rely on Immigrant Health.” Migration Policy Institute, 26 January 2024, https://www.migrationpolicy.org/art icle/health-care-worker-migration- trends. Accessed 28 October 2024.
Salachi, Emma, "The Immigration Crisis in Italy: A Convergence of Crises and What it Means for Globalization" (2019). Honors Theses. 53. https://digitalcommons.assumption. edu/honorstheses/53.
Franzini, Luisa, and Margherita Giannoni. “Determinants of Health Disparities between Italian Regions.” BMC Public Health 10, no. 1 (December
2010): 296.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458- 10-296.
Parsons, Cristopher. “What's the best policy to attract high- skilled migrants?” The World Economic Forum, 9 June 2015, https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2 015/06/whats-the-best-policy-to- attract-high-skilled-migrants/. Accessed 28 October 2024.
European Commission. n.d. “EU funds for migrant integration 2021-2027 | European Website on Integration.” European Website on Integration. Accessed November 13, 2024.
https://migrant- integration.ec.europa.eu/funding/eu- funds-2021-2027-period_en.
Bubola, Emma. “Meloni's Balancing Act: Centrist Abroad, Right Wing at Home.” The New York Times, 17 October 2024, https://www.nytimes.com/2024/10/ 17/world/europe/meloni-surrogacy- migrants-italy.html. Accessed 28 October 2024.
[36] Pollina, Elvira, and Alvise Armellini. 2023. “Italy's Meloni talks tough on migrants while
opening up to foreign workers.” Reuters.
https://www.reuters.com/world/euro pe/italys-meloni-talks-tough-
migrants-while-opening-up-foreign- workers-2023-12-06/.
Instability and Insecurity in Pakistan: Addressing Police Brutality and Corruption
By Zain Ali, zmaa4@cornell.edu

The police force is perceived to be the most corrupt institution in Pakistan, broadly accused of bribery, intimidation, torture, and extrajudicial killings.Reforming training standards, oversight, and constructing new cultural and legal frameworks in policing would build trust in police and government.

Background
Abusive policing in Pakistan traces to the Colonial Police Act of 1861, designed to form a repressive police force for the British Empire, and the Anti-Terrorism Act of 1998 (ACA), designed to address violence by enabling violations of citizen’s constitutional rights by law enforcement.4,5,6 Calls for reform eventually resulted in Police Order 2002, which aimed to standardize and modernize policing by introducing new standards of oversight, accountability, training, and conduct.7 The implementation of this act has been limited due to the lack of political will and opposition by police leadership.6,8,9
The lack of urgency can be partially attributed to widespread internal security threats.10 Police often justify torture and staged killings as necessary to maintain order, combat terrorism, and out of fear of suspects escaping punishment.11 The first half of 2023 saw 27 reported cases of deaths from police torture.12 Former Inspector General of Sindh explained the prevalence of extra- judicial killings as an expected side- effect of an ineffective judicial system.13 This militarized attitude is conspicuously advertised on province police websites where officers killed in the line of duty are referred to as “shuhada” or martyrs. This wartime rhetoric is echoed by
leaders like President Zardari, who honored fallen officers for fighting on a “frontline” against criminals and terrorists.14
The most consequential aspect of policing in Pakistan is the broad and deep-rooted “thana” culture. Thana culture—“thana” meaning “police station”—is a catch-all term for police abuses ranging from verbal abuse to illegal detention and torture.15 This has resulted in polls showing that 92% of residents disagree that the Lahore police are trustworthy.16 Despite recognition of the issues by police leadership and the public, inadequate training, a culture of physical force, and ineffective grievance processes have persisted, undermining both police effectiveness and public trust in the Pakistani government.17
Policy Idea
Reforms must be conducted at the provincial and district levels to implement cultural changes, change training curriculums, and complaint processes. These reforms should include:
Revising police recruitment to emphasize community service and de-emphasize militaristic culture, while reforming the training curriculum to allocate at least half of instruction to de-escalation, conflict
resolution, human rights, investigative standards, and community engagement.
Create opportunities at home and abroad for current officers to be retrained and gain advanced skills in areas like policing, forensics, and criminology to overcome established norms in police leadership and incentivize policing reform at lower levels.
Creating transparent independent civilian oversight boards (COBs) at the district level with broad investigative and disciplinary powers.
Creating a publicly accessible national database of police officers, including all investigated complaints against them.
Policy Analysis
The thana culture in Pakistani policing significantly shapes public perceptions of the government and undermines trust in the justice system. Addressing this culture is key to rebuilding trust, starting with recruitment and initial training as well as additional training opportunities for junior officers. Recruits trained in a more academic, non-stress environment perform better in the field, report higher job satisfaction, and improve
public satisfaction.18,19 In contrast, stress-based training creates defensive, impersonal officers, reinforcing problematic and entrenched cultural norms.17,18,20 Some police departments in the US have used similar frameworks to build trust and create community programs such as ‘Ceasefire,’ which resulted in a 37% reduction in homicides in Oakland, CA.21 Recruitment strategies and advertisements also influence the type of candidates who apply, shaping their motivations and expectations for the profession.22,23
COBs provide numerous benefits to improve policing, such as helping complainants feel heard, holding police departments accountable, creating means for mediation, increasing transparency, and educating the public on police work.24,25 However, they can be expensive, depending on the size and expertise of the staff, and localities must have the flexibility to consider cost as they form COBs. Trust and effectiveness of COBs vary and often are seen as inconsistent when they lack authority, access, or transparency in their processes and rulings.
Government leadership should preserve these elements, regardless of cost to preserve their effectiveness.25,26,27
A national database of officers would help increase accountability, improve tracking of abuse data, and highlight regions’ highest complaints and abuse rates. Making this information fully public comes from the necessity of building trust in an institution that is seen as untrustworthy.1 Pakistan mobile application. “Pakistan Citizen’s Portal” (PCP), centralizes complaints by citizens, but has only 1.7% participation.28 While the data
collected tracks the number of complaints for a broad range of government and private actors, there is no focus on tracking individual police officers and departments. Tracking this data may help hold police accountable and improve citizen awareness.29

Highlights
Despite the Police Order of 2002, reform efforts in Pakistan's police force have been hindered by poor implementation. A legacy of colonial practices, combined with modern security challenges, has fueled corruption, abuse, and violence, leading to deep mistrust and fear among the public.
Overhauling training and recruitment standards that emphasize community service, professionalism, and advanced investigative skills would start building a new culture around policing with each successive cohort of junior officers.
Civilian Oversight Bodies (COBs) would allow the civilian population to express grievances and file official complaints. These reports would be investigated by civilians independent of the police force and would act as an investigative body to determine fault and enforce punishments.
A national database would create a transparent avenue for the public to review the performance of their local police force and hold police and political leaders accountable for hiring or
retaining poor-performing officers.
Implementation
The focus must start at the recruitment and training stage to shift police culture. Recruitment efforts, developed at the provincial level leadership, should highlight civilian protection, professionalism, and high standards while downplaying crime-fighting and counterterrorism.30 Expanding job marketing can also attract a broader range of quality candidates and improve selectivity. Police training centers should reformulate training standards to reduce stress and address key issues of “thana culture.” For example, de-escalation techniques would help officers avoid unnecessary violence, while community engagement training would foster professionalism and strengthen trust between police and communities. Both strategies should emphasize the importance of effective policing and community relations.31
Police training programs should give junior officers opportunities to develop investigative skills, reducing the reliance on higher-ranking officers to implement modern policing practices from the top down.32 Efforts should also be made to expand training partnerships with foreign police forces, such as the NYPD and Karachi Police, and broaden their scope to community policing.33 Additionally, officers should be encouraged to apply for international programs like the UK’s Chevening Scholarship, which offers valuable opportunities for officers to pursue advanced studies in forensic investigation, policing, or criminology.34 These efforts,, alongside creating new exchange initiatives, can help
cultivate a cohort of professionally educated officers.
Strong enforcement mechanisms will hold police officers accountable and reinforce the culture shift. Civilian oversight boards (COBs) at the tehsil, or county, level should have independent review powers, full- time staff, investigative access, and the authority to issue punishments. To ensure impartiality and avoid the perception of bias or corruption, COB members should be elected locally and prohibited from having close family ties to law enforcement or political parties. Investigative and sanctioning authority is essential for accurate case reviews and appropriate punishments. To prevent challenges to COB authority, police leadership should face administrative or criminal consequences for failing to comply with COB decisions and respect their investigative authority.
Additionally, COB positions should offer competitive wages relative to local income to reduce the risk of bribery.35
Lastly, the Federal Investigation Agency (FIA) should create a database that tracks all police officers and members of the Civil Armed Forces, a paramilitary internal security force. The FIA would require regular reports on police complaints investigated by COBs and resulting punishments. This data should be published annually and made publicly available. While a similar application exists for government services, a dedicated system for the police force is needed.
Stakeholders must prioritize local changes since enforcement of the Police Order 2002 at the federal level has been anemic. Organizing citizens at the district and provincial
levels through NGOs like the Human Rights Council and Human Rights Commission of Pakistan can pressure local leaders and circumvent national political challenges. Efforts should focus on regions with the greatest potential for success and support, such as Punjab and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, where reform efforts have made progress despite challenges and setbacks.36,37,38 Collecting data from these areas will help demonstrate the effectiveness of the programs, motivating change in other regions and gradually improving police professionalism and broader institutional reform at the nationally.

Works Cited
Transparency International- Pakistan. National Corruption Perception Survey 2023. Transparency International- Pakistan, 2023. https://transparency.org.pk/NCPS_ REPORTS/NCPS-2023/National- Corruption-Perception-Survey- 2023-Report-TI-Pakistan.pdf
“‘This Crooked System.’” Human Rights Watch, March 28, 2023.
https://www.hrw.org/report/2016/09
/27/crooked-system/police-abuse- and-reform-pakistan.
Waseem, Zoha. “The Problems with Policing Pakistan.” dawn.com, May 9, 2021.
https://www.dawn.com/news/16228 64.
Wassem, Zoha. “Inside the Punitive State: Governance through Punishment in Pakistan.” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, June 20, 2024.
https://carnegieendowment.org/rese arch/2024/06/pakistan-punitive- state-terrorism-police?lang=en.
“Human Rights Watch World Report 1998.” Human Rights Watch. Accessed October 7, 2024. https://www.hrw.org/legacy/worldr eport/Asia-09.htm.
Zaman, Muhamma. “Police Order 2002 and Institutional Reform: An Analysis,” Master’s thesis. Pakistan Institute of Development Economics School of Social Sciences, 2022. https://file- thesis.pide.org.pk/pdf/mphil-public- policy-2019-muhammad-zaman-- police-order-2002-and-institutional- reform-an-analysis.pdf
“The Police Order, 2002 (as of 2007): An Order to Reconstruct and Regulate the Police.” International Human Rights Law Database, August 2007. https://ihl- databases.icrc.org/en/national- practice/police-order-2002-2007.
Rao, Shahid. “IHC Directs for Implementation of Provisions of Police Order 2002.” The Nation, November 24, 2021. https://www.nation.com.pk/25-Nov- 2021/ihc-directs-for- implementation-of-provisions-of- police-order-2002.
Anjum, Shakeel. “What Hampered Implementation of Police Order 2002.” thenews, June 18,
2020.
https://www.thenews.com.pk/print/ 674504-what-hampered- implementation-of-police-order- 2002
“Chapter 10 The History of Terrorism in Pakistan.” Essay. In The Cambridge History of Terrorism, 223. Cambridge
University Press, 2021.
“Pakistan Legalizing the Impermissible: The New Anti- Terrorism Law.” Amnesty International, 1997: 7-8. https://www.amnesty.org/en/wp- content/uploads/2021/06/asa330341 997en.pdf.
“2023 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Pakistan .”
U.S. Department of State, 2023. https://www.state.gov/reports/2023- country-reports-on-human-rights- practices/pakistan/.
Mohanty, Tushar Ranjan. “South Asia Intelligence Review: Karachi - Uncertain Gains.” South Asia Terrorism Portal, August 24, 2015. https://www.satp.org/south- asia-intelligence-review-Volume- 14-No-8.
“Youm-e-Shuhada-e-Police: PM, Others Laud Sacrifices of Police Force.” The News International, August 4, 2024. https://www.thenews.com.pk/latest/ 1216540-youm-e-shuhada-e-police- pm-shehbaz-others-laud-sacrifices- of-police-force.
“Annual Policing Plan 2023-24
- District Dera Ghazi Khan.” Annual Policing Plans 2023-24 | Punjab Police. Accessed October 8, 2024.
https://punjabpolice.gov.pk/system/ files/D.G.Khan%202023-24.pdf.
Jackson, Jonathan, Muhammad Asif, Ben Bradford, and Muhammad Zakria Zakar. “Corruption and Police Legitimacy in Lahore, Pakistan.” British Journal of Criminology 54, no. 6
September 16, 2014: 1067–88. https://doi.org/10.1093/bjc/azu069.
Hussain, Mahar Murrawat. “The Problem with Pakistan’s Police.” DAWN.COM, July 7, 2024.
https://www.dawn.com/news/18443 29.
Bickel, Karl. “Recruit Training: Are We Preparing Officers for a Community Oriented Department?” COPS Office. Accessed October 9, 2024. https://cops.usdoj.gov/html/dispatch
/06-
2013/preparing_officers_for_a_com munity_oriented_department.asp.
Earle, Howard. In Police Recruit Training Stress vs. Non- Stress: A Revolution in Law Enforcement Career Programs.,
145. Springfield, IL, 1973.
Conti, Norman. “A Visigoth System.” Journal of Contemporary Ethnography 38, no. 3 (March 17,
2009): 427–427.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0891241608 330092.
Gilbert, Daniela, Stewart Wakeling, and Vaughn Crandall. 2015. “Procedural Justice and Police Legitimacy: Using Training as a Foundation for Strengthening Community-Police Relationships” https://bja.ojp.gov/sites/g/files/xyck uh186/files/bwc/pdfs/procedural- justice-and-police-legitimacy- paper-cpsc-feb-2015.pdf.
Koslicki, Wendy M. “Recruiting Warriors or Guardians? A Content Analysis of Police Recruitment Videos.” Policing and Society 31, no. 6 May 19, 2020:
702–20.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10439463.2 020.1765778.
Burrus, Trevor. “How Militarized Police Can Attract the Wrong Officers.” Cato.org, 2020. https://www.cato.org/commentary/h ow-militarized-police-can-attract- wrong-officers#.
Finn, Peter. “Citizen Review of Police : Approaches and Implementation.” U.S. Department of Justice - Office of Justice Programs, 2001. https://www.ojp.gov/pdffiles1/nij/1 84430.pdf.
“Civilian Oversight - Assessing the Evidence.” Council on Criminal Justice - Task Force on Policing, 2021. https://counciloncj.foleon.com/polic
ing/assessing-the-evidence/xi- civilian-oversight. [26]“Community Oversight Paves the Road to Police Accountability - National Association for Civilian Oversight of Law Enforcement.” National Association for Civilian Oversight of Law Enforcement.
Accessed October 9, 2024. https://www.nacole.org/community
_oversight_paves_the_road_to_poli ce_accountability.
Seyffert, Pamela. “Can Professional Civilian Oversight Improve Community-Police Relations?” The Police Chief Online, 2017. https://www.policechiefmagazine.or g/can-professional-civilian- oversight-improve-community- police-relations/.
“Prime Minister’s Performance Delivery Unit -PMDU.” PM’s Performance Delivery Unit. Accessed October 9, 2024. https://citizenportal.gov.pk/index.ph p#about.
Gardner, Betsy. “How Can Data Increase Police Accountability?” Data-Smart City Solutions, June 11, 2020. Accessed
December 12, 2024. https://datasmart.hks.harvard.edu/ne ws/article/how-can-data-increase- police-accountability.
“Changing Police Recruitment Messages Attracts a Larger and More Diverse Applicant Pool - Council on Criminal Justice.” Council on Criminal Justice, October 8, 2024. https://counciloncj.org/changing- police-recruitment-messages- attracts-a-larger-and-more-diverse- applicant-pool/.
Beck, Charlie. “Relationship- Based Policing.” Police Chief Online. Accessed November 15, 2024.
https://www.policechiefmagazine.or
g/relationship-based- policing/?ref=d5d99e04318a8a8726 68c66f0b6e0461.
Abbas, Hassan. “Reforming Pakistan‘s Police and Law Enforcement Infrastructure: Is It Too Flawed to Fix?” United States Institute of Peace, 2011. https://www.usip.org/sites/default/fi les/SR266- Reforming_Pakistan%E2%80%98s
_Police_and_Law_Enforcement_Inf rastructure.pdf.
“NYPD Offers to Train Sindh Police.” The Express Tribune, May 6, 2024.
https://tribune.com.pk/story/246544 0/nypd-offers-to-train-sindh-police.
“Who Can Apply for a Chevening Scholarship?” Chevening. Accessed November 15, 2024.
https://www.chevening.org/scholars hips/who-can-apply/.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Michael Lokshin, and Vladimir Kolchin. “Effects of Public Sector Wages on Corruption: Wage Inequality Matters.” Journal of Comparative Economics 51, no. 3 (September
2023): 941–59.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jce.2023.0 3.005.
Bahadar, Nawab, Shakir Ullah, Ingrid Nyborg, and Tahir Maqsood. 2019. “Community-Oriented Policing: Political, Institutional and
Technical Reforms in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) Police.” Journal of Human Security 15 (2). https://doi.org/10.12924/johs2019.1 5020041.
“KP Cabinet Okays Proposed Amendments to Transfer IGP’s Powers back to CM.” DAWN.COM. October 10, 2024.
https://www.dawn.com/news/18642 00.
“Punjab Police Launches Project on Internal Police Reforms.” ANI News. September 23, 2024. https://www.aninews.in/news/natio nal/general-news/punjab-police- launches-project-on-internal-police- reforms20240923213234/..
Restoring ASEAN Principles: Why Expelling Myanmar Could End the Junta’s Oppressive Reign
By Naina Kalra, nk599@cornell.edu

The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) must suspend Myanmar’s membership to uphold its commitment to human rights and regional stability, leveraging economic exclusion and a coordinated arms embargo to pressure the junta into halting violence against the Rohingya population.

Background
The ongoing military junta’s persecution of the Rohingya people is a grim illustration of ethnic cleansing in Myanmar. In 1974, Myanmar’s military government, led by a Buddhist nationalist group, revoked the citizenship of the Rohingya, a Muslim ethnic minority group.1 Over the past 50 years, the Rohingya have endured relentless violence, including the burning of villages, sexual violence, mass killings, and loss of rights.1 This persecution peaked in 2017, when military-led violence forced over 700,000 Rohingya to flee to Bangladesh, leaving 9,000 dead.1 Despite the Rome Statute from the International Criminal Court requiring countries to prevent and address genocide, and the United Nations labeling the Rohingya crisis as genocide, ASEAN’s response has been unacceptably poor.2,3,4
ASEAN’s mission emphasizes promoting peace and upholding the rules and standards of the United Nations.5 However, ASEAN’s failure to effectively address Myanmar’s atrocities has violated these core principles.
While ASEAN barred Myanmar from participation in certain summits and signed a five-point consensus with Myanmar in 2021 to end violence, Myanmar has continued its violent repression.6
Currently, 914,000 Rohingya live in overcrowded refugee camps in Bangladesh with no path to citizenship.1 Another 630,000 remain in Myanmar in extreme danger and are unable to escape to Bangladesh, which has forcibly returned 6,000 Rohingya since August 5, unable to support the refugees.7 If decisive action is not taken now, this entire ethnic group risks losing their homeland and chance to preserve their identity.
ASEAN’s failure to expel Myanmar reflects their deep economic ties with Singapore-based companies that supplied Myanmar with $254 million in arms between 2021 and 2022, placing ASEAN members among the top arms providers to Myanmar’s junta.8 Allowing Myanmar to resume participation in ASEAN summits signals that ASEAN tolerates human rights abuses.9 Expelling Myanmar from ASEAN is an essential prerequisite to ending the authoritarian regime in Myanmar.
Policy Idea
Given Myanmar’s failure to adhere to ASEAN’s five-point consensus — particularly its disregard for the ceasefire agreement, commitment to peaceful resolution, and worsening human rights abuses against the Rohingya people — ASEAN should suspend
Myanmar’s membership.6 This suspension aligns with ASEAN’s foundational principles of mutual respect, peaceful cooperation, and human rights and serves as a crucial step toward mitigating the conflict. To reinforce this stance, ASEAN should implement a region-wide arms embargo on Myanmar, with a clear mandate that member states who continue trading arms with Myanmar risk their own membership status. This coordinated approach would underscore ASEAN’s commitment to upholding human rights and regional stability and exclude Myanmar from the crucial economic benefits of membership, pressuring the regime to reduce hostilities and align with ASEAN’s standards of governance and peace.
Policy Analysis
ASEAN has mainly hesitated to expel Myanmar because doing so would eliminate crucial communication channels for diplomatic dialogue, humanitarian aid, and negotiation.10 However, these channels are failing to mitigate Myanmar’s violence: since ASEAN’s five-point consensus, the military junta has killed at least 5,000 more Rohingya.11,12,13 ASEAN’s current approach is ineffective and there is an urgent need for more drastic action.
Removing Myanmar would deny it the economic benefits of ASEAN membership, weakening its military capacity. Southeast Asia’s GDP is expected to grow at an annual rate of 5.1%, outpacing China, the US, and Europe.14,15,16 This is largely due to ASEAN initiatives, such as the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA), which enables tariff-free trade, protects investments, and secures market access among members.17 ASEAN has also invested $34 billion in research, sharing advancements among members through programs like the One-Shot Campaign, which provides vital vaccination, and invest in environmentally sustainable develepment.14 Myanmar’s exclusion would remove its access to these critical resources, pressuring the junta to change course.
This approach aligns with historical precedent: London’s government cited South Africa’s forced withdrawal from the British Commonwealth during apartheid as pivotal in catalyzing global sanctions and isolation, essential for eventual change.18 Similarly, expelling Myanmar would signal that arms deals and economic ties with the junta are unacceptable.
Removing Myanmar alongside a clear declaration of removal from the association for member states that partake in trade with Myanmar would affirm ASEAN’s stance against human rights abuses and strain the junta’s resources.8
Highlights:
Since 1974, the Rohingya have faced brutal repression, peaking in 2017 when over 700,000 were forced to flee Bangladesh due to military- led violence.1
ASEAN’s failure to effectively address Myanmar’s atrocities violates its core mission to uphold regional peace, stability, and adherence to international law.5
Myanmae’s access to ASEAN’s economic benefits, including tariff-free trade and regional investments, strengthens its regime and undermines ASEAN’s credibility.17
ASEAN must suspend Myanmar’s membership and implement a region-wide arms embargo to underscore a commitment to human rights while pressuring Myanmar’s regime to reduce violence.

Implementation
The rotating ASEAN chair position provides significant influence over the association’s agenda, with Malaysia’s upcoming chairmanship in 2025 poised to play a pivotal role in advancing a more assertive stance on Myanmar.19 With increasing pressure for decisive action against Myanmar’s military junta, Malaysia would drive a coordinated approach to suspend Myanmar’s membership, promoting ASEAN’s commitment to human rights and regional stability.19
As chair, Malaysia could bring the proposal for Myanmar’s suspension to a formal vote within ASEAN. While this would require unanimous consent, Malaysia can leverage ASEAN’s foundational principles of peace and human rights to build counsense.5 Notably, five of nine ASEAN member states currently support the UN-led arms embargo on Myanmar, including
Singapore who is most economically tied to Myanmar.8 Despite Singapore’s economic ties to Myanmar, its vote on the embargo highlights a prioritization of international credibility over complicity in genocide. If a suspension vote is called, Singapore and other ASEAN member states with lesser economic ties are likely to support the measure to avoid international condemnation or isolation as the sole dissenting
vote.
Malaysia’s former foreign minister Saifuddin Abdullah set a progressive president by openly addressing the humanitarian crisis in Myanmar and building cabinet support for such initiative, laying the groundwork for the current foreign minister, Datuk Seri Mohamad Hasan.20 Hasan has emphasizes ASEAN’s responsibility to act decisively on Myanmar, framing the oppression of Muslims in Myanmar as a crisis that transcends internal affairs and demanded unified regional action.21 Malaysia’s theme for its chairmanship “Inclusivity and Sustainability” reinforces its commitment to addressing Myanmar’s genocide, positioning the country to lead efforts to demand accountability from the Myanmar’s junta, opening to door for ideas such as removal of the state from ASEAN. Additionally, the newly established Troika mechanism, comprising Indonesia, Malaysia, and Laos—the previous, current, and future ASEAN chairs—provides a coordinated platform to address the Myanmar crisis.22 This mechanism signals ASEAN’s intent to strengthen its response to the junta's violations and explore solutions beyond the ineffective five-point consensus.
Advocating for Myanamr’s suspension aligns with ASEAN’s historical principles and enhances its credibility on the global stage. A suspension would signal ASEAN’s intolerance for human rights abuses and restrict Myanmar’s access to arms and economic resources. This unified regional stance would exert significant pressure on the junta, challenging its ability to sustain the oppressive regime and advancing efforts to resolve the humanitarian crisis.

Works Cited
“A Timeline of Rohingya History: Burma’s Path to Genocide.” United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. n.d. https://exhibitions.ushmm.org/burm as-path-to-genocide/timeline.
OHCHR. n.d. “Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.” https://www.ohchr.org/en/instrumen ts-mechanisms/instruments/rome- statute-international-criminal-court.
Baker, Jalelah Abu. 2023. “Indonesia ‘Proactive’ but ‘Slow’ in Dealing With Myanmar as ASEAN Chair, Say Analysts.” CNA, April 14, 2023.
https://www.channelnewsasia.com/ asia/myanmar-crisis-air-strike- indonesia-asean-chair-needs-do- more-3417706.
“UN Rights Council Condemns Myanmar Abuses, Urges Immediate Action.” 2024. UN News. July 10,
2024.
https://news.un.org/en/story/2024/0 7/1151966.
ASEAN “What We Do: ASEAN
Main Portal.” ASEAN Main Portal. June 7, 2024.
https://asean.org/what-we-do.
“ASEAN Must Take Stronger Stance Beyond Five-Point Consensus, Southeast Asian MPs Say” n.d.
https://aseanmp.org/publications/po st/asean-must-take-stronger-stance- beyond-five-point-consensus- southeast-asian-mps-say.
Human Rights Watch. 2024. “Bangladesh: New Rohingya Refugees Lack Protection, Aid,” October 23, 2024. https://www.hrw.org/news/2024/09/ 25/bangladesh-new-rohingya- refugees-lack-protection-aid.
Ewe, Koh. 2023. “Why Southeast Asia Just Can’t Seem to Cut off Myanmar’s Junta.” TIME, October 20, 2023. https://time.com/6326274/asean- myanmar-junta-trade/.
Writer, Staff. 2024. “Myanmar Seeks ASEAN Compromise to Join First Summit Since Takeover.” Nikkei Asia, October 2, 2024. https://asia.nikkei.com/Spotlight/M yanmar-Crisis/Myanmar-seeks- ASEAN-compromise-to-join-first- summit-since-takeover.
Matamis, Joaquin. 2023. “Myanmar Reveals ASEAN’s Weak Spot Again.” Stimson Center, July. https://www.stimson.org/2023/mya nmar-reveals-aseans-weak-spot- again/.
“Over 5,000 Civilians Killed Since Myanmar Military Coup.” 2024. UN News. September 17,
2024.
https://news.un.org/en/story/2024/0 9/1154436.
Human Rights Watch. 2024. “Myanmar: New Atrocities Against Rohingya,” August 28, 2024. https://www.hrw.org/news/2024/08/ 22/myanmar-new-atrocities-against- rohingya.
“ASEAN to Conduct Comprehensive Review on 5 Point Consensus on Myanmar.” n.d. BERNAMA.
https://www.bernama.com/en/news. php?id=2322605.
“The ASEAN Region Is the World’s Economic Dark Horse, Here’s Why.” 2024. World Economic Forum. September 10, 2024.
https://www.weforum.org/stories/20 23/08/asean-economic-growth/. [15]“Southeast Asia Outlook.” 2024.
https://www.bain.com/globalassets/ noindex/2024/bain_report_navigati ng_high_winds_southeast_asia_outl ook_2024_34.pdf.
“Asian Development Outlook 2023.” ADB. July 2023.
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/fil es/publication/896606/asian- development-outlook-july- 2023.pdf.
“ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA).” n.d.
https://www.enterprisesg.gov.sg/gro w-your-business/go- global/international- agreements/free-trade- agreements/find-an-fta/afta.
“Forced Withdrawal of South Africa From the Commonwealth.” the O’Malley Archives. n.d. https://omalley.nelsonmandela.org/i ndex.php/site/q/03lv01538/04lv016 00/05lv01617/06lv01620.htm.
Usmani, Sameena. 2024. “The Future of the U.S. ASEAN Relationship.” Amnesty International USA. October 31, 2024.
https://www.amnestyusa.org/blog/th e-future-of-the-u-s-asean- relationship/.
Daniel, Thomas. 2022. “Will Malaysia Change Its Policy on Myanmar?” ISIS. October 17, 2022. https://www.isis.org.my/2022/10/13
/will-malaysia-change-its-policy- on-myanmar/.
“ASEAN to Scrutinise Effectiveness of 5PC to Address Myanmar’s Humanitarian Crisis.”
n.d. Thesun.my.
https://thesun.my/malaysia- news/asean-to-scrutinise- effectiveness-of-5pc-to-address- myanmar-s-humanitarian-crisis- mohamad-LE13428542.
“ASEAN Establishes New Troika to Find Solution on Myanmar Crisis.” n.d. Jakarta Globe. https://jakartaglobe.id/news/asean-
establishes-new-troika-to-find- solution-on-myanmar-crisis.
Mexico President Claudia Sheinbaum Must Reform Her National Guard
By Jorge Mariño, jam894@cornell.edu

Mexico’s Congress should lobby for President Claudia Sheinbaum to adhere to the Organization of American States’ Inter-American Commission on Human Rights’ propositions regarding implementing accountability reforms in Mexico’s National Guard.

Background
Mexico’s National Guard’s commitment to human rights remains unsatisfactory. Despite former President Andres Manuel López in 2019 proposing that the National Guard would be a 60,000- member joint civilian-military organization to tackle cartel violence, the majority of Mexico’s National Guard are former members of the federal police, known for their incompetence and human rights violations.1 Nevertheless, sitting Mexican President Claudia Sheinbaum has affirmed her support for her predecessor’s militarization of the National Guard, stating that the military has acted within the law and can respond to violence in whatever way seen fit.2 Since its creation, the National Guard has been highly problematic in adhering to human rights.
Furthermore, the Organization of American States’ Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) revealed that Mexico has largely not adhered to its human rights suggestions. In 2022, the IACHR recommended that Mexico ensure investigations into cases of forced disappearances, extrajudicial executions, and torture involving the National Guard, holding both the direct perpetrators and those in the chain of command accountable.3 The IACHR report noted that no senior civilian or
military officials were sentenced by Mexico for torture or forced disappearances in 2020 or 2021.3 Moreover, military and government figures allegedly tried to manipulate legal outcomes for favors during the Tlatlaya massacre in which Mexican soldiers killed 22 suspects in a grain warehouse, including 12 to 15 who were executed after surrendering.3,4 IAHCR’s report conveys that Mexico’s militarization of the National Guard has enabled armed forces to operate without transparency or accountability, leading to more human rights violations.
Policy Idea
Mexican senators and deputies not aligned with Sheinbaum’s Sigamos Haciendo Historia political alliance should lobby President Sheinbaum to implement accountability measures in Mexico’s National Guard, pressuring her to implement long overdue public security measures outlined by the Organization of American States’ Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR). First, deputies should lobby for the state to report civilian casualties and prosecute national guardsmen or their superior officers involved in any human rights abuse cases. Next, Mexican senators should raise the same concern with the president, urging her to comply
with the IACHR’s policy recommendations that Mexico has yet to address, such as establishing an independent body to oversee public security operations to ensure accountability within the National Guard.
Policy Analysis
Mexico adopting IACHR recommendations will help combat human rights abuses by establishing a framework for Mexico to implement accountability reforms. For example, in 2019, the IACHR ruled that Mexico must adopt a law regarding the use of force per international human rights standards.3 In the same year, Mexico adopted the National Law on the Use of Force, which requires detailed reporting and accountability measures for superiors in cases of unlawful force.3 IACHR concluded that Mexico has fully adhered to their suggestion ever since.5 While Mexico implemented this IACHR recommendation, Sheinbaum’s fervent support for militarization conveys that the Mexican Senate and Chamber of Deputies should lobby for the president to implement more IACHR reforms to address the National Guard’s human rights abuses, given that they are the direct channel between communities experiencing human rights violations and the
government. Although Mexico has adopted some IACHR reforms, further action is needed to hold the National Guard accountable.
IACHR’s involvement in the Barrios Alto case in Peru demonstrates how their reforms can hold Latin American militaries accountable. On November 3rd, 1991, Peruvian military officials killed 15 people in the Barrios Alto neighborhood on false suspicions of terrorism.6 Later, the Peruvian Congress adopted an amnesty law that exonerated army members who committed human rights violations between 1980 and 1995.6 In 2001, the IACHR ruled that Peru’s law violated the American Convention on Human Rights.6 Following the ruling, Peru created the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (CVR) to monitor human rights violations, and in 2005, the CVR formalized the Comprehensive Reparations Plan which compensates individuals who were subjects of human rights violations.7 Given Mexico’s ongoing inability to hold its National Guard accountable, oversight from the IACHR is a logical approach to convince Sheinbaum to implement more accountability reforms.

Highlights
Mexico has struggled to balance militarizing its National Guard and addressing the Organization of American States’ Inter- American Commission on Human Rights’ concerns over human rights abuses in the military.
Mexican senators and deputies who are not members of Mexican President Claudia Sheinbaum’s Sigamos
Haciendo Historia political alliance should lobby the President to implement IACHR’s reforms to hold the National Guard accountable.
Mexico has successfully implemented some IACHR reforms relating to human rights in the past, such as the National Law on the Use of Force, which Mexico has consistently been adhering to since its implementation in 2019.
IACHR’s involvement in the Barrios Alto case in Peru, which saw Peru create the Truth and Reconciliation Commission to monitor human rights violations in 2001 after military officials killed 15 people on false suspicions of terrorism in 1991, demonstrates its ability to hold Latin American military officials accountable to human
rights.

Implementation
Implementing reforms to the National Guard will require deputies from different parties not affiliated with Sigamos Haciendo Historia, such as Víctor Manuel Pérez Díaz of the National Action Party and Laura Hernández García of the Citizens’ Movement, to begin lobbying support in Mexico’s lower house. During the September general Chamber of Deputies session that put the National Guard under military oversight, Pérez Díaz voiced his opinion against the reform, citing that when the military assumes civilian functions, they violate rights and increase repression.8 Much like Pérez Díaz, Hernández García stated that in
regards to the National Guard, the Mexican government neither has the capacity nor will to create a civil authority with the ability to address Mexico’s security problems Although the militarization reform did pass, Pérez Díaz and Hernández García can mobilize their respective parties to push for accountability reforms, such as those that IACHR has recommended, in a completely new multipartisan effort to increase the likelihood of building future support for reforms when Sheinbaum’s term is up in 2030.
Having deputies from multiple parties lobbying for accountability reforms is the first step to making the National Guard accountable.
Building on the Chamber of Deputies’ work, Mexico’s senators also not aligned with Sigamos Haciendo Historia, such as Senator Cristina Ruíz Sandoval of Mexico’s Institutional Revolutionary Party, should pressure Sheinbaum directly to implement accountability measures. Like her deputy counterparts, Sandoval opposed militarizing the National Guard, stating that Mexico will risk international sanctions by permanently militarizing its armed forces without adhering to the IACHR ruling that the use of armed forces in public security must be exceptional and temporary.9 Given that Sandoval is on the Senate Human Rights Commission, she is best suited to gather support from like-minded senators and lobby Sheinbaum to implement IACHR reforms. Gathering Senate support to convince the president to implement IACHR reforms remains key to improving accountability in the National Guard.
Given Mexico’s failure to fully enforce accountability within its National Guard, Sheinbaum’s
unwavering support of militarization, and a unified government dominated by Sheinbaum’s party, MORENA, Mexican legislators should not lobby for accountability reforms in the National Guard during the next six years of Sheinbaum’s presidency. On November 11, 2024, Mexico’s Senate approved Sheinbaum’s constitutional reform to empower Mexico’s Secretariat of Security and Citizen Protection (SSPC).10 Approving this reform expands powers of criminal investigation oversight to the SSPC and National Guard.10 Sheinbaum’s reform likely allows the National Guard to continue denying human rights violations, obstructing the IACHR’s call for independent accountability mechanisms in public security operations. Despite the need for reform to ensure the National Guard upholds human rights, the current government’s support for militarization suggests that efforts to push for accountability reforms will likely yield minimal substantive progress. To increase the chance of success, legislators should wait until this sexenio (the six-year single term a Mexican president serves) expires and begin to lobby members today to hold the National Guard accountable.

Works Cited
H.Escamilla-Hamm , Patricia. “The Guardia Nacional (National Guard): Why a New Militarized Police in Mexico.” Small Wars Journal by Arizona State University, August 12, 2020. https://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/ar
t/guardia-nacional-national-guard- why-new-militarized-police- mexico.
Herrera, Olivia Vázquez. “Claudia Sheinbaum lanza promesa ante las Fuerzas Armadas: ‘Nunca emitiré orden que vulnere la Constitución o los derechos humanos.’” infobae, October 3, 2024.
https://www.infobae.com/mexico/2 024/10/03/claudia-sheinbaum- lanza-promesa-ante-las-fuerzas- armadas-nunca-emitire-orden-que- vulnere-la-constitucion-o-los- derechos-humanos/.
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. “Follow-up of Recommendations Issued by the IACHR Inn Its Country or Thematics Reports.” Annual Report 2022. Organization of American States, 2022. https://www.oas.org/en/iachr/docs/a nnual/2022/Chapters/14- IA2022_Cap_5_MX_EN.pdf.
The Guardian. “Mexican Soldiers Charged with Killing 22 People Acquitted, Rights Group Reveals.” March 30, 2016, sec. World news. https://www.theguardian.com/world
/2016/mar/30/mexico-soldiers- acquitted-killing-22-people- tlatlaya.
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. “Follow-up of Recommendations Issued by the IACHR in Its Country or Thematics Reports.” Annual Report 2023. Organization of American States, 2023.
https://www.oas.org/en/iachr/docs/a nnual/2023/chapters/IA2023_Cap_5
_Mexico_ENG.DOCX.
Cançado Trindade, Antônio A. , Máximo Pacheco Gómez, Hernán Salgado Pesantes, Alirio Abreu Burelli, Sergio García Ramírez , and Carlos Vicente de Roux Rengifo. Case of Barrios Altos v Peru (Inter-American Court of Human Rights March 14, 2001). https://opil.ouplaw.com/display/10. 1093/law:ihrl/1458iachr01.case.1/la w-ihrl-1458iachr01.
Lehne, Maria Emilia. “The Truth and Reconciliation Commission in Peru – The Victims’ Right to Truth and Justice.” International Journal on Rule of Law, Transitional Justice and Human Rights 11, no. 11 (2020):
37–50.
https://www.ceeol.com/search/articl e-detail?id=932538.
Cámara de Diputados del Honorable Congreso de la Unión, LXVI Legislatura. “Versión estenográfica de la sesión ordinaria del jueves 19 de septiembre de 2024,” September 19, 2024. https://cronica.diputados.gob.mx/Ve 19sep2024.html.
Senado de México. “Sesión nocturna de la Cámara de Senadores, del 24 de septiembre de 2024.” YouTube. Senado de México, September 24, 2024. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v= BP_T6U2bSHs.
Esquivel, Israel Aguilar. “Avanza en el Senado iniciativa para fortalecer la SSPC con nuevas facultades en seguridad.” infobae. infobae, November 11, 2024. https://www.infobae.com/mexico/2 024/11/11/avanza-en-el-senado- iniciativa-para-fortalecer-la-sspc- con-nuevas-facultades-en- seguridad/.
Breaking the Cycle: Strengthening Police Response to Domestic Violence in Kyrgyzstan
By Olivia Pham, omp24@cornell.edu

The Kyrgyz government should implement mandatory, specialized police training to enhance law enforcement’s effectiveness in protecting domestic violence victims, increasing reporting rates, and building trust to ensure justice is served.

Background
Kyrgyzstan ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) in 1997, committing to uphold women’s rights and combat discrimination.1 However, the country has struggled to meet these obligations, particularly in addressing domestic violence.2,3 Police often focus on reconciliation rather than victim protection, and families commonly pressure victims to reconcile instead of pursuing legal action. 4,5,6 This lack of enforcement leaves victims vulnerable and without proper legal recourse.
In rural areas, cultural stigma and a strong emphasis on family unity deter women from approaching law enforcement, which limits forensic evidence collection and prevents many cases from reaching court.7 Sexual violence crimes are often only prosecuted when physical injuries or biological evidence are present, reflecting a narrow interpretation of “violence” in Kyrgyz law that
excludes psychological or economic harm.8 Consequently, many forms of abuse remain unaddressed.
Moreover, the legal term “helplessness” in cases of sexual assault lacks a clear definition, leaving victims without legal recourse if they cannot physically
resist. Approximately 86% of domestic violence cases are retracted, often due to police inaction, financial dependency, and a lack of shelter—factors that leave victims with few options but to return to unsafe situations.9
Alarmingly, the Ministry of Internal Affairs reported a 20% increase in domestic violence cases in 2023 compared to the previous year, while the number of domestic violence victims increased by 5.1 times from 2010 to 2021.10,11 Women in rural areas are most affected due to the legal and cultural barriers. Children also suffer under this system, with 104 cases of child violence documented in 2021, many of which were prematurely closed.12
Current policies, such as the Law on Domestic Violence, still have weak law enforcement that fails to provide adequate protection through restraining orders and prioritizes reconciliation.13
Policy Idea
To improve law enforcement's response to domestic violence in Kyrgyzstan, the government should implement a mandatory, ongoing specialized training program that includes the following:
Mandatory training for all law enforcement officers on domestic violence, focusing on recognizing
psychological and economic abuse as well as physical violence.14
Regular refresher courses are held annually to ensure officers stay up to date on best practices and are fully equipped to handle domestic violence cases effectively.15
Comprehensive curriculum covering the enforcement of restraining orders and prioritizing victim safety over reconciliation, emphasizing rural areas where enforcement is weakest.16
Accountability mechanisms to assess officers’ performance and ensure compliance with the training, including routine evaluations.17
Collaboration with local and international organizations, such as UN Women and Bir Duino (a human rights organization protecting civil liberties and advocating for marginalized groups) to provide resources and support for the training program.18

Policy Analysis
The implementation of mandatory, ongoing specialized training for police officers in Kyrgyzstan would enhance law
enforcement's ability to respond to domestic and sexual violence cases. A study by the Australian Institute of Criminology demonstrates that training focused on recognizing coercive control (a pattern of controlling behaviors that create an unequal power dynamic), psychological abuse, and economic violence has led to more effective handling of cases, resulting in higher arrest rates and better enforcement of restraining
orders.19 Additionally, such training enhances officers' ability to identify the primary aggressor in complex domestic violence situations, helping to reduce repeat offenses and prevent further harm.19
Practical, scenario-based training, including mock interviews and real-life simulations, has been shown to enhance police skills in managing domestic violence cases.19 This training equips officers to navigate the complexities of these situations, leading to higher prosecution rates and more accurate investigations. Incorporating
trauma-informed approaches— which emphasize understanding and sensitivity toward survivors’ experiences—further improves interactions, reducing victim- blaming and increasing victims’ willingness to report abuse.
A study by the National Policing Institute found that procedural justice training not only reduced crime but also improved public perceptions of the police, which is crucial for building trust with vulnerable populations.20 This model is essential for Kyrgyzstan, where interviews indicate that only about 10% of domestic violence cases are reported to the police via
102. Distrust in law enforcement, cultural stigma, and financial
dependence often lead survivors to seek support elsewhere.21
By partnering with organizations like Bir Duino and utilizing resources from the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Kyrgyzstan can lower the costs of developing and maintaining police training programs.22 These collaborations provide access to expertise, training materials, and funding that reduce the need for Kyrgyzstan to invest heavily in creating its own training infrastructure.23

Highlights
Since ratifying CEDAW in 1997, Kyrgyzstan has struggled to meet its obligations, with weak enforcement of domestic violence laws leaving victims unprotected and many cases dismissed.24
Kyrgyzstan should implement a mandatory, nationwide police training program to ensure accountability and improve protection and support for domestic violence victims.25
Addressing cultural and structural barriers, particularly in rural areas, is vital to building trust and encouraging reporting through sensitive, victim- centered approaches.26
Drawing from successful international models, Kyrgyzstan should adopt scenario-based and trauma- informed training to equip law enforcement with the skills needed for effective and compassionate interventions.27
Implementation
While past legislation, such as the 2017 Law on Protection and Defense Against Domestic Violence, expanded protections on paper, its enforcement has been inadequate.28 Between January 2019 and April 2021, only 14% of reported cases reached the courts, with most dismissed due to ineffective intervention.29 This policy aims to close these gaps by introducing a comprehensive framework that prioritizes victim safety over reconciliation, addressing both structural and cultural barriers.
To achieve this, amendments to the 2017 Law will be introduced through the Zhogorku Kenesh (Parliament of Kyrgyzstan) by partnering with progressive legislators and advocacy groups.
Leveraging committees on human rights and gender equality, the policy will be framed as a measure aligning with Kyrgyzstan’s international obligations under CEDAW, emphasizing societal stability and the importance of addressing domestic violence as a public safety issue. This strategic framing will help navigate opposition rooted in traditional norms.
Moreover, sustainable funding will be secured through government allocations and international grants, with support from organizations such as the UNDP, UNODC, and Bir Duino.30 Drawing on successful international models, this policy incorporates practices like Mexico’s CRIMJUST program, which improved officers’ skills by 28% and increased victim cooperation and trust in law enforcement.31 These approaches highlight the effectiveness of linking funding to measurable outcomes, such as higher victim reporting rates and more effective
law enforcement responses. In Kyrgyzstan, where only 10% of domestic violence cases are reported due to fear of inaction, similar training programs could raise reporting rates and foster a supportive environment for survivors. 32, 33 Tailoring these strategies to Kyrgyzstan’s cultural and institutional context will help ensure practical implementation and long-term impact.
The proposed training curriculum will emphasize trauma- informed, scenario-based learning, including mock interviews and real- life simulations to strengthen practical skills and empathy among officers.34 This approach has proven effective in the U.S., where a four- hour victim-support training led to a 32% increase in positive victim interactions and improved report accuracy.35 By equipping officers to handle cases sensitively, the policy seeks to reduce victim-blaming and encourage survivors to report abuse. Additionally, implementation will begin with pilot programs in urban and rural areas, allowing for iterative improvements before scaling nationwide.
Beyond skill-building, the policy includes sustained engagement with local religious and community leaders to address cultural resistance, particularly in rural areas where family unity is often prioritized over victim safety.36 Recent initiatives provide a model for success: in August 2023, the UNDP and the Academy of the Ministry of Internal Affairs conducted field training as part of the SDG Partnership to address gender-based violence.37 Expanding this training nationally through a continuous program is essential to ensure lasting change.
In essence, by establishing these practices as standard within law enforcement training, this policy would foster a sustainable, systemic response to gender-based violence across Kyrgyzstan, embedding trauma-informed, community- centered practices within the country’s policing framework.38, 39 Moving beyond temporary solutions, it aims to transform domestic violence response into lasting protection for survivors.

Works Cited
United Nations,“Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women,” accessed October 10, 2024, https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewD etails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_n o=IV-8&chapter=4&clang=_en.
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. “Dialogue with Kyrgyzstan: Experts from Committee Against Torture Commend Legislative Progress.” Press Release, November 12, 2021.
https://www.ohchr.org/en/press- releases/2021/11/dialogue- kyrgyzstan-experts-committee- against-torture-commend- legislative.
Human Rights Watch. “Kyrgyzstan: Pressure Builds to Protect Women and Girls.” News Release, May 28, 2019. https://www.hrw.org/news/2019/05/ 28/kyrgyzstan-pressure-builds- protect-women-and-girls.
Human Rights Watch. 2015.“Call Me When He Tries to Kill You”: State Response to Domestic Violence in Kyrgyzstan. October 28, 2015.
https://www.hrw.org/report/2015/10
/28/call-me-when-he-tries-kill- you/state-response-domestic- violence-kyrgyzstan.
Human Rights Watch. 2006. Reconciled to Violence: State Failure to Stop Domestic Abuse and Abduction of Women in Kyrgyzstan. September 27, 2006. https://www.hrw.org/report/2006/09
/27/reconciled-violence/state- failure-stop-domestic-abuse-and- abduction-women.
RFE/RL, “Kyrgyzstan: Abusive Marriage Tradition and the Push for Reconciliation,” accessed October 10, 2024,
https://www.rferl.org/a/kyrgyzstan- abusive-marriage-tradition- reconciliation/31071481.html.
PubMed Central, “Study on Police Training and Family Violence,” accessed October 10, 2024,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40609-022- 00226-x.
Equality Now, “Disability in Kyrgyzstan: Intersectionality and Access to Justice,” accessed October 10, 2024, https://equalitynow.storage.googlea pis.com/wp- content/uploads/2023/05/12094124/ EN-Disability-in-Kyrgystan-07- ENG-PDF.pdf.
RFE/RL, “Kyrgyzstan: Domestic Violence Cases Rising,” accessed October 10, 2024, https://www.rferl.org/a/kyrgyzstan- domestic-violence-cases- rising/32026482.html.
Central Asia Barometer. 2021. Central Asia Barometer: Wave 12 Kyrgyzstan Report. https://ca- barometer.org/assets/files/froala/20 7fb9867dee0c7a6e8f0968e4cd2acd 4a16895d.pdf.
UN Women. 2023. Gender Snapshot: Kyrgyzstan and the Sustainable Development Goals. https://data.unwomen.org/sites/defa ult/files/documents/Publications/20 23/Kyrgyz-SDG-gender.pdf.
U.S. Department of State. 2023. Kyrgyz Republic 2022 Human Rights Report. February 2023. https://www.state.gov/wp- content/uploads/2023/02/415610_K YRGYZ-REPUBLIC-2022- HUMAN-RIGHTS-REPORT.pdf.
Abdulkhafizova, Zalin. 2022. "Legal Response to Domestic Violence in Kyrgyzstan." Master's thesis, Central European University.
PubMed Central, “Study on Police Training and Family Violence,” accessed October 10, 2024,
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/ articles/PMC10249667/.
International Association of Chiefs of Police. 2020. Enhancing Law Enforcement Response to Domestic Violence: A Guide for Policy Makers. June 29, 2020. https://www.theiacp.org/sites/defaul t/files/2021- 07/Domestic%20Violence%20FUL L%20-%2006292020.pdf.
UNODC, “Handbook on Effective Prosecution Responses to Violence Against Women and Girls,” accessed October 10, 2024, https://www.unodc.org/documents/j ustice-and-prison- reform/Handbook_on_effective_pro secution_responses_to_violence_ag ainst_women_and_girls.pdf.
UN Women, “Guide on How to Assess Essential Services for Gender-Based Violence Survivors,” accessed October 10, 2024, https://asiapacific.unwomen.org/site s/default/files/2022-03/bd-Guide- on%20How-to-Assess-Essential- Services-for-GBV-survivors-s.pdf.
Learning Partnership, “Bir Duino: Partnership for Human Rights,” accessed October 10, 2024, https://learningpartnership.org/who- we-are/partnership/bir-duino.
Australian Institute of Criminology, “Police Training in Responding to Family, Domestic and Sexual Violence,” accessed October 10, 2024, https://www.aic.gov.au/sites/default
/files/2024- 04/ti689_police_training_in_respon ding_to_fdsv.pdf.
National Policing Institute, “Study: Intensive, Specialized Training of Police Officers Leads to Reduced Crime, Fewer Arrests, and More Positive Interactions,” accessed October 10, 2024, https://www.policinginstitute.org/pr ess-releases/study-intensive- specialized-training-of-police- officers-leads-to-reduced-crime- fewer-arrests-and-more-positive- interactions-and-community- evaluations/.
Central Asia Barometer, “Social Indicators and Domestic Violence Reporting,” accessed October 10, 2024, https://ca- barometer.org/assets/files/froala/20 7fb9867dee0c7a6e8f0968e4cd2acd 4a16895d.pdf.
UNODC, “Training Curriculum on Effective Police Responses to Violence Against Women,” accessed October 10, 2024,
https://www.unodc.org/pdf/criminal
_justice/Training_Curriculum_on_E ffective_Police_Responses_to_Viol ence_against_Women.pdf.
DCAF, “Gender and Security Sector Toolkit,” accessed October 10, 2024,
https://www.dcaf.ch/sites/default/fil es/publications/documents/GSToolk it_Tool-2%20EN%20FINAL_0.pdf.
United Nations Kyrgyzstan. 2022. “UN Calls on Kyrgyzstan to Intensify Curbing Violence against Women and Girls.” United Nations. https://kyrgyzstan.un.org/en/189361
-un-calls-kyrgyzstan-intensify-
curbing-violence-against-women- and-girls.
Human Rights Watch. 2022. “Kyrgyzstan: Submission to the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child.” Human Rights Watch. https://www.hrw.org/news/2022/12/ 12/kyrgyzstan-submission-un- committee-rights-child.
Kessler, R. C., et al. 1995. “Lifetime and 12-Month Prevalence of DSM-III-R Psychiatric Disorders in the United States: Results from the National Comorbidity Survey.” Archives of General Psychiatry 51
(1): 8–19.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1077801223 1186814.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 2023. “UNODC and Association of Women Judges Introduce Innovative Training Techniques to Promote Victim- Oriented and Trauma-Informed Investigation and Prosecution of Human Trafficking in the Kyrgyz Republic.” UNODC. https://www.unodc.org/roca/en/new s/unodc-and-association-of-women- judges-introduce-innovative- training-techniques-to-promote- victim-oriented-and-trauma- informed-investigation-and- prosecution-of-human-trafficking- in-the-kyrgyz-republic.html.
Amnesty International. 2023. “Europe and Central Asia 2022 Report.” Amnesty International. https://www.amnesty.org/en/locatio n/europe-and-central-asia/report- europe-and-central-asia/.
March, Andrew, and Emily Bazelon. 2021.“Incarceration and Development in Central Asia.” In Central Asia: Between Tradition and Modernity, edited by Laurent Couillard and Marissa Zajac, 13: 219–239. Cham: Springer. https://link.springer.com/chapter/10. 1007/978-3-031-16659-4_13.
Peace Insight. 2022. “Bir Duino Kyrgyzstan (BDK).” Peace Insight. https://www.peaceinsight.org/en/or ganisations/bir-duino-kyrgystan- bdk/?location=kyrgyzstan&theme.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 2022. “UNODC: Strengthening Police Responses to Gender-Based Violence in Mexico Proven to Have Strong Positive Impact.” UNODC. https://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/dr ug-trafficking/crimjust/news/unodc- strengthening-of-police-responses- to-gender-based-violence-in- mexico-proven-to-have-strong- positive-impact.html.
Center for Justice. 2023. “Kyrgyzstan Court Violated Domestic Abuse Survivor’s Rights.” Center for Justice. https://cfj.org/news/kyrgyzstan- court-violated-domestic-abuse- survivors-rights/.
Kessler, Ronald C., et al. 2023. “An Overview of the Epidemiology
of Depression.” PMC. https://doi.org/10.1080/02634937.2 022.2147146.
Gundacker, Christian. 2020. “How Can We Bridge the Gap between Academia and Clinical Practice?” Family Medicine 52 (3):
215–223.
https://journals.stfm.org/media/443 0/gundacker-2020-0619.pdf.
Mourtgos, Scott M., Ian T. Adams, and Sharon H. Mastracci. “Improving Victim Engagement and Officer Response in Rape Investigations: A Longitudinal Assessment of a Brief Training.” Journal of Criminal Justice 74 (May–June 2021): 101818.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcrimjus.20 21.101818.
Barkley, Leah. 2021. “Domestic Violence in Central Asia: Comparative Case Studies.” Journal of Comparative Social Studies 70 (4): 623–638.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcrimjus.20 21.101818.
United Nations. 2020. “Community Engagement Guidelines on Peacebuilding and Sustaining Peace.” United Nations. https://www.un.org/peacebuilding/s ites/www.un.org.peacebuilding/files
/documents/un_community- engagement_guidelines.august_202 0.pdf.
Spotlight Initiative. 2023. Spotlight Global Annual Report 2022. June 2023.
https://www.spotlightinitiative.org/s ites/default/files/publication/2023- 06/2022%20SPOTLIGHT%20GLO BAL%20ANNUAL%20REPORT.p
df.
Violence Against Women Act Measuring Effectiveness Initiative. 2024. Coordinated Judicial Outcomes: Conceptual Framework. February 2024. https://www.vawamei.org/wp- content/uploads/2024/02/CJO_Conc eptual-Framework_080222.pdf.


Healthcare Policy
Director: Kaitlyn Z Varriale Assistant Director: Zoë O’Halloran
Analysts: Arjun Anugole, Tanirika Choudhry, and Kimia Shahriyar
Care for Colorectal Cancer: Establishing Self- Service FIT Kiosks to Diminish Racial Inequities
By Arjun Anugole, aa2823@cornell.edu

The rates of colorectal cancer are considerably disproportionate for minority populations compared to their white counterparts. To address this disparity, the federal government should implement a policy establishing self-service testing kiosks as an effective alternative to traditional screenings.

Background
In 2020, the World Health Organization reported that there were approximately 1.9 million new cases of colorectal cancer (CRC) and over 930,000 resulting deaths, making it the second-leading cause of cancer-related mortalities in the world.1 However, for minority populations in the US, this number is significantly greater. African Americans have a 20% higher incidence and a 40% higher mortality rate for CRC compared to other racial groups.2 This inequality can be attributed to structural barriers, including mistrust, maltreatment, and the lack of access to health insurance or a primary care provider.3
Despite its alarming prevalence in the US, CRC is among one of the most preventable cancers through proper screenings and early detection.4 The most common screening modality is a colonoscopy; however, these methods tend to be invasive and lower quality for minority individuals.5,6 Mistreatment and biases inflicted on by physicians contribute to inferior screenings coupled with discomfort, lack of social support, cultural norms, and socioeconomic factors that notably enhance the reluctance of minorities to participate in CRC screenings.5 The negative perceptions and lack of education on CRC screenings
form a glaring racial disparity that needs to be addressed by establishing comfortability and different screening methods.
The advent of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act in 2010 served to increase CRC screening rates, yet Hispanic, African American, and Native populations remain disproportionately underserved.7 With minimal movement aimed at improving overall CRC screening rates, there has been even less implemented legislation for minority groups.8 To improve CRC- related outcomes among minority populations, different screening approaches need to be put in place to overcome the systemic obstacles minorities face.

Policy Idea
To address the disparities in CRC treatment, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Colorectal Cancer Control Program (CRCCP) should implement a policy to enhance CRC screenings by administering self-service kiosks that distribute at-home stool-based Fecal Immunochemical Test (FIT) kits to residents in the recommended age range of 45 to
75.9 These kiosks should be placed in high-traffic, non-clinical settings to optimize accessibility for minority populations. The FIT kits should be culturally tailored
towards those minority groups, containing instructions and educational materials to address language barriers, discomfort, and any negative perceptions towards screenings. Along with these materials, a return envelope should be provided to mail the FIT kit to its respective testing site with a follow- up process for individuals that test positive to receive a colonoscopy.
In accordance with these kiosks, community outreach groups will be constructed to advise how to improve distribution and other aspects of the screening process.
Policy Analysis
A policy implementing self- service kiosks that distribute FIT kits would require commitments from the CRCCP, community outreach groups, and participants. Placing automated kiosks in high- traffic areas would be practical and can be modeled on the administration of prior self-service COVID-19 and Influenza testing kiosks.10,11 This innovative approach to CRC screening increases convenience for residents and does not require access to health insurance or a primary care provider. Automated kiosks can be applied to various public health initiatives, such as screenings for HIV, to provide more equitable access to minority populations.12
At-home stool-based tests serve as viable substitutes to conventional screening methods in both their efficacy and distribution. The FIT kit is a unique method of screening that tests for occult blood in the stool with an overall 95% accuracy.13 Pilot trials conducted by the National Cancer Institute have shown improved completion of CRC screenings by distributing FIT kits through a mailing process, finding higher and quicker response rates with FIT kit outreach compared to colonoscopy distribution.14 Other private or state- level initiatives present a pragmatic approach to distributing low-cost testing kits, including FIT implementation guides that demonstrate the feasibility of their use and return.15,16 In addition, the FIT kit is a noninvasive alternative to colonoscopies that is currently underutilized among all populations.17
The community outreach program associated with the screenings will help ensure that the distribution methods are culturally competent, inclusive, and accessible to minority populations. A study that implemented a culturally tailored navigator intervention program found increased screening rates led by multilingual navigators that educated patients on CRC, addressed barriers to screening, translated information, and organized appointments.18 Using a hands-on approach to understand the perceptions and accommodate for the individual circumstances of participating community residents can enhance overall screening outcomes.19

Highlights
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second-leading cause of
cancer-related deaths; however, the rates of diagnoses and mortalities are substantially amplified for minority populations.1,2
CRC is one of the most preventable cancers through adequate early screenings.4 However, typical screening methods, such as colonoscopies, are invasive and lower quality for minority individuals and lead to reduced screening participation among these groups.5,6
To address disparities in CRC treatment, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Colorectal Cancer Control Program (CRCCP) should administer self-service kiosks in high- traffic areas for minority populations that distribute culturally tailored Fecal Immunochemical Test (FIT) kits.
Establishing self-service kiosks that distribute FIT kits should be feasible and convenient based on prior implementation of screening kiosks for other diseases and the employment of past FIT kit initiatives; the introduction of community outreach programs should help ensure accessibility for minority populations.10,14,15,16,18,19
Implementation
Congress should enact the CRCCP’s proposed policy for self- service kiosks. With the CRCCP’s mobilized support from Congress and current funding to “20 states, 8 universities, 2 tribal organizations, and 5 other organizations,” the
CRCCP already serves a substantial portion of the general public and diversifies its support coalition.20 Furthermore, its partnerships with various healthcare organizations allow the CRCCP to improve CRC screening strategies and promote the federal administration of self- service kiosks.20 These pre-existing support networks can be pivotal in promoting the policy through federal avenues. The policy can receive added assistance from the American Cancer Society National Colorectal Cancer Roundtable, an organization that supports policy action in key issues surrounding CRC by increasing public awareness and sharing implementation strategies from healthcare organizations.21 Additionally, congressional support for federal screening services, such as the House Ways and Means Committee’s unanimous passage of multi-cancer early detection bill
H.R. 2407 that continues to gain momentum to potentially be passed in Congress, demonstrates such policies’ viability.22
To ensure proper allocation of the self-service kiosks, the CRCCP should conduct pilot trials to determine which high-traffic areas are optimal and convenient for their target populations; the CRCCP can further place machines in prior kiosks’ locations, such as “food banks, transit stations, churches, schools, and libraries.”23 In addition, these pilot programs should develop culturally competent FIT kits that minimize language barriers, are comprehensible for a wide audience, and provide simple instructions for comfortable screenings. The aforementioned community outreach groups can also play a vital role in highlighting community residents’ perceptions
and potential methods for improving screening outcomes, leading to the program’s overall expansion and refinement.
Healthcare organizations can assist in forming advisory boards by directly hosting meetings in local communities and engaging minority residents, ensuring that their input is applied to the screenings and will benefit those specific areas.
There are several other practical considerations for the program’s operation. If modeled off of prior testing kiosks, the maintenance of automated CRC screening kiosks should be minimal given the high proportion of FIT kits in each machine and few costs associated with the actual tests.23 In addition, the kiosk administration should coordinate with laboratories that already process FIT kits or create new centralized laboratory settings to process incoming stool samples.16 After the kit has been tested, creating a follow-up process that minimizes participants’ potential emotional strain in the case of positive results will be crucial. Therefore, trained community health workers from partnered health organizations should deliver positive FIT results in the manner most preferred by the participant and inform them of accessible colonoscopy options if necessary.16 Overall, proper implementation of this policy through a wide array of constituent support will lead to diminished CRC racial disparities.

Works Cited
“Colorectal cancer.” 2023. World Health Organization (WHO).
https://www.who.int/news- room/fact-sheets/detail/colorectal- cancer.
“Colorectal Cancer Rates Higher in African Americans, Rising in Younger People.” 2020. American Cancer Society. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/lates t-news/colorectal-cancer-rates- higher-in-african-americans-ri
sing-in-younger-people.html.
Shiman, Lauren J., Fatoumata Diallo, Christina I. Nieves, Brandon Brooks, Rachel Dannefer,
Sheena Dorvil, Maria Lejano, and Jennifer Pierre. 2023. “Be honest and gain trust”: a
population health study to understand the factors associated with building trust in local government related to COVID-19 and vaccination in three historically disinvested
neighborhoods in New York City.” Frontiers in Public Health 11:1285152.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2023. 1285152.
Brenner, Hermann, and Chen Chen. 2018. “The Colorectal Cancer Epidemic: Challenges and Opportunities for Primary, Secondary and Tertiary Prevention.” British Journal of Cancer
119:785-792.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41416-018- 0264-x.
Ajufo, Afomachukwu, Aisha O. Adigun, Majed Mohammad, Juliet
C. Dike, Abidemi O. Akinrinmade, Temitayo M. Adebile, Chioma Ezuma-Ebong, Kafayat Bolaji, and Okelue E.
Okobi. 2023. “Factors Affecting the Rate of Colonoscopy Among African Americans Aged Over
45 Years.” Cureus 15(10): e46525. https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.4652 5.
Alagoz, Oguzhan, Folasade P. May, Chyke A. Doubeni, A. M. Fendrick, Vahan Vahdat, Chris
Estes, Travelle Ellis, Paul J. Limburg, and Durado Brooks. 2024. “Impact of racial disparities in follow-up and quality of colonoscopy on colorectal cancer outcomes.” Journal of the National Cancer Institute djae140. https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djae140
.
May, Folasade P., Liu Yang, Edgar Corona, Beth A. Glenn, and Roshan Bastani. 2020. “Disparities in Colorectal Cancer Screening in the United States Before and After
Implementation of the Affordable Care Act.” Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology 18 (8):
1796-1804.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2019.0 9.008.
Kling, Sarah M., Simran Kripalani, Valeda Yong, and Juan Lucas Poggio. 2024. “The Impact of Federally Legislated Colon and Rectal Cancer Screening Programs and Policy in the United States.” Seminars in Colon and Rectal Surgery 35 (3): 101040. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scrs.2024.1 01040.
“Screening for Colorectal Cancer.” 2024. CDC.
https://www.cdc.gov/colorectal- cancer/screening/index.html.
“Testing Kiosks.” n.d. Washington State Department of Health. https://doh.wa.gov/emergencies/cov id-19/testing-covid-19/testing- kiosks.
“DCHD Celebrates the Launch of "Test and Go" Kiosks with Ribbon-Cutting Ceremony -
Health Department.” 2024. Delaware County. https://delcopa.gov/health/news/dch dtestandgoceremony.html.
Rothman, Richard E., Megan Gauvey-Kern, Alonzo Woodfield, Stephen Peterson, Boris
Tizenberg, Joseph Kennedy, Devon Bush, et al. 2014. “Streamlining HIV Testing in the
Emergency Department— Leveraging Kiosks to Provide True Universal Screening: A Usability Study.” Telemedicine and e-Health 20 (2): 122-127.
https://doi.org/10.1089/tmj.2013.00 45.
Lee, Jeffrey K., Elizabeth G. Liles, Stephen Bent, Theodore R. Levin, and Douglas A. Corley. 2014. “Accuracy of Fecal Immunochemical Tests for Colorectal Cancer: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” Annals of Internal Medicine 160
(3): 171–81.
https://doi.org/10.7326/M13-1484.
“Fecal Immunochemical Test (FIT) and Colonoscopy Outreach.” 2023. Evidence-Based
Cancer Control Programs (EBCCP).
https://ebccp.cancercontrol.cancer.g ov/programDetails.do?programId=2 6900022.
“Where Can I Get Screened for Colon Cancer?” 2024. Texas Cancer Information. https://www.texascancer.info/prevs crntreat/colonscreen.html.
“Mailed FIT Implementation Guide.” 2023. https://chronicdisease.org/wp- content/uploads/2023/01/60851- Mailed-FIT-Guide-v50.pdf.
Issaka, Rachel B., Nkem O. Akinsoto, Erica Strait, Van Chaudhari, David R. Flum, and John
M. Inadomi. 2020. “Effectiveness of a mailed fecal immunochemical test outreach: a Medicare Advantage pilot study.” Sage Journals 13. https://doi.org/10.1177/1756284820 945388.
“Culturally Tailored Navigator Intervention Program for Colorectal Cancer Screening.”
2024. Evidence-Based Cancer Control Programs (EBCCP). https://ebccp.cancercontrol.cancer.g ov/programDetails.do?programId=1 493683.
Castañeda, Maira A. 2024. “Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Use of Colorectal Cancer
Screening Among Adults With Chronic Medical Conditions: BRFSS 2012–2020.” CDC.
https://www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/202 4/23_0257.htm.
“About Colorectal Cancer Control Program.” 2024. CDC. https://www.cdc.gov/colorectal- cancer-control/about/index.html.
“How We Work - American Cancer Society National Colorectal Cancer Roundtable.” 2024. https://nccrt.org/who-we-are/about- us/how-we-work/.
Congress.gov. "H.R.2407 - 118th Congress (2023-2024): Nancy Gardner Sewell Medicare Multi-Cancer Early Detection Screening Coverage Act." June 27, 2024.
https://www.congress.gov/bill/118t h-congress/house-bill/2407.
“Department of Health Unveils Kiosks That Offer Free COVID-19 and Flu Tests.” 2024.
Washington State Department of Health. https://doh.wa.gov/newsroom/depar tment-health-unveils-kiosks-offer- free-covid-19-and-flu-tests.
Addressing Florida’s Hidden Epidemic in Polypharmacy
By Tanirika Choudhry, tc769@cornell.edu

The Florida Department of Health should implement a Polypharmacy Reduction Initiative (FPRI) to reduce polypharmacy risks in elderly populations through pharmacist-led reviews, and deprescribing protocols. This would improve health outcomes, lower costs, and enhance quality of life statewide.

Background
Polypharmacy, the use of five or more medications simultaneously, is common among older adults managing multiple chronic conditions.1 While comprising only 14% of the United States population, individuals 65 years and older account for over one-third of outpatient prescription medication.2 Polypharmacy is a growing concern with negative health consequences such as increased risk of adverse drug reactions, higher hospitalization rates, healthcare costs, and lower quality of life.3 For example, in conditions like heart failure, certain medications may offer little benefit or cause harm while increasing the risks of cognitive impairment, falls, and drug-disease interactions (instances where a drug prescribed for one condition exacerbates another). 1	Inappropriate use of medications increases the risk of complications and places financial burdens on patients and caregivers. A 2017 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey found that polypharmacy was associated with nearly double the total healthcare costs (198%) and almost triple the pharmacy- related costs (287%) compared to patients without polypharmacy. 4 Adjusted data show patients with polypharmacy incur average annual costs of $19,068, versus $8,815 for others.4 Medicare and Medicaid
shoulder much of this financial strain as polypharmacy increases the risk of medication-related problems (MRPs). An NIH study reported that patients on 11+ medications under Medicare are nearly twice as likely to experience MRPs, with each additional medication raising the risk by 10%.5 However, Medicare’s Medication Therapy Management services demonstrate the potential to reduce costs and adverse outcomes through improved medication adherence.5
Florida's elderly population is the second largest state in the United States, with over 36.9% over
50.6 Yet, no comprehensive statewide programs specifically address polypharmacy management for elderly residents. The lack of a standardized mechanism to deprescribe unnecessary or harmful medications leaves patients vulnerable to the detrimental effects of inappropriate drug use and financial burden.
Policy Idea
To mitigate and prevent the adverse effects of polypharmacy, the Florida Department of Health should implement a Florida Polypharmacy Reduction Initiative (FPRI). This program addresses the risks of polypharmacy, particularly in elderly residents of long-term care facilities across Florida, who
face a heightened risk for harmful drug interactions with multiple prescription medications.2 FPRI will prioritize pharmacist-led medication reviews, where pharmacists conduct quarterly assessments, utilize their expertise in drug interactions, engage patients in discussions about side effects and treatment goals, and with prescribing doctors providing final oversight.
The initiative will use a multi-faceted publicity strategy for effective outreach. It incorporates mandatory Medication Therapy Management services, standardized deprescribing protocols, and statewide public awareness campaigns. Provider-directed financial incentives would encourage deprescribing only when healthcare providers, such as physicians or pharmacists, determine that medications may be unnecessary or harmful. This approach safeguards low-income elderly patients from any pressure to stop beneficial treatments.
Policy Analysis
Mandatory pharmacist-led medication reviews every three months are crucial for identifying and removing unnecessary or harmful medications, particularly for elderly patients in long-term care settings. A UPMC study found that over four years, integrating
pharmacists into primary care teams improves medication management and fosters trust among healthcare providers and patients.7 Pharmacists enhance patient outcomes by identifying and resolving medication therapy problems, including nonadherence, which accounts for up to $289 billion in
U.S. healthcare costs annually.8 This interprofessional approach promotes coordinated care among providers, patients, and caregivers while promoting improved care for elderly patients who can advocate more consistently for their medication treatment plan.9 Mandatory Medication Therapy can include financial incentives for healthcare providers who prescribe unnecessary medications, further promoting safer prescribing and more collaboration between pharmacists and providers.10
Deprescribing is a patient- centered approach tailoring medication regimens to individual needs. Standardized deprescribing guidelines, developed by a task force of geriatricians, pharmacists, and specialists, would offer providers safe pathways for reducing unnecessary medications. A statewide public awareness campaign would inform seniors and caregivers about the risks of polypharmacy and offer resources for advocating medication
reviews. FPRI is comparable to programs established in other states, such as New York. The United Hospital Fund, supported by the Mother Cabrini Health Foundation and TD Bank Charitable Foundation, has collaborated with seven nursing homes in New York City, where participants implemented quality improvement interventions to reduce polypharmacy.11 Their work proved
effective in deprescribing practices and decreasing inappropriate medication use, ultimately improving health outcomes for elders in nursing homes.11 The program has begun the next phase based on the first phase’s success. By expanding these evidence-based practices statewide, the different initiatives outlined in FPRI can mitigate the dangers of polypharmacy and improve healthcare outcomes for Florida’s elderly population.

Highlights
Polypharmacy, defined as the use of five or more medications at once, is common among older adults, who account for over one-third of outpatient prescriptions in the U.S. This practice is linked to increased adverse drug reactions, hospitalizations, and healthcare costs, which ultimately lower the quality of life.1,2,3,4,5
To address these issues, the Florida Department of Health should implement the Florida Polypharmacy Reduction Initiative (FPRI), which includes quarterly pharmacist-led medication reviews, mandatory Medicare Medication Therapy Management, standardized deprescribing protocols, and public awareness campaigns to educate seniors about polypharmacy risks.
Pharmacist intervention in healthcare teams can significantly reduce inappropriate prescribing and adherence to manageable healthcare
treatment. Studies have shown that integrating pharmacists into patient care can reduce prescribing errors by 25% and enhance patient outcomes, demonstrating improvement in efficiency in managing polypharmacy.12

Implementation
The Florida State Department of Health must engage various stakeholders to implement the FPRI, including pharmacists, healthcare providers, geriatricians, long-term care facility administrators, legislators, and patient advocacy groups. In the first six months, the initiative should focus on an awareness campaign across multiple channels—local news outlets, senior centers, and healthcare facilities—to educate the public and healthcare providers on the benefits of polypharmacy reduction and safe deprescribing.
This initiative will involve developing educational materials for seniors and caregivers about the risks of polypharmacy. Throughout the next six months, the FPRI will be a pilot in high-need areas with dense elderly populations, such as Miami-Dade and Palm Beach counties.13 Pharmacists in these regions would begin quarterly medication reviews with prescribed oversight by primary care physicians. Pilot findings will guide further expansion.
This program would initially be funded through state healthcare grants and additional support from Medicare and Medicaid program funds to cover pharmacist-led services. Developing a supplemental grant proposal to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) can further
financial support, specifically for regions with high elderly populations.14 Additionally, reallocating a portion of state healthcare funds can be used to provide reimbursements when incentivizing deprescribing when appropriate.
There are several possible obstacles to implementing the FPRI. One significant obstacle would be opposition from medical professionals, some of whom might be worried about patient safety or the potential loss of income linked to deprescribing. Therefore, policy development talks should involve workshops to educate providers on the long-term benefits of polypharmacy reduction, such as improved patient outcomes, fewer adverse drug events, and reduced healthcare costs. Highlighting how deprescribing can lead to better health outcomes for patients and decrease hospitalization rates will be vital in shifting provider perspectives. Furthermore, offering training sessions on safe deprescribing can ensure providers and pharmacists only prioritize hazardous or unnecessary prescriptions. Technical difficulties with Electronic Health Records (EHR) integration present another obstacle because thorough integration can be expensive and complicated.15 Thus, the initiative will begin with a trial phase. If complete EHR integration is not feasible, records will be maintained and shared via a centralized, secure medication-sharing platform.
Furthermore, recognizing that Black, Indigenous, and People of Color communities are frequently disproportionately impacted by polypharmacy issues, the FPRI would work to guarantee that these communities have fair access to
deprescribing resources and assistance, especially in areas where they are more likely to encounter obstacles to healthcare access.16
A decrease in the average number of drugs per patient, fewer adverse drug responses (tracked by hospitalization rates), and reduced healthcare costs, particularly those associated with Medicaid and Medicare, are the specific measures to gauge FPRI’s performance.
Furthermore, patients’ and caregivers’ quarterly questionnaires will evaluate gains in quality of life and satisfaction with the deprescribing process. They will also track cost savings and hospitalization rate reductions yearly to assess the program’s effectiveness. The FPRI will reduce the hazards of polypharmacy, improve life quality, and increase healthcare equality for Florida's senior citizens through this stepwise strategy, focused outreach, and established measurements.
Works Cited
“The Dangers of Polypharmacy and the Case for Deprescribing in Older Adults.” National Institute on Aging, 24 Aug. 2021, https://www.nia.nih.gov/news/dang ers-polypharmacy-and-case- deprescribing-older-adults.
Varghese, Dona, et al. “Polypharmacy.” StatPearls, StatPearls Publishing, 2024. PubMed, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/ NBK532953/.
Halli-Tierney, Anne D., et al. “Polypharmacy: Evaluating Risks and Deprescribing.” American Family Physician, vol. 100, no. 1,
July 2019, pp. 32–38.
https://www.aafp.org/pubs/afp/issue s/2019/0701/p32.html.
Kwak, Min Ji, Mihyun Chang, Simbo Chiadika, David Aguilar, Elenir Avritscher, Ashish Deshmukh, Parag Goyal, Dae Hyun Kim, Rajender Aparasu, and Holly
M. Holmes. “Healthcare Expenditure Associated With Polypharmacy in Older Adults With Cardiovascular Diseases.” The American Journal of Cardiology 169 (April 2022): 156–58.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjcard.20 22.01.012.
Almodóvar, Armando Silva, and Milap C. Nahata. “Associations Between Chronic Disease, Polypharmacy, and Medication- Related Problems Among Medicare Beneficiaries.” Journal of Managed Care & Specialty Pharmacy, vol. 25, no. 5, May 2019, pp. 573–77.
doi.org, https://doi.org/10.18553/jmcp.2019. 25.5.573.
Florida Epidemiological Profile: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Issues. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, November 2016. https://acl.gov/sites/default/files/pro grams/2016- 11/Florida%20Epi%20Profile%20F inal.pdf.
Castelli, Gregory, Jennifer L. Bacci, Sarah Krahe Dombrowski, Maria Osborne, Aaron Difilippo, Patricia M. Klatt, and Melissa Somma McGivney. “Pharmacist- Delivered Comprehensive Medication Management Within Family Medicine Practices: An Evaluation of the SCRIPT Project.” Family Medicine 50, no. 8
(September 6, 2018): 605–12. https://doi.org/10.22454/FamMed.2 018.391124.
Zullig, Leah L, Dan Blalock, Samantha Dougherty, Rochelle Henderson, Carolyn C Ha, Megan Oakes, and Hayden B Bosworth.
“The New Landscape of Medication Adherence Improvement: Where Population Health Science Meets Precision Medicine.” Patient Preference and Adherence Volume 12 (July 1, 2018): 1225–30.
https://doi.org/10.2147/ppa.s165404
.
Jandu, Jagmohan S., Arvindselvan Mohanaselvan, Ranjan Dahal, and Sangita Bista. “Strategies to Reduce Polypharmacy in Older Adults.” StatPearls - NCBI Bookshelf, August 11, 2024. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/book s/NBK574550/.
Rashidian, Arash, Amir- Houshang Omidvari, Yasaman Vali, Heidrun Sturm, and Andrew D Oxman. “Pharmaceutical Policies: Effects of Financial Incentives for Prescribers.” Cochrane Library 2015, no. 8 (August 4, 2015).
https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.c d006731.pub2.
United Hospital Fund. “Polypharmacy in NYC Nursing Homes | United Hospital Fund,”
n.d. https://uhfnyc.org/our- work/initiatives/quality- institute/polypharmacy/.
Cortejoso, Lucia, Ralf Alexander Dietz, Gisela Hofmann, Markus Gosch, and Annette Sattler. “Impact of Pharmacist Interventions in Older Patients: A Prospective Study in a Tertiary Hospital in Germany.” Clinical Interventions in Aging Volume 11 (September 1,
2016): 1343–50.
https://doi.org/10.2147/cia.s109048.
FLHealthCharts. “Aging in Florida Dashboard - Overview,” n.d. https://www.flhealthcharts.gov/Cha rtsDashboards/rdPage.aspx?rdRepor
t=AgingInFlorida.Overview&tabid= Overview&islCounty=69.
CMS. “How to Apply for CMS Grants,” n.d. https://www.cms.gov/about- cms/work-us/grants-cooperative- agreements/how-apply-cms-grants.
Reisman, Miriam. “EHRs: The Challenge of Making Electronic Data Usable and Interoperable.” Pharmacy and Therapeutics 42, no. 9 (September 2017): 572. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/article s/PMC5565131/.
Bazargan, Mohsen, James Smith, Masoud Movassaghi, David Martins, Hamed Yazdanshenas, Seyede Salehe Mortazavi, and Gail Orum. “Polypharmacy among Underserved Older African American Adults.” Journal of Aging Research 2017 (2017): 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/60263 58.
Creating an International Recruitment Program to Increase Clinical Specialist Return to Ireland
By Zoë O’Halloran, zko2@cornell.edu

Specialists often leave Ireland for fellowships abroad, but their emigration is becoming concerningly more long-term. To encourage specialists to return and increase their retention, the National Doctors Training and Planning Unit (NDTP) must coordinate outreach to update them on available consultant positions and healthcare system improvements.

Background
Ireland is in a “paradoxical situation” involving medical students and healthcare workforce composition.1 Its numerus clausus policies allow unlimited international students to enter Irish medical schools, yet conflictingly provide little opportunity for their further clinical training.1 Consequently, the majority of these students leave after graduation.1 This loss, and the failure to retain medical graduates, classified as non-consultant hospital doctors (NCHDs) in later clinical training, contribute to Ireland’s reliance on foreign doctors. Ireland thus produces “relatively more medical graduates” than any other OECD country, yet recruits more “foreign- trained doctors than any other EU country.”1 This reliance contradicts
its commitment to the World Health Organization Global Code of Practice on the International Recruitment of Health Personnel, requiring the pursuit of “a sustainable health workforce.”2
For context, NCHDs emigrate at all training stages, but the loss of NCHDs at later stages creates a striking “brain drain” problem. In Ireland, physicians receive a Certificate of Satisfactory Completion of Specialist Training (CSCST) after specialist training following medical school. CSCSTs,
besides general practitioners, typically complete subsequent fellowship training abroad.4 Traditionally, NCHDs temporarily emigrate to better advance in their career and then return to Ireland to work as consultants.1,4 Despite this historical “temporary emigration” pattern among CSCSTs, some researchers worry that long-term emigration has increased.1
Although physicians are encouraged to gain specialty experience abroad, there are also negative factors driving their departure, including “stressful working conditions” with insufficient time allocated to training and a shortage of both “suitable consultant posts” and “career progression opportunities.”3 In particular, there are insufficient “post-CSCST fellowships available in Ireland”: in 2022, there were only 68 such fellowships but 452 CSCST graduates.4 In 2015, researchers found that doctors working abroad were interested in returning if “working conditions in Ireland” improved substantially.3

Policy Idea
In their Annual Medical Retention Report 2023, the National Doctors Training and Planning unit (NDTP) of the Health Service Executive emphasized that there are “no formal structures to maintain
contact with CSCSTs who leave Ireland” and suggested “targeted recruitment strategies” could encourage their return.4 The NDTP should create an international recruitment program for doctors who received CSCSTs in Ireland. The NDTP helps run the Doctors Integrated Management E-System (DIME) database, which records information about NCHDs working in the Irish public healthcare system and can be used to document when doctors “leave and return.”4 The NDTP should use the NCHD contact information stored in DIME to contact those who receive their CSCSTs in Ireland but are not actively registered with the Irish Medical Council (IMC) when (1) there are recruitment opportunities for consultants and (2) improvements are made in the Irish healthcare system to encourage their return and retention.

Policy Analysis
No similar policies are known to exist in other countries. Ireland has a unique culture of migration among those in their 20s, including doctors.1,4 Most specialties even “encourage trainees to migrate to achieve career progression.”4 Ireland requires culturally conscious policies, such as this recruitment program built
around the migrational culture of CSCSTs.
While the Irish government did not substantially implement previous policy reports proposing solutions to Ireland’s healthcare workforce issues, it is implementing the 2017 National Strategic Framework for Health and Social Care Workforce Planning (NSF).1 As the recruitment policy would fall under the “revising recruitment strategies” objective of “policies to address inflows and outflows” outlined in the NSF’s Health Labour Market Framework, it would align with current workforce planning goals.2
For the 2016-2019 CSCST
recipients, retention rates (measured by the number of recipients working as consultants in Ireland in 2023) were lower in “Radiology, Medicine and Anaesthesiology,” so the recruitment program should prioritize connecting with CSCSTs in these disciplines.4 Additionally, “retention rates of Irish cohorts are on average 12-13% higher than the EU/UK and non-EU cohorts,” so the program should prioritize communication with Irish CSCSTs whose increased retention may result in increased receptivity to outreach.4 Lastly, a 2016 research study found that “the longer a health professional remained abroad, the less likely they were to return to make their careers in Ireland.”3 The recruitment program should increase outreach “during the ‘critical period’ in the early years” following emigration.3
While factors such as career prospects lead Irish-trained physicians abroad, throughout post- graduate training, “the lack of substantive improvements in conditions back in Ireland ...keeps them abroad.”3 The Irish healthcare
system could better increase CSCST return by also using the recruitment program to update CSCSTs as NSF implementation results in developments.

Highlights
Ireland currently has a surplus of medical students yet an inadequate healthcare workforce.1 Ireland’s dependence on foreign- trained doctors is problematically drawing doctors away from low and middle-income countries.1 Despite the historical pattern of CSCSTs emigrating for fellowship training and subsequently returning to Ireland, some researchers worry that their emigration is becoming more common and more permanent.1,4
The NDTP should create an international recruitment program for doctors who received their CSCSTs in Ireland. It should contact those who receive their CSCSTs in Ireland but are not actively registered with the IMC when (1) there are recruitment opportunities for consultants and (2) there are improvements made in the Irish healthcare system to encourage their return.
As the NDTP monitors the DIME database for workforce planning, it should monitor the recruitment campaign's targets and conduct surveys of those who return to determine whether the outreach influenced their decision.

Implementation
The NDTP, which maintains DIME, could implement an international recruitment program. Gaining the support of the NDTP’s Medical Workforce Planning Lead, Dr. Roisin Morris, and of DIME Project Managers, Orla Smith and Aoife Nolan, would be instrumental in creating this program.6 As the NDTP, the IMC, postgraduate medical training bodies, and clinical sites collaborate to collect DIME data, critical officials in these other organizations must also champion this policy for it to be successful.5 DIME’s utility for tracking physicians leaving and returning from Ireland hinges on using each doctor’s IMC number as a “unique identifier” because it does not change as they migrate.4 As such, ensuring the IMC’s support in using this information and physician contact details to organize outreach is critical. In particular, obtaining encouragement from the IMC’s Registration and Continuing Practice Committee could facilitate the fastest possible implementation of the program.7 In addition, one avenue to ensure the aforementioned training bodies’ support could be to contact the Forum of Irish Postgraduate Medical Training Bodies, which could promote the policy to all such bodies together.1 In particular, establishing a connection with the Forum Trainee Subcommittee, which aims to improve the “standards of postgraduate training,” would be beneficial.8 As this subcommittee distributes information to trainees across all bodies, promoting the program through its avenues could increase awareness among trainees and encourage their future engagement with the outreach. Engagement with the aforementioned organizations
will most likely lead to engagement with clinical sites.
The first step of implementing this policy will be engaging with these four critical organizations which collaborate on DIME. Upon their approval, the NDTP should create the outreach program for CSCSTs abroad.
Personnel involved in DIME would assume the extra responsibility of keeping the contact information of CSCSTs abroad up to date and maintaining connections with them. For updates on available consultant positions that CSCSTs may apply to, DIME administrators would coordinate with the Consultants Division of the NDTP, which regulates such job postings.9 At the same time, all four organizations would contribute updates on improvements in workplace conditions.
As the NDTP monitors the DIME database for workforce planning, it should also monitor the recruitment campaign’s targets and conduct surveys of those who return to Ireland to determine whether the outreach influenced their decision. If personnel involved in DIME at the NDTP determine the workload associated with the recruitment program requires more support, they should form a CSCST Recruitment Committee with members across the organizations that contribute to DIME. This committee, led by the NDTP personnel who would initially establish the recruitment program,
would communicate with CSCSTs abroad and conduct the return surveys to determine the program’s effectiveness. The committee would also continue to develop the program as new ideas arise.
With support from the organizations which collaborate to maintain the DIME database, the NDTP can introduce and monitor an outreach program to increase the return and retention rates of physicians who move abroad after obtaining their CSCSTs in Ireland.

Works Cited
OECD. 2019. “The Irish
paradox: Doctor shortages despite high numbers of domestic and foreign medical graduates.” Recent Trends in International Migration of Doctors, Nurses and Medical Students. (pp. 67-87). OECD Publishing, Paris. https://doi.org/10.1787/ef8dbec2- en.
Department of Health, Government of Ireland. 2017. “Working Together for Health: A National Strategic Framework for Health and Social Care Workforce Planning.” (p. 10, 32, 33, 93, 111).
https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/f 303a9-working-together-for-health- a-national-strategic-framework-for- healt/?referrer=https://www.health. gov.ie/wp- content/uploads/2018/04/Working- Together-Report.pdf.
Brugha, Ruairi, Frances Cronin, Nick Clarke, and RCSI Health Workforce Research Group. 2018.
“Retaining Our Doctors Medical Workforce Evidence, 2013-18. Full Report.” Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland. (pp. iii, vii, 12, 28, 40-
42).
https://doi.org/10.25419/rcsi.10776 569.v2.
HSE NDTP. 2024. “Annual
Medical Retention Report 2023.” (p. 2, 6, 8, 22, 24, 25, 28, 33).
https://www.hse.ie/eng/staff/leaders hip-education- development/met/plan/annual- medical-retention-report-2023.pdf.
HSE. n.d. “HSE NDTP - DIME
and NER.” https://www.hse.ie/eng/staff/leaders hip-education- development/met/database/.
HSE NDTP. n.d. “Contact Details, National Doctors Training and Planning.” https://www.hse.ie/eng/staff/leaders hip-education- development/met/contact/.
Medical Council. n.d. “Medical Council Committees.” https://www.medicalcouncil.ie/abou t-us/medical-council- committees/medical-council- committees.html.
The Forum of Irish Postgraduate Medical Training Bodies. n.d. “Committees & Working Groups.” https://www.theforum.ie/committee s-working-groups/.
HSE NDTP. n.d. “Consultants Division.” https://www.hse.ie/eng/staff/leaders hip-education- development/met/consultantapplicat ions/.
Audit for Equity: Enhancing Accountability Across New Jersey’s Harm Reduction Services
By Kimia Shahriyar, ks2462@cornell.edu

Misallocation of Opioid Settlement Fund grants in New Jersey exacerbates disparities in harm reduction access. Abuse of community-distributor portals necessitates the implementation of audits to protect the integrity of harm reduction and ensure equitable allocation of resources to underserved communities.

Background
The State of New Jersey’s Department of Health (DOH) grants agencies across the state harm reduction licenses and funding to enable them to buy and distribute services in their respective communities.1 On February 15, 2024, the DOH’s Division of HIV, Sexually Transmitted Diseases, and Tuberculosis Services (DHSTS) made funds available for harm reduction in NJ as per the Opioid Settlement Fund.2 To mitigate harms related to drug use, executive action supports harm reduction services in areas of unmet needs.3 In 2023 alone, the New Jersey Harm Reduction Coalition (NJHRC) distributed 10,000 doses of naloxone, effectively used in over 140 overdose reversals.7
Qualifying agencies are awarded funding if they can attest to their capabilities to provide the core suite of harm reduction: preventative care supplies, trauma- informed education, and access to drug-checking equipment.1 Providing these services is costly, and the maximum award per 12- month period to qualifying institutions is $350,000.4
Similar to organizations applying to receive funding from the DHSTS, persons looking to become community distributors must apply through forms specific to the needs of the population they
intend to serve.5 Individuals in contact with drug users are encouraged to request anywhere from a few dozen to a hundred kits of various harm reduction supplies like smoking kits, safer injection kits, and naloxone kits.6
The obligation of harm reduction agencies to fulfill requests on behalf of community distributors is a central aim of the expanding harm reduction mailing services.
However, the lack of verification standards and processes makes resources liable to misallocation. Given the lack of current-day regulations on request portals, unassuming mailing service coordinators at harm reduction agencies are prone to abuse. There currently are no preventative measures against the very likely possibility of similarly funded agencies depleting supplies through another agency’s community distributor portal.

Policy Idea
NJ’s DOH should impose distribution audits for all state- registered harm reduction agencies to address the lack of accountability for misallocated funds that drive programs to deplete similarly funded harm reduction agencies for supplies under the guise of a community distributor. Distribution audits would aim to report information about their resource
procurement, distribution, and finances to the NJ DOH. In this manner, the tracking would lead to the reprimanding of agencies procuring resources through other organizations’ community distributor allocations. The internal auditing system will work to impede excessive burden on providing organizations and straighten expectations for those responsible for the abuse. Should organizers who are provided the same funding under the designation of harm reduction agencies by the DOH wish to place requests to other agencies for harm reduction supplies, it should be a disqualification of their grant of
$350,000.

Policy Analysis
The notice of funds availability for New Jersey harm reduction expansion is partially an effort to address the unfortunate reality that over one-third of NJ counties have a harm reduction agency within their jurisdiction.¹ The $350,000 annual grant per agency could be better spent if monitored effectively, addressing the gap between the available funds and the actual delivery of services in underfunded areas.
By creating a clear and enforceable auditing system, the state can increase the reach and impact of its harm reduction
programs. The proposed penalties for non-compliance, including disqualification from grant renewal, would deter potential abuses and incentivize agencies to maintain their commitment to equity and the core suite of harm reduction. This policy shift would foster a culture of greater accountability, ensuring that funds reach their intended recipients, and enhance the overall effectiveness of the Opioid Settlement Fund’s reparative efforts across New Jersey.
Should issues arise during the auditing process, harm reduction agencies should be made ineligible for renewal of funding.
Concurrently, scrutiny of grant allocation and corrupt practices has arisen in the private sector of addiction rehabilitation, for which the State of New Jersey Commission of Investigation emphasizes the need to monitor public investments and ensure public funding in their February 2024 report.8 The case for safeguarding harm reduction agencies granted the Opioid Settlement Fund against abuse is clear: The appropriate use of resources will work to ensure that qualifying harm reduction agencies receive grant renewals and can continue the invaluable services they provide to people who use drugs and their communities.
Ultimately, audits would force the reinstatement of said funding into communities where they are due.
Highlights
The New Jersey Department of Health (DOH) grants harm reduction licenses and funding to agencies to enable them to buy and distribute essential supplies. Organizations can receive
$350,000 annually if they qualify for the designation.1
A lack of verification processes for community distributor requests can lead to potential resource misallocation, which makes meeting demands for supplies, such as naloxone and safer injection kits, difficult.
NJ’s DOH should impose distribution audits for all state-registered harm reduction agencies to prevent community distributor request portals’ abuse by warning against inappropriate retrieval and distribution of supplies other agencies have paid for and protecting harm reduction’s integrity.
Through state monitoring of public investments and appropriate fund usage, audits would ensure affected communities receive support and further grant renewals for qualifying harm reduction agencies.8

Implementation
NJ’s DOH should impose distribution audits for all state- registered harm reduction agencies to enhance accountability and ensure proper allocation of resources. This policy aims to prevent funds’ and supplies’ misallocation, particularly by addressing the misuse of community distributor request portals. The audit policy should be introduced through the New Jersey State Legislature, ideally in collaboration with invested state legislators Assemblyman Conway, Assemblywoman Jaffer, and Assemblywomen Speight quoted
supporting legalization of fentanyl test strips and bolstered naloxone distribution as proposed by Senator Cory Booker.1,9 Stakeholders in this matter include harm reduction agencies, verified community distributors, the DOH, and New Jersey’s greater population.
Implementing distribution audits statewide would require establishing verification standards for community distributor requests. This policy proposes the creation of metrics that directly evaluate the success of audits imposed, such as performance monitoring for distribution. As outlined in the Commission of Investigation, multiple government agencies oversee separate components of the addiction rehabilitation industry and participating operations.8 To tackle this fragmented framework, a unified task force incorporating a diverse board of industry experts and professionals was proposed to effectively identify problems and or complaints.8
The DOH would ideally implement the auditing system before the next grant application or reapplication cycle. Furthermore, in the context of competing budget priorities, legislators might oppose the dedication of additional funds to harm reduction audits. However it should be emphasized that these are to be a mere reallocation of a population of existing resources.
Funding for the anticipated expenses associated with auditing can be obtained through existing harm reduction grant funding as part of the Opioid Settlement Fund. There is confidence in securing adequate funding for this process as it is in the settlement’s tenets to provide a bridge for people using drugs to social support services, which are integral aspects of harm
reduction agencies.1,3 Long-term benefits associated with reallocating funding to the auditing process will outweigh any initial monetary loss.
The DOH can increase satisfaction among agencies and previously underserved clientele through the successful implementation of the policy.
Furthermore, the DOH can then develop access to a statistically observable move towards equitable resources in the form of overdose reversal rates and quantifiable decreases in healthcare costs associated with drug-use-related hospitalizations. Effective implementation of distribution audits will protect the integrity of harm reduction and ensure equitable allocation of resources to underserved communities.
Works Cited
“Funding Opportunities Through Settlement Dollars.” Opioid Settlements, https://www.nj.gov/opioidfunds/fun ding-opportunities/.
“Governor Murphy Announces Allocation of $95 Million from New Jersey’s Opioid Recover and Remediation Fund”. https://nj.gov/governor/news/news/ 562024/approved/20240215a.shtml.
“Harm Reduction Principles.” National Harm Reduction Coalition, https://harmreduction.org/about- us/principles%20-of-harm- reduction/.
Naloxone Leave Behind Program. https://dmhas.dhs.state.nj.us/NDP.
“Next Distro.” NEXT Distro, https://nextdistro.org.
Get Syringes - NJ Harm Reduction Coalition.
https://njharmreduction.org/get- syringes/
Impact Report: Naloxone365 First Year Review. June 2024, https://www.nj.gov/humanservices/ news/publications/NJ%20Human% 20Services%20Impact%20Report% 20-%20Naloxone%20365%20First
%20Year%20Review.pdf
NJ State Commission of Investigation “SCI Report: The Dirty Business Behind Getting Clean.” Accessed November 17, 2024. https://nj.gov/sci/home/sci- report-the-dirty-business-behind- getting-clean/.
Congress.gov “Text-S.2483-
118th Congress (2023-2024): Expanding Nationwide Access to Test Strips Act.” July 25, 2023. https://www.congress.gov/bill/118t h-congress/senate-bill/2484/text.

24/03/2025 Crime in prisons https://www.college.police.uk/app/investigation/crime-prisons Page


Crime in prisons


This page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published
7 July 2015 Updated
30 January 2020
Written by College of Policing Investigation
2 mins read
Protocols and Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) have been developed between the National Police Chiefs Council and relevant other bodies to address criminality in prisons. These include:
 NOMS (2019) The Appropriate Handling of Crimes in Prisons. Protocol between National Offender Management Service, Association of Chief Police Officers and Crown Prosecution Service
 HMPPS (2019) Memorandum of Understanding: An agreement between Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service and the National Police Chiefs’ Council regarding corruption in prisons and probation
Additional advice includes:
 HM Prison and Probation Service (n.d.) Guidance Toolkit – Version 2; Police support to Prisons, and the Crime in Prison process (Restricted access – requires login to College Learn)
 Investigating Deaths in Prisons
 The Interviewing of Suspects who have allegedly Assaulted Prison Officers in Prison Establishments (Public and Private) which are situated in other Force areas
 NOMS (2015) Commencement of Legislation: Possession of Offensive Weapons in Prison  NOMS (2015) Commencement of Section 79: Offence of throwing articles into prisons
Back to Investigation overview

Tags

Investigation


Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes





Policing and Crime Act 2009
2009 CHAPTER 26

An Act to make provision about the police; to make provision about prostitution, sex offenders, sex establishments and certain other premises; to make provision for reducing and dealing with the abuse of alcohol; to make provision about the proceeds of crime; to make provision about extradition; to amend the Aviation Security Act 1982; to make provision about criminal records and to amend the Safeguarding Vulnerable Groups Act 2006 and the Safeguarding Vulnerable Groups (Northern Ireland) Order 2007; to confer, extend or facilitate search, forfeiture and other powers relating to the United Kingdom's borders or elsewhere; to make further provision for combatting crime and disorder; to repeal redundant provisions; and for connected purposes.    [12th November 2009]
BE IT ENACTED by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:—




Part 1

Police reform

Public accountability

Duty of police authorities in relation to public accountability
In section 6(2) of the Police Act 1996 (c. 16) (matters to which police authorities must have regard in discharging their functions) after paragraph (a) insert—
“(aa)	the views of people in the authority's area about policing in that area,”.
In section 54(2A) of that Act (inspection and report powers of inspectors of constabulary) after “with” insert “ the requirement to have regard to the views of people in its area about policing in that area and its compliance with ”.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 1 – Police reform
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Appointment of senior officers

Police Senior Appointments Panel
F1(1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
In section 54 (appointment and functions of inspectors of constabulary) omit subsection (3A) (delegation of Secretary of State's functions relating to approval of appointments, etc).
[F2In Part 2 of Schedule 1A to the Race Relations Act 1976 (c. 74) (persons subject to general statutory duty) insert at the appropriate place—
“The Police Senior Appointments Panel.”]
In Part 6 of Schedule 1 to the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (c. 36) (public authorities) insert at the appropriate place—
“The Police Senior Appointments Panel”.


Regulations about senior officers
In section 50 of the Police Act 1996 (c. 16) (regulations for police forces) after subsection (6) insert—
“(6A) Without prejudice to the powers conferred by this section, regulations under this section may make provision with respect to—
steps to be taken in connection with the appointment of senior officers;
payments to senior officers who cease to hold office before the end of a fixed term appointment.
(6B) In subsection (6A) “senior officer” means—
a member of a police force holding a rank above that of chief superintendent;
the Commissioner of Police for the City of London.”
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	3
Part 1 – Police reform
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Metropolitan police force appointments
The Police Act 1996 is amended as follows.
In section 9F (Assistant Commissioners of Police of the Metropolis) for subsection (2) substitute—
“(2) Any appointment of an Assistant Commissioner shall be made, in accordance with regulations under section 50, by the Metropolitan Police Authority.
(2A) Before appointing an Assistant Commissioner the Metropolitan Police Authority shall—
consult the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, and
obtain the approval of the Secretary of State.”
In section 9FA (Deputy Assistant Commissioners of Police of the Metropolis) for subsection (2) substitute—
“(2) Any appointment of a Deputy Assistant Commissioner shall be made, in accordance with regulations under section 50, by the Metropolitan Police Authority.
(2A) Before appointing a Deputy Assistant Commissioner the Metropolitan Police Authority shall—
consult the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, and
obtain the approval of the Secretary of State.”
In section 9G (Commanders in the metropolitan police force) for subsection (2) substitute—
“(2) Any appointment of a Commander in the metropolitan police force shall be made, in accordance with regulations under section 50, by the Metropolitan Police Authority.
(2A) Before appointing a Commander in the metropolitan police force the Metropolitan Police Authority shall—
consult the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, and
obtain the approval of the Secretary of State.”


Police co-operation

Police collaboration
For section 23 of the Police Act 1996 substitute—
4	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 1 – Police reform
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


“23 Police force collaboration agreements
The chief officers of two or more police forces may make an agreement about the discharge of functions by members of any of their forces.
An agreement may, in particular, provide—
for the joint discharge of functions by members of police forces;
for members of a police force to discharge functions in another force's area;
for members of a police force to be provided to another force.
An agreement may include provision about the discharge of functions by a police authority employee (a “civilian employee”) who is under the direction and control of a chief officer who is a party to the agreement.
An agreement may provide for a member of a police force, or a civilian employee, to be under the direction and control of a chief officer specified in or determined in accordance with the agreement.
A chief officer may make an agreement only if the chief officer thinks that the agreement is in the interests of the efficiency or effectiveness of one or more police forces.
A chief officer may make an agreement only with the approval of the police authority responsible for maintaining the chief officer's force.
In this section a reference to the members of a police force includes a reference to the special constables appointed for the area for which the force is maintained.
An agreement under this section is referred to in this Part as a police force collaboration agreement.

23A Police authority collaboration agreements
Two or more police authorities may make an agreement about the provision of support—
for any of those police authorities;
for any of the police forces maintained by them.
An agreement may, in particular, provide—
for support to be provided jointly by two or more authorities;
for support to be provided for two or more authorities or forces jointly;
for an authority to provide support to another authority or to a force maintained by another authority.
In this section references to the provision of support include, in particular, the provision of—
premises;
equipment;
staff;
services;
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	5
Part 1 – Police reform
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

facilities.
A police authority may make an agreement which includes provision about the discharge of functions by employees who are under the direction and control of a chief officer only with the approval of that chief officer.
A police authority may make an agreement only if it thinks that the agreement is in the interests of the efficiency or effectiveness of one or more police authorities or police forces.
Before making an agreement a police authority must consult the chief officer of the police force maintained by the authority.
An agreement under this section is referred to in this Part as a police authority collaboration agreement.

23B Collaboration agreements: payments
A collaboration agreement may provide for payments between relevant police authorities.
Provision under subsection (1) may, in particular—
specify the authorities by which and to which a payment is to be made or the manner in which those authorities are to be determined;
specify the amount of any payment or the manner in which it is to be determined.
A relevant police authority must make any payments required by provision made under subsection (1).
“Relevant police authority”—
in relation to a police force collaboration agreement, means a police authority maintaining a police force whose chief officer is a party to the agreement, and
in relation to a police authority collaboration agreement, means a police authority which is a party to the agreement.
In this Part “collaboration agreement” means—
a police force collaboration agreement, or
a police authority collaboration agreement.

23C Collaboration agreements: consultation and supplemental
A person must consult the Secretary of State before making a collaboration agreement to which there are 6 or more other parties.
A collaboration agreement must be in writing.
A collaboration agreement may make different provision for different cases or circumstances.
A collaboration agreement may be varied by a subsequent collaboration agreement.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 1 – Police reform
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


A collaboration agreement may be brought to an end by agreement between the parties to it; and section 23(6) or, as the case may be, section 23A(6) applies to an agreement under this subsection.

23D Collaboration agreements: accountability
Where a chief officer makes a police force collaboration agreement, the police authority responsible for maintaining the force shall hold the chief officer to account for the discharge of functions by anyone who—
is acting under the terms of the agreement, and
while so acting, is under the direction and control of the chief officer.
Before approving an agreement as mentioned in section 23(6), a police authority must notify the chief officer of the arrangements that it proposes to make for the discharge of its functions under this section in connection with the agreement.
When deciding what arrangements to make, the police authority shall, in particular, consider making arrangements for those functions to be discharged jointly with another police authority responsible for maintaining a force whose chief officer is a party to the agreement.
The functions conferred on a police authority under this section do not affect any other function of holding a chief officer to account.

23E Collaboration agreements: publication
A person who makes a collaboration agreement must—
publish the agreement, or
publish the fact that the agreement has been made and such other details about it as the person thinks appropriate.
In the case of a police force collaboration agreement, information notified to a chief officer under section 23D(2) must be published by the chief officer with the information under subsection (1).

23F Collaboration agreements: guidance
The Secretary of State may give chief officers or police authorities guidance about collaboration agreements or related matters.
In discharging their functions, chief officers and police authorities must have regard to the guidance.

23G Collaboration agreements: directions
The Secretary of State may give chief officers or police authorities directions about collaboration agreements or related matters.
A direction may be given to—
one or more chief officers;
one or more police authorities.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	7
Part 1 – Police reform
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

A person to whom a direction is given must comply with it.
A direction may, in particular—
require two or more persons to make, or prohibit them from making, a collaboration agreement;
require two or more persons to vary, or prohibit them from varying, a collaboration agreement;
require two or more persons to consider making a collaboration agreement of a specified description;
specify terms to be included, or not to be included, in collaboration agreements.
A direction may relate to—
a particular agreement,
agreements of a particular description, or
agreements in general.
Before giving a direction under this section the Secretary of State must consult the person or persons to whom it is to be given.

23H Collaboration agreements: termination by Secretary of State
The Secretary of State may terminate a collaboration agreement by notice to the parties to the agreement.
A notice under this section may provide for the termination of the agreement with immediate effect or at the end of a specified period.
Before giving a notice under this section the Secretary of State must consult the parties to the agreement.

23I Collaboration agreements: definitions
This section has effect for the purposes of sections 23 to 23H.
“Police force” includes—
the British Transport Police Force, and
the Civil Nuclear Constabulary.
“Chief officer” means—
in relation to the British Transport Police Force, the Chief Constable of the force,
in relation to the Civil Nuclear Constabulary, the chief constable of the Constabulary, and
in relation to any other police force, the chief officer of police of that force.
“Police authority” includes—
the British Transport Police Authority, and
the Civil Nuclear Police Authority.”
8	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 1 – Police reform
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



6	Authorisations to interfere with property etc
Section 93 of the Police Act 1997 (c. 50) (rules for grant of authorisations) is amended as follows.
In subsection (3) after “application made—” insert—
“(za)  if the authorising officer is within subsection (5)(a) to (c)—
by a member of the officer's police force; or
in a case where the chief officer of police of that force (“the authorising force”) has made an agreement under section 23(1) of the Police Act 1996 with the chief officer of police of one or more other police forces, by a member of a collaborative force;”.
In subsection (3)(a), for “subsection (5)(a)” substitute “ subsection (5)(d) ”.
After subsection (3) insert—
“(3A) For the purposes of subsection (3)(za)(ii)—
a police force is a collaborative force if—
its chief officer of police is a party to the agreement mentioned in that provision; and
its members are permitted by the terms of the agreement to make applications for authorisations under this section to the authorising officer of the authorising force; and
a reference to a police force is to the following—
any police force maintained under section 2 of the Police Act 1996 (police forces in England and Wales outside London);
the metropolitan police force; and
the City of London police force.”
In subsection (6)—
in paragraph (a), after “subsection (5)” insert “ to whom an application is made by virtue of subsection (3)(za)(i) ”;
after paragraph (a) insert—
“(aa) in relation to a person within any of those paragraphs to whom an application is made by virtue of subsection (3)(za) (ii), means the area in England and Wales—
for which any collaborative force (within the meaning of subsection (3A)) is maintained; and
which is specified in relation to members of that force in the agreement mentioned in subsection (3) (za)(ii);”; and
in paragraph (b), for “that subsection” substitute “ subsection (5) ”.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	9
Part 1 – Police reform
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



F37	Authorisations for obtaining and disclosing communications data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Authorisations of covert human intelligence sources: conditions
Section 29 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (c. 23) (authorisation of covert human intelligence sources) is amended as follows.
In subsection (2) for paragraph (c) substitute—
“(c)	that arrangements exist for the source's case that satisfy—
the requirements of subsection (4A), in the case of a source of a relevant collaborative unit;
the requirements of subsection (4B), in the case of a source of a relevant Scottish collaborative unit;
the requirements of subsection (5), in the case of any other source;
and that satisfy such other requirements as may be imposed by order made by the Secretary of State.”
After subsection (2) insert—
“(2A) For the purposes of subsection (2)—
a relevant collaborative unit is a unit consisting of two or more police forces whose chief officers of police have made an agreement under section 23(1) of the Police Act 1996 which relates to the discharge by persons holding offices, ranks or positions with any of the forces of functions in connection with the conduct or use of the source; and
a relevant Scottish collaborative unit is a unit consisting of two or more Scottish police forces whose chief constables have made an agreement under section 12(1) of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 which relates to the discharge by persons holding offices, ranks or positions with any of the forces of functions in connection with the conduct or use of the source.”
After subsection (4) insert—
“(4A) For the purposes of this Part there are arrangements for the source's case that satisfy the requirements of this subsection if such arrangements are in force as are necessary for ensuring—
10	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 1 – Police reform
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


that there will at all times be a qualifying person who will have day- to-day responsibility for dealing with the source, and for the source's security and welfare;
that there will at all times be another qualifying person who will have general oversight of the use made of the source;
that there will at all times be a qualifying person who will have responsibility for maintaining a record of the use made of the source;
that the records relating to the source that are maintained by virtue of paragraph (c) will always contain particulars of all such matters (if any) as may be specified for the purposes of this paragraph in regulations made by the Secretary of State; and
that records maintained by virtue of paragraph (c) that disclose the identity of the source will not be available to persons except to the extent that there is a need for access to them to be made available to those persons.
(4B) For the purposes of this Part there are arrangements for the source's case that satisfy the requirements of this subsection if such arrangements are in force as are necessary for ensuring—
that there will at all times be a Scottish qualifying person who will have day-to-day responsibility for dealing with the source, and for the source's security and welfare;
that there will at all times be another Scottish qualifying person who will have general oversight of the use made of the source;
that there will at all times be a Scottish qualifying person who will have responsibility for maintaining a record of the use made of the source;
that the records relating to the source that are maintained by virtue of paragraph (c) will always contain particulars of all such matters (if any) as may be specified for the purposes of this paragraph in regulations made by the Secretary of State; and
that records maintained by virtue of paragraph (c) that disclose the identity of the source will not be available to persons except to the extent that there is a need for access to them to be made available to those persons.”
After subsection (7) insert—
“(7A) For the purposes of subsection (4A) a person is a qualifying person if—
the person holds an office, rank or position with a police force whose chief officer of police is a party to the agreement mentioned in subsection (2A)(a); and
persons holding offices, ranks or positions with that force are permitted by the terms of the agreement to have the responsibility mentioned in paragraph (a) or (c) of subsection (4A) or the general oversight mentioned in paragraph (b) of that subsection (as the case may require).
(7B) For the purposes of subsection (4B), a person is a Scottish qualifying person if—
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	11
Part 1 – Police reform
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

the person holds an office, rank or position with a Scottish police force whose chief constable is a party to the agreement mentioned in subsection (2A)(b); and
persons holding offices, ranks or positions with that force are permitted by the terms of the agreement to have the responsibility mentioned in paragraph (a) or (c) of subsection (4B) or the general oversight mentioned in paragraph (b) of that subsection (as the case may require).”
After subsection (9) insert—
“(10) For the purposes of this section—
references to a police force are to the following—
any police force maintained under section 2 of the Police Act 1996 (police forces in England and Wales outside London);
the metropolitan police force; and
the City of London police force; and
references to a Scottish police force are to a police force maintained under or by virtue of section 1 of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967.”


Authorisations for surveillance etc
Section 33 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (c. 23) (rules for grant of authorisations) is amended as follows.
In subsection (1), at the end insert “ (subject to subsections (1ZB) and (1ZE)) ”.
After subsection (1), insert—
“(1ZA) Subsection (1ZB) applies if the chief officer of police of a police force (“the authorising force”) has made an agreement under section 23(1) of the Police Act 1996 with the chief office of police of one or more other police forces.
(1ZB) A person who is a designated person for the purposes of section 28 or 29 by reference to an office, rank or position with the authorising force may grant an authorisation under that section on an application made by a member of a collaborative force.
(1ZC) For the purposes of subsection (1ZB) a police force is a collaborative force if—
its chief officer of police is a party to the agreement mentioned in subsection (1ZA); and
its members are permitted by the terms of the agreement to make applications for authorisations under section 28 or 29 to a person who is a designated person for the purposes of that section by reference to an office, rank or position with the authorising force.
(1ZD) Subsection (1ZE) applies if the chief constable of a Scottish police force (“the Scottish authorising force”) has made an agreement under section 12(1) of
12	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 1 – Police reform
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 with the chief constable of one or more other Scottish police forces.
(1ZE) A person who is a designated person for the purposes of section 28 or 29 by reference to an office, rank or position with the Scottish authorising force may grant an authorisation under that section on an application made by a member of a collaborative force.
(1ZF) For the purposes of subsection (1ZE) a Scottish police force is a collaborative force if—
its chief constable is a party to the agreement mentioned in subsection (1ZD); and
its members are permitted by the terms of the agreement to make applications for authorisations under section 28 or 29 to a person who is a designated person for the purposes of that section by reference to an office, rank or position with the Scottish authorising force.”
In subsection (3), at the beginning insert “ “Subject to subsections (3ZB) and (3ZE),” ”.
After subsection (3) insert—
“(3ZA) Subsection (3ZB) applies if—
the chief officer of police of a police force (“the surveillance authorising force”) has made an agreement under section 23(1) of the Police Act 1996 with the chief office of police of one or more other police forces; and
an application for an authorisation for the carrying out of intrusive surveillance is made by a member of a collaborative force.
(3ZB) A person who is a senior authorising officer by reference to the surveillance authorising force may—
grant the authorisation;
in a case where the authorisation is for the carrying out of intrusive surveillance in relation to any residential premises, grant the authorisation only in relation to premises in the area which is—
the area of operation of a collaborative force; and
specified in relation to members of that force in the agreement mentioned in subsection (3ZA).
(3ZC) For the purposes of subsections (3ZA) and (3ZB) a police force is a collaborative force if—
its chief officer of police is a party to the agreement mentioned in subsection (3ZA); and
its members are permitted by the terms of the agreement to make applications for authorisations for the carrying out of intrusive surveillance to a person who is a senior authorising officer by reference to the surveillance authorising force.
(3ZD) Subsection (3ZE) applies if—
the chief constable of a Scottish police force (“the Scottish surveillance authorising force”) has made an agreement under section 12(1) of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 with the chief constable of one or more other Scottish police forces; and
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	13
Part 1 – Police reform
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

an application for an authorisation for the carrying out of intrusive surveillance is made by a member of a collaborative force.
(3ZE) A person who is a senior authorising officer by reference to the Scottish surveillance authorising force may—
grant the authorisation;
in a case where the authorisation is for the carrying out of intrusive surveillance in relation to any residential premises, grant the authorisation only in relation to premises in the area which is—
the area of operation of a collaborative force; and
specified in relation to members of that force in the agreement mentioned in subsection (3ZD).
(3ZF) For the purposes of subsections (3ZD) and (3ZE) a Scottish police force is a collaborative force if—
its chief constable is a party to the agreement mentioned in subsection (3ZD); and
its members are permitted by the terms of the agreement to make applications for authorisations for the carrying out of intrusive surveillance to a person who is a senior authorising officer by reference to the Scottish surveillance authorising force.”
After subsection (5) insert—
“(5A) In subsections (1ZA) to (1ZC) and (3ZA) to (3ZC) a reference to a police force is to the following—
any police force maintained under section 2 of the Police Act 1996 (police forces in England and Wales outside London);
the metropolitan police force; and
the City of London police force.
(5B) In subsections (1ZD) to (1ZF) and (3ZD) to (3ZF) a reference to a Scottish police force is to a police force maintained under or by virtue of section 1 of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967.”


Police officers engaged on service outside their force etc
After section 97 of the Police Act 1996 (c. 16) insert—

“97A Power to amend section 97
The Secretary of State may by order amend the definition of “relevant service”
in section 97(1).
An order under this section may make transitional, consequential, incidental and supplemental provision or savings.
14	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 1 – Police reform
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


The provision that may be made under subsection (2) includes provision amending any enactment.
A statutory instrument containing an order under this section shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”
After section 11 of the Police Pensions Act 1976 (c. 35) insert—

“11A Power to amend
The Secretary of State may by order amend section 11 for the purpose of altering the descriptions of service to which subsection (1) applies.
An order under this section may make transitional, consequential, incidental and supplemental provision or savings.
The provision that may be made under subsection (2) includes provision amending any enactment.
An order under this section shall be made by statutory instrument.
A statutory instrument containing an order under this section shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”
In section 63(3) of the Police Act 1996 (consultation of Police Advisory Board for England and Wales)—
after paragraph (c) insert “or
an order under section 97A, or
an order under section 11A of the Police Pensions Act 1976 (power to amend kinds of service),”, and
for “draft of the regulations or rules” substitute “ draft of the regulations, rules or order ”.


Police equipment
Section 53 of the Police Act 1996 (regulations as to standard of equipment) is amended as follows.
In subsection (1A)—
in paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (e) for “all police forces in England and Wales” substitute “ one or more police forces ”, and
in paragraph (d) for “police forces in England and Wales” substitute “ one or more police forces ”.
In subsection (1B) for “generally of the police forces maintained for police areas in England and Wales” substitute “ of one or more police forces ”.
In subsection (2C) before paragraph (a) insert— “(za)	software;”.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	15
Part 2 – Sexual offences and sex establishments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Police procedures and practices
Section 53A of the Police Act 1996 (c. 16) (regulation of procedures and practices) is amended as follows.
In subsection (1) for “all police forces in England and Wales” substitute “ one or more police forces ”.
In subsection (7)(a) after “in order to” insert “—
(i) promote the efficiency and effectiveness of a police force, or (ii)”.


Police facilities and services
In section 57(3) of the Police Act 1996 (regulations requiring police forces to use specified facilities or services) for “all police forces in England and Wales” substitute “ one or more police forces ”.



Part 2

Sexual offences and sex establishments

Prostitution

Paying for sexual services of a prostitute subjected to force etc: England and Wales
After section 53 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (c. 42) insert—

“53A Paying for sexual services of a prostitute subjected to force etc.
A person (A) commits an offence if—
A makes or promises payment for the sexual services of a prostitute (B),
16	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 2 – Sexual offences and sex establishments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


a third person (C) has engaged in exploitative conduct of a kind likely to induce or encourage B to provide the sexual services for which A has made or promised payment, and
C engaged in that conduct for or in the expectation of gain for C or another person (apart from A or B).
The following are irrelevant—
where in the world the sexual services are to be provided and whether those services are provided,
whether A is, or ought to be, aware that C has engaged in exploitative conduct.
C engages in exploitative conduct if—
C uses force, threats (whether or not relating to violence) or any other form of coercion, or
C practises any form of deception.
A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.”


F415	Paying for sexual services of a prostitute subjected to force etc: Northern Ireland
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Amendment to offence of loitering etc for purposes of prostitution
The Street Offences Act 1959 (c. 57) is amended as follows.
In subsection (1) of section 1 (loitering or soliciting for purposes of prostitution)—
for “common prostitute” substitute “ person ”, and
after “female)” insert “ persistently ”.
In subsection (4) of that section after “section” insert “—
conduct is persistent if it takes place on two or more occasions in any period of three months;
any reference to a person loitering or soliciting for the purposes of prostitution is a reference to a person loitering or soliciting for the purposes of offering services as a prostitute;
”.
Omit section 2 (application to court by person cautioned for loitering or soliciting).
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	17
Part 2 – Sexual offences and sex establishments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

In determining for the purposes of section 1 of the Street Offences Act 1959 (c. 57) (as amended by this section) whether a person's conduct is persistent, any conduct that takes place before the commencement of this section is to be disregarded.


Orders requiring attendance at meetings
The Street Offences Act 1959 is amended as follows.
In section 1 (loitering or soliciting for purposes of prostitution) after subsection (2) insert—
“(2A) The court may deal with a person convicted of an offence under this section by making an order requiring the offender to attend three meetings with the person for the time being specified in the order (“the supervisor”) or with such other person as the supervisor may direct.
(2B) The purpose of an order under subsection (2A) is to assist the offender, through attendance at those meetings, to—
address the causes of the conduct constituting the offence, and
find ways to cease engaging in such conduct in the future.
(2C) Where the court is dealing with an offender who is already subject to an order under subsection (2A), the court may not make a further order under that subsection unless it first revokes the existing order.
(2D) If the court makes an order under subsection (2A) it may not impose any other penalty in respect of the offence.”
After section 1 insert—

“1A Orders under section 1(2A): supplementary
This section applies to an order under section 1(2A).
The order may not be made unless a suitable person has agreed to act as supervisor in relation to the offender.
In subsection (2) “suitable person” means a person appearing to the court to have appropriate qualifications or experience for helping the offender to make the best use of the meetings for the purpose mentioned in section 1(2B).
The order must specify—
a date (not more than six months after the date of the order) by which the meetings required by the order must take place;
the local justice area in which the offender resides or will reside while the order is in force.
The supervisor must determine—
the times of the meetings required by the order and their duration, and
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 2 – Sexual offences and sex establishments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


the places at which they are held.
The supervisor must—
make any arrangements that are necessary to enable the meetings required by the order to take place; and
once the order has been complied with, notify the court which made the order of that fact.
The court making the order must provide copies of it to the offender and the supervisor.
Subsection (9) applies where—
the order is made by the Crown Court, or
the order is made by a magistrates' court but specifies a local justice area for which the court making the order does not act.
The court must provide to a magistrates' court acting for the local justice area specified in the order—
a copy of the order, and
any documents and information relating to the case that it considers likely to be of assistance to that court in the exercise of any functions in relation to the order.
The order ceases to be in force (unless revoked earlier under section 1(2C) or under the Schedule to this Act)—
at the end of the day on which the supervisor notifies the court that the order has been complied with, or
at the end of the day specified in the order under subsection (4)(a), whichever first occurs.
The Schedule to this Act (which relates to failure to comply with orders under section 1(2A) and to the revocation or amendment of such orders) has effect.”
(4) At the end of the Act insert the Schedule set out in Schedule 1 to this Act.


Rehabilitation of offenders: orders under section 1(2A) of the Street Offences Act 1959
The Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 (c. 53) is amended as follows.
[F5In section 5 (rehabilitation periods for particular sentences) after subsection (4C) insert—
“(4D) The rehabilitation period applicable to an order under section 1(2A) of the Street Offences Act 1959 shall be six months from the date of conviction for the offence in respect of which the order is made.”]
In section 6 of that Act (the rehabilitation period applicable to a conviction) after subsection (3) insert—
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	19
Part 2 – Sexual offences and sex establishments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

“(3A) Without prejudice to subsection (2), where—
an order is made under section 1(2A) of the Street Offences Act 1959 in respect of a conviction,
after the end of the rehabilitation period applicable to the conviction the offender is dealt with again for the offence for which that order was made, and
the rehabilitation period applicable to the conviction in accordance with subsection (2) (taking into account any sentence imposed when so dealing with the offender) ends later than the rehabilitation period previously applicable to the conviction,
the offender shall be treated for the purposes of this Act as not having become a rehabilitated person in respect of that conviction, and that conviction shall for those purposes be treated as not having become spent, in relation to any period falling before the end of the new rehabilitation period.”


Soliciting: England and Wales
Before section 52 of Sexual Offences Act 2003 (c. 42) (but after the italic heading, which becomes “Prostitution”) insert—

“51A Soliciting
It is an offence for a person in a street or public place to solicit another (B) for the purpose of obtaining B's sexual services as a prostitute.
The reference to a person in a street or public place includes a person in a vehicle in a street or public place.
A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.
In this section “street” has the meaning given by section 1(4) of the Street Offences Act 1959.”


Soliciting: Northern Ireland
For Articles 60 and 61 of the Sexual Offences (Northern Ireland) Order 2008 (S.I. 1769 (N.I. 2)) (kerb-crawling and persistent soliciting) substitute—
20	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 2 – Sexual offences and sex establishments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


“60	Soliciting
It is an offence for a person in a street or public place to solicit another (B) for the purpose of obtaining B's sexual services as a prostitute.
The reference to a person in a street or public place includes a person in a vehicle in a street or public place.
A person guilty of an offence under this Article shall be liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.”


Closure orders: sexual offences

Closure orders
Schedule 2 (which amends the Sexual Offences Act 2003 to make provision about closure orders for premises used for activities related to certain sexual offences) has effect.
(2) For the purposes of sections 136B(3) and (4) and 136D(6) and (7) of the 2003 Act (as inserted by Schedule 2), it does not matter whether the offence or offences were committed before, or on or after, the date on which this section is commenced.


Orders imposed on sex offenders

Time limits
The Sexual Offences Act 2003 (c. 42) is amended as follows.
After section 132 insert—

“132A Disapplication of time limit for complaints
Section 127 of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 (time limits) does not apply to a complaint under any provision of this Part.”
In section 136 (modifications for Northern Ireland) after subsection (4) insert—
“(4A) In section 132A the reference to section 127 of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 is to be read as a reference to Article 78 of the Magistrates' Courts (Northern Ireland) Order 1981.”
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	21
Part 2 – Sexual offences and sex establishments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

The amendments made by this section apply to a complaint made after the commencement of this section even if the matter of complaint arose more than 6 months before the making of the complaint.


Foreign travel orders: grounds
In the following provisions of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 for “under 16”, wherever occurring, substitute “ under 18 ”
section 115(2) (definition of “protecting children generally or any child from serious sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom”), and
section 116(2)(b), (c)(ii) and (iii) and (d) (“qualifying offenders”: offences).
The amendments made by this section apply for the purposes of the making, variation, renewal or discharge of orders after the commencement of this section.


Foreign travel orders: duration
In section 117(1) of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (foreign travel orders: effect) for “6 months” substitute “ 5 years ”.
The amendment made by this section applies in relation to orders made, varied or renewed after the commencement of this section.


Foreign travel orders: surrender of passports
The Sexual Offences Act 2003 is amended as follows.
After section 117 insert—

“117A Foreign travel orders: surrender of passports
This section applies in relation to a foreign travel order which contains a prohibition within section 117(2)(c).
The order must require the defendant to surrender all of the defendant's passports, at a police station specified in the order—
on or before the date when the prohibition takes effect, or
within a period specified in the order.
22	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 2 – Sexual offences and sex establishments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Any passports surrendered must be returned as soon as reasonably practicable after the person ceases to be subject to a foreign travel order containing a prohibition within section 117(2)(c).
Subsection (3) does not apply in relation to—
a passport issued by or on behalf of the authorities of a country outside the United Kingdom if the passport has been returned to those authorities;
a passport issued by or on behalf of an international organisation if the passport has been returned to that organisation.
In this section “passport” means—
a United Kingdom passport within the meaning of the Immigration Act 1971;
a passport issued by or on behalf of the authorities of a country outside the United Kingdom, or by or on behalf of an international organisation;
a document that can be used (in some or all circumstances) instead of a passport.”
In section 122 (breach of foreign travel order) after subsection (1) insert—
“(1A) A person commits an offence if, without reasonable excuse, the person fails to comply with a requirement under section 117A(2).”
The amendment made by subsection (2) applies in relation to orders made, varied or renewed after the commencement of this section.


Indecent photographs of children

Penalty for contravening notice relating to encrypted information
Section 53 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (c. 23) (failure to comply with notice relating to encrypted information) is amended as follows.
In subsection (5A)(a) after “case” insert “ “or a child indecency case” ”.
After subsection (5B) insert—
“(6) In subsection (5A) “a child indecency case” means a case in which the grounds specified in the notice to which the offence relates as the grounds for imposing a disclosure requirement were or included a belief that the imposition of the requirement was necessary for the purpose of preventing or detecting an offence under any of the provisions listed in subsection (7).
(7) Those provisions are—
section 1 of the Protection of Children Act 1978 (showing or taking etc an indecent photograph of a child: England and Wales);
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	23
Part 2 – Sexual offences and sex establishments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

Article 3 of the Protection of Children (Northern Ireland) Order 1978 (S.I. 1978/1047 (N.I. 17)) (corresponding offence for Northern Ireland);
section 52 or 52A of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 (showing or taking etc or possessing an indecent photograph of a child: Scotland);
section 160 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 (possessing an indecent photograph of a child: England and Wales);
Article 15 of the Criminal Justice (Evidence, Etc.) (Northern Ireland) Order 1988 (S.I. 1988/1847 (N.I. 17)) (corresponding offence for Northern Ireland).”
The amendments made by this section apply in relation to cases in which the section 49 notice was given after the commencement of this section.


Sex establishments

Regulation of lap dancing and other sexual entertainment venues etc
Schedule 3 to the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (c. 30) (control of sex establishments) is amended as follows.
In paragraph 2 (meaning of “sex establishment”) after “means a” insert “ sexual entertainment venue, ”.
After paragraph 2 insert—

2A	“Meaning of “sexual entertainment venue”
In this Schedule “sexual entertainment venue” means any premises at which relevant entertainment is provided before a live audience for the financial gain of the organiser or the entertainer.
In this paragraph “relevant entertainment” means—
any live performance; or
any live display of nudity;
which is of such a nature that, ignoring financial gain, it must reasonably be assumed to be provided solely or principally for the purpose of sexually stimulating any member of the audience (whether by verbal or other means).
The following are not sexual entertainment venues for the purposes of this Schedule—
sex cinemas and sex shops;
premises at which the provision of relevant entertainment as mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) is such that, at the time in question and including any relevant entertainment which is being so provided at that time—
24	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 2 – Sexual offences and sex establishments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


there have not been more than eleven occasions on which relevant entertainment has been so provided which fall (wholly or partly) within the period of 12 months ending with that time;
no such occasion has lasted for more than 24 hours; and
no such occasion has begun within the period of one month beginning with the end of any previous occasion on which relevant entertainment has been so provided (whether or not that previous occasion falls within the 12 month period mentioned in sub-paragraph (i));
premises specified or described in an order made by the relevant national authority.
The relevant national authority may by order amend or repeal sub- paragraph (3)(b).
But no order under sub-paragraph (4) may—
increase the number or length of occasions in any period on which sub-paragraph (3)(b) as originally enacted would permit relevant entertainment to be provided; or
provide for shorter intervals between such occasions.
The relevant national authority may by order provide for descriptions of performances, or of displays of nudity, which are not to be treated as relevant entertainment for the purposes of this Schedule.
Any power of the relevant national authority to make an order under this paragraph—
is exercisable by statutory instrument;
may be exercised so as to make different provision for different cases or descriptions of case or for different purposes; and
includes power to make supplementary, incidental, consequential, transitional, transitory or saving provision.
A statutory instrument containing an order under sub-paragraph (4) may not be made by the Secretary of State unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.
A statutory instrument containing an order made under sub-paragraph (3)(c) or (6) by the Secretary of State is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
A statutory instrument containing an order under sub-paragraph (4) may not be made by the Welsh Ministers unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, the National Assembly for Wales.
A statutory instrument containing an order made under sub-paragraph (3)
(c) or (6) by the Welsh Ministers is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of the National Assembly for Wales.
For the purposes of this paragraph relevant entertainment is provided if, and only if, it is provided, or permitted to be provided, by or on behalf of the organiser.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	25
Part 2 – Sexual offences and sex establishments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

For the purposes of this Schedule references to the use of any premises as a sexual entertainment venue are to be read as references to their use by the organiser.
In this paragraph—
“audience” includes an audience of one; “display of nudity” means—
in the case of a woman, exposure of her nipples, pubic area, genitals or anus; and
in the case of a man, exposure of his pubic area, genitals or anus; “the organiser”, in relation to the provision of relevant entertainment at premises, means any person who is responsible for
the organisation or management of—
the relevant entertainment; or
the                     premises; “premises” includes any vessel, vehicle or stall but does not include
any private dwelling to which the public is not admitted;
“relevant national authority” means—
in relation to England, the Secretary of State; and
in relation to Wales, the Welsh Ministers;
and for the purposes of sub-paragraphs (1) and (2) it does not matter whether the financial gain arises directly or indirectly from the performance or display of nudity.”
In paragraph 9(1) (duration of licence) after “paragraph 16” insert “ or 27A below ”.
In paragraph 12(3) (refusal of licences) for paragraph (c) substitute—
“(c)  that the number of sex establishments, or of sex establishments of a particular kind, in the relevant locality at the time the application is determined is equal to or exceeds the number which the authority consider is appropriate for that locality;”.
In paragraph 13 (power to prescribe standard conditions)—
in sub-paragraph (2)(a) after “for” insert “ sexual entertainment venues, ”,
in sub-paragraph (2)(b) after “of” insert “ sexual entertainment venues, ”, and
in sub-paragraph (3) for paragraph (d) (as originally enacted) substitute— “(d)	any change from one kind of sex establishment mentioned
in sub-paragraph (2)(a) above to another kind of sex
establishment so mentioned.”
In paragraph 19 (fees in relation to applications) after “grant,” insert “ variation, ”.
After paragraph 25 (powers of constables and local authority officers) insert—

“25A
A person acting under the authority of a warrant under paragraph 25(4) may
seize and remove anything found on the premises concerned that the person reasonably believes could be forfeited under sub-paragraph (4).
26	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 2 – Sexual offences and sex establishments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


The person who, immediately before the seizure, had custody or control of anything seized under sub-paragraph (1) may request any authorised officer of a local authority who seized it to provide a record of what was seized.
The authorised officer must provide the record within a reasonable time of the request being made.
The court by or before which a person is convicted of an offence under paragraph 20 or 23 of this Schedule may order anything—
produced to the court; and
shown to the satisfaction of the court to relate to the offence; to be forfeited and dealt with in such manner as the court may order.
But the court may not order the forfeiture of anything under sub-paragraph (4) if it (whether alone or taken together with other things being forfeited which appear to the court to have been in the custody or control of the same person) is worth more than the amount of the maximum fine specified in paragraph 22(1).
Sub-paragraph (7) applies if a person claiming to be the owner of, or otherwise interested in, anything that may be forfeited applies to be heard by the court.
The court may not order the forfeiture unless the person has had an opportunity to show why the order should not be made.”
After paragraph 27(10) (appeals) insert—
“(10A) Sub-paragraph (10) does not apply if the grounds for refusing an application for the renewal of a licence are those set out in paragraph 12(3)(c) or (d) of this Schedule.”
After paragraph 27 (appeals) insert—

27A	“Premises which are deemed sexual entertainment venues
This paragraph applies if—
premises are subject to a licence for a sexual entertainment venue; and
their use would be use as such a venue but for the operation of paragraph 2A(3)(b).
This Schedule applies as if—
the premises were a sexual entertainment venue; and
the use or business of the premises was use as, or the business of, such a venue.
But the appropriate authority must cancel the licence if the holder of the licence asks them in writing to do so.
In this paragraph “premises” has the same meaning as in paragraph 2A.”
Schedule 3 (provisions which are transitional on this section) has effect.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	27
Part 3 – Alcohol misuse
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Part 3

Alcohol misuse

Selling alcohol to children
In section 147A(1)(a) of the Licensing Act 2003 (c. 17) (offence of selling alcohol to children on different occasions) for “3 or more different occasions” substitute “ 2 or more different occasions ”.


Confiscating alcohol from young persons
Section 1 of the Confiscation of Alcohol (Young Persons) Act 1997 (c. 33) (confiscation of alcohol from young persons in a public place etc) is amended as follows.
In subsection (1) omit “and to state his name and address”.
After subsection (1) insert—
“(1AA) A constable who imposes a requirement on a person under subsection (1) shall also require the person to state the person's name and address.
(1AB) A constable who imposes a requirement on a person under subsection (1) may, if the constable reasonably suspects that the person is under the age of 16, remove the person to the person's place of residence or a place of safety.”
Subsection (1A) is omitted.
In subsection (3) after “subsection (1)” insert “ or (1AA) ”.
In subsection (4) after “that subsection” insert “ or (1AA) ”.
In subsection (6) omit “and (1A)”.
28	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 3 – Alcohol misuse
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Offence of persistently possessing alcohol in a public place
A person under the age of 18 is guilty of an offence if, without reasonable excuse, the person is in possession of alcohol in any relevant place on 3 or more occasions within a period of 12 consecutive months.
“Relevant place”, in relation to a person, means—
any public place, other than excluded premises, or
any place, other than a public place, to which the person has unlawfully gained access.
A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 2 on the standard scale.
For the purposes of subsection (2) a place is a public place if at the material time the public or any section of the public has access to it, on payment or otherwise, as of right or by virtue of express or implied permission.
In subsection (2) “excluded premises”—
in relation to England and Wales, means—
premises which may by virtue of Part 3 or 5 of the Licensing Act 2003 (c. 17) (premises licence or permitted temporary activity) be used for the supply of alcohol,
premises which may by virtue of Part 4 of that Act (club premises certificate) be used for the supply of alcohol to members or guests,
in relation to Northern Ireland, means—
licensed premises within the meaning of the 1996 Licensing Order,
premises of a club registered under the Registration of Clubs (Northern Ireland) Order 1996 (S.I. 1996/3159 (N.I. 23)),
premises for which an occasional licence (within the meaning of the 1996 Licensing Order) has been granted.
In this section “alcohol”—
in relation to England and Wales, has the same meaning as in the Licensing Act 2003,
in relation to Northern Ireland, has the same meaning as “intoxicating liquor” in the 1996 Licensing Order.
References in this section to the 1996 Licensing Order are to the Licensing (Northern Ireland) Order 1996 (S. I. 1996/3158 (N. I. 22)).

Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	29
Part 4 – Injunctions: gang-related violence and drug-dealing activity
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F631	Directions to individuals who represent a risk of disorder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Mandatory licensing conditions relating to alcohol
Schedule 4 (which makes provision about mandatory licensing conditions relating to alcohol) has effect.


Individual members of licensing authorities to be interested parties
F7(1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F8(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .



Part 4

Injunctions: gang-related violence [F9and drug-dealing activity]

30	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 4 – Injunctions: gang-related violence and drug-dealing activity
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Power to grant injunctions

[F10 34 Injunctions to prevent gang-related violence and drug-dealing activity
A court may grant an injunction under this section against a respondent aged 14 or over if the first and second conditions are met.
The first condition is that the court is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the respondent has engaged in or has encouraged or assisted—
gang-related violence, or
gang-related drug-dealing activity.
The second condition is that the court thinks it is necessary to grant the injunction for either or both of the following purposes—
to prevent the respondent from engaging in, or encouraging or assisting, gang- related violence or gang-related drug-dealing activity;
to protect the respondent from gang-related violence or gang-related drug- dealing activity.
An injunction under this section may (for either or both of those purposes)—
prohibit the respondent from doing anything described in the injunction;
require the respondent to do anything described in the injunction.
For the purposes of this section, something is “gang-related” if it occurs in the course of, or is otherwise related to, the activities of a group that—
consists of at least three people, and
has one or more characteristics that enable its members to be identified by others as a group.
In this section “ violence ” includes a threat of violence.
[F11(7) In this Part “ drug-dealing activity ” means—
the unlawful production, supply, importation or exportation of a controlled drug, or
the unlawful production, supply, importation or exportation of a psychoactive substance.
In subsection (7)—
in paragraph (a), “production”, “supply” and “controlled drug” have the meaning given by section 37(1) of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971;
in paragraph (b), “production”, “supply” and “psychoactive substance” have the meaning given by section 59 of the Psychoactive Substances Act 2016.]]

Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	31
Part 4 – Injunctions: gang-related violence and drug-dealing activity
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Contents of injunctions

Contents of injunctions
This section applies in relation to an injunction under section 34.
The prohibitions included in the injunction may, in particular, have the effect of prohibiting the respondent from—
being in a particular place;
being with particular persons in a particular place;
being in charge of a particular species of animal in a particular place;
wearing particular descriptions of articles of clothing in a particular place;
using the internet to facilitate or encourage violence [F12or drug-dealing activity].
The requirements included in the injunction may, in particular, have the effect of requiring the respondent to—
notify the person who applied for the injunction of the respondent's address and of any change to that address;
be at a particular place between particular times on particular days;
present himself or herself to a particular person at a place where he or she is required to be between particular times on particular days;
participate in particular activities between particular times on particular days.
A requirement of the kind mentioned in subsection (3)(b) may not be such as to require the respondent to be at a particular place for more than 8 hours in any day.
The prohibitions and requirements included in the injunction must, so far as practicable, be such as to avoid—
any conflict with the respondent's religious beliefs, and
any interference with the times, if any, at which the respondent normally works or attends any educational establishment.
Nothing in subsection (2) or (3) affects the generality of section 34(4).
In subsection (2) “place” includes an area.


Contents of injunctions: supplemental
This section applies in relation to an injunction under section 34.
The injunction may not include a prohibition or requirement that has effect after the end of the period of 2 years beginning with the day on which the injunction is granted (“the injunction date”).
32	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 4 – Injunctions: gang-related violence and drug-dealing activity
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


The court may order the applicant and the respondent to attend one or more review hearings on a specified date or dates.
If any prohibition or requirement in the injunction is to have effect after the end of the period of 1 year beginning with the injunction date, the court must order the applicant and the respondent to attend a review hearing on a specified date within the last 4 weeks of the 1 year period (whether or not the court orders them to attend any other review hearings).
[F13(4A) Where—
the respondent is under the age of 18 on the injunction date, and
any prohibition or requirement in the injunction is to have effect after the respondent reaches that age and for at least the period of four weeks beginning with the respondent's 18th birthday,
the court must order the applicant and the respondent to attend a review hearing on a specified date within that period.]
A review hearing is a hearing held for the purpose of considering whether the injunction should be varied or discharged.
The court may attach a power of arrest in relation to—
any prohibition in the injunction, or
any requirement in the injunction, other than one which has the effect of requiring the respondent to participate in particular activities.
If the court attaches a power of arrest, it may specify that the power is to have effect for a shorter period than the prohibition or requirement to which it relates.


Applications

Applications for injunctions under section 34
An application for an injunction under section 34 may be made by—
the chief officer of police for a police area,
the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force, or
a local authority.
In this Part “local authority” means—
in relation to England, a district council, a county council, a London borough council, the Common Council of the City of London or the Council of the Isles of Scilly;
in relation to Wales, a county council or a county borough council.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	33
Part 4 – Injunctions: gang-related violence and drug-dealing activity
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Consultation by applicants for injunctions
Before applying for an injunction under section 37, the applicant must comply with the consultation requirement.
The consultation requirement is that the applicant must consult—
any local authority, and any chief police officer, that the applicant thinks it appropriate to consult, and
[F14(aa) where the respondent is under the age of 18 (and will be under that age when the application is made), the youth offending team established under section 39 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 in whose area it appears to the applicant that the respondent resides, and]
any other body or individual that the applicant thinks it appropriate to consult.
[F15(3) If it appears to the applicant that the respondent resides in the area of two or more youth offending teams, the obligation in subsection (2)(aa) is to consult such of those teams as the applicant thinks appropriate.]


Applications without notice
An application under section 37 may be made without the respondent being given notice.
In this Part, such an application is referred to as an application without notice.
Section 38(1) does not apply in relation to an application without notice.
If an application without notice is made the court must either—
dismiss the application, or
adjourn the proceedings.
If the court acts under subsection (4)(b), the applicant must comply with the consultation requirement before the date of the first full hearing.
In this section “full hearing” means a hearing of which notice has been given to the applicant and respondent in accordance with rules of court.
34	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 4 – Injunctions: gang-related violence and drug-dealing activity
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Interim injunctions

Interim injunctions: adjournment of on notice hearing
This section applies if—
the court adjourns the hearing of an application for an injunction under section 34, and
the respondent was notified of the hearing in accordance with rules of court.
The court may grant an interim injunction if it thinks that it is just and convenient to do so.
An interim injunction under this section may include any provision which the court has power to include in an injunction granted under section 34 (including a power of arrest).


Interim injunctions: adjournment of without notice hearing
This section applies if—
an application without notice is made by virtue of section 39, and
the proceedings are adjourned (otherwise than at a full hearing within the meaning of that section).
The court may grant an interim injunction if it thinks that it is necessary to do so.
An interim injunction under this section may not have the effect of requiring the respondent to participate in particular activities.
Except as provided by subsection (3), an interim injunction under this section may include any provision which the court has power to include in an injunction granted under section 34 (including a power of arrest).


Variation and discharge

Variation or discharge of injunctions
The court may vary or discharge an injunction under this Part if—
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	35
Part 4 – Injunctions: gang-related violence and drug-dealing activity
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

a review hearing is held, or
an application to vary or discharge the injunction is made.
An application to vary or discharge the injunction may be made by—
the person who applied for the injunction;
the respondent.
The power to vary an injunction includes power to—
include an additional prohibition or requirement in the injunction;
extend the period for which a prohibition or requirement in the injunction has effect (subject to section 36(2));
attach a power of arrest or extend the period for which a power of arrest attached to the injunction has effect.
Section 36(4) does not apply where an injunction is varied to include a prohibition or requirement which is to have effect as mentioned in that provision but the variation is made within (or at any time after) the period of 4 weeks mentioned in it.
[F16(4A) Where—
the respondent is under the age of 18 on the injunction date, and
any prohibition or requirement in the injunction is to have effect after the respondent reaches that age and for at least the period of four weeks beginning with the respondent's 18th birthday,
the court must order the applicant and the respondent to attend a review hearing on a specified date within that period.]
Before applying for the variation or discharge of an injunction, a person mentioned in subsection (2)(a) must notify the persons consulted under section 38(1) or 39(5).
[F17(6) If an application to vary or discharge an injunction under this Part is dismissed, no further application to vary or discharge it may be made by any person without the consent of the court.]


Arrest and remand

Arrest without warrant
This section applies if a power of arrest is attached to a provision of an injunction under this Part.
A constable may arrest without warrant a person whom the constable has reasonable cause to suspect to be in breach of the provision.
36	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 4 – Injunctions: gang-related violence and drug-dealing activity
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


If a constable arrests a person under subsection (2), the constable must inform the person who applied for the injunction.
A person arrested under subsection (2) must be brought before a relevant judge within the period of 24 hours beginning with the time of the arrest.
If the matter is not disposed of when the person is brought before the judge, the judge may remand the person.
In calculating when the period of 24 hours mentioned in subsection (4) ends, Christmas Day, Good Friday and any Sunday are to be disregarded.
In this Part “relevant judge”, in relation to an injunction, [F18means a judge of the court that granted the injunction, except that where—
the respondent is aged 18 or over, but
the injunction was granted by a youth court, it means a judge of the county court. ]


Issue of warrant of arrest
This section applies in relation to an injunction under this Part.
If the person who applied for the injunction considers that the respondent is in breach of any of its provisions, the person may apply to a relevant judge for the issue of a warrant for the arrest of the respondent.
A relevant judge may not issue a warrant on an application under subsection (2) unless the judge has reasonable grounds for believing that the respondent is in breach of any provision of the injunction.
If a person is brought before a court by virtue of a warrant under subsection (3), but the matter is not disposed of, the court may remand the person.


Remand for medical examination and report
This section applies in relation to a person who is brought before the relevant judge or the court under section 43 or 44.
If the relevant judge or the court has reason to consider that a medical report will be required, the judge or the court may remand the person under section 43(5) or (as the
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	37
Part 4 – Injunctions: gang-related violence and drug-dealing activity
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

case may be) 44(4) for the purpose of enabling a medical examination to take place and a report to be made.
If the person is remanded in custody for that purpose, the adjournment may not be for more than 3 weeks at a time.
If the person is remanded on bail for that purpose, the adjournment may not be for more than 4 weeks at a time.
If the relevant judge or the court has reason to suspect that the person is suffering from a mental disorder within the meaning of the Mental Health Act 1983, the judge or the court has the same power to make an order under section 35 of that Act (remand for report on accused's medical condition) as the Crown Court has under that section in the case of an accused person (within the meaning of that section).


Further provision about remands
Schedule 5 (which makes further provision about the remand of a person under sections 43(5) and 44(4)) has effect.


[F1946A Breach of injunction: supplementary powers in respect of under-18s
Schedule 5A (which makes provision about the powers of the court in relation to breach of an injunction by a respondent aged under 18) has effect.]


[F20Appeals


46B	Appeals against decisions of youth courts
An appeal lies to the Crown Court against a decision of a youth court made under this Part.
38	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 4 – Injunctions: gang-related violence and drug-dealing activity
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


On an appeal under this section the Crown Court may make—
whatever orders are necessary to give effect to its determination of the appeal;
whatever incidental or consequential orders appear to it to be just.
An order of the Crown Court made on an appeal under this section (other than one directing that an application be re-heard by a youth court) is to be treated for the purposes of section 42 as an order of a youth court.]

Miscellaneous

Guidance
The Secretary of State must issue guidance relating to injunctions under this Part.
The Secretary of State may revise any guidance issued under subsection (1).
Before issuing or revising any guidance under this section the Secretary of State must consult the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales and such other persons as the Secretary of State thinks appropriate.
The Secretary of State must lay any guidance issued or revised under this section before Parliament.
The Secretary of State must publish any guidance issued or revised under this section.
Each of the following must have regard to any guidance published under subsection (5)
—
a chief officer of police for a police area;
the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force;
a local authority.


Supplemental
F21(1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rules of court may provide that an appeal from a decision F22... to which this subsection applies may be made without notice being given to the respondent.
Subsection (2) [F23applies—
to a decision under section 39(4)(a) that an application without notice be dismissed, and
to a decision] to refuse to grant an interim injunction under section 41.
[F24(4) In relation to a respondent attaining the age of 18 after the commencement of proceedings under this Part, rules of court may—
provide for the transfer of the proceedings from a youth court to the High Court or the county court;
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	39
Part 4 – Injunctions: gang-related violence and drug-dealing activity
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

prescribe circumstances in which the proceedings may or must remain in a youth court.]


Interpretation
In this Part—
“application without notice” has the meaning given by section 39(2); “consultation requirement” has the meaning given by section 38(2); [F25“court” (except in Schedule 5A)—
in the case of a respondent aged under 18, means a youth court, and
in any other case, means the High Court or the county court,
but this is subject to any provision in rules of court that is or could be made under section 48(4);]
[F26 “ drug-dealing activity ” has the meaning given by section 34(7); ] [F27 “ judge ”, in relation to a youth court, means a person qualified to sit
as a member of that court; ]
“local authority” has the meaning given by section 37(2); “relevant judge” has the meaning given by section 43(7);
“respondent” means the person in respect of whom an application for an injunction is made or (as the context requires) the person against whom such an injunction is granted;
“review hearing” has the meaning given by section 36(5);
“specify”, in relation to an injunction, means specify in the injunction; “violence” includes violence against property.
Any reference in this Part to an injunction under this Part includes a reference to an interim injunction.

40	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Review of operation of this Part
The Secretary of State must—
review the operation of this Part, and
prepare and publish a report on the outcome of the review.
The report must be published before the end of the period of 3 years beginning with the day on which this Part comes into force.
The Secretary of State must lay the report before Parliament.



Part 5

Proceeds of crime

Confiscation

Recovery of expenses etc
The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29) is amended as follows.
In section 55 (sums received by designated officer in England and Wales) for subsection (7) substitute—
“(7) Subsection (4) does not apply in relation to the remuneration of a receiver if the receiver is a person falling within subsection (8).
The following fall within this subsection—
a constable,
a person employed by a police authority in England and Wales under section 15 of the Police Act 1996 or a member of staff of the City of London police force,
an accredited financial investigator,
a member of staff of the Crown Prosecution Service,
a member of staff of the Serious Fraud Office,
a member of staff of the Revenue and Customs Prosecutions Office,
a member of staff of the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs,
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	41
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

a member of staff of SOCA,
a member of staff of any government department not mentioned above.
It is immaterial for the purposes of subsection (7) whether a person falls within subsection (8) by virtue of a permanent or temporary appointment or a secondment from elsewhere.
The reference in subsection (8) to an accredited financial investigator is a reference to an accredited financial investigator who falls within a description specified in an order made for the purposes of that subsection by the Secretary of State under section 453.”
In section 203 (sums received by chief clerk in Northern Ireland) for subsection (7) substitute—
“(7) Subsection (4) does not apply in relation to the remuneration of a receiver if the receiver is a person falling within subsection (8).
The following fall within this subsection—
a constable,
a member of staff of the Northern Ireland Policing Board,
an accredited financial investigator,
a member of staff of the Public Prosecution Service for Northern Ireland,
a member of staff of the Serious Fraud Office,
a member of staff of a Northern Ireland department,
a member of staff of the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs,
a member of staff of SOCA.
It is immaterial for the purposes of subsection (7) whether a person falls within subsection (8) by virtue of a permanent or temporary appointment or a secondment from elsewhere.
The reference in subsection (8) to an accredited financial investigator is a reference to an accredited financial investigator who falls within a description specified in an order made for the purposes of that subsection by the Secretary of State under section 453.”


Power to retain seized property: England and Wales
The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29) is amended as follows.
After section 41 insert—
42	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


“41A Restraint orders: power to retain seized property etc.
A restraint order may include provision authorising the detention of any property to which it applies if the property—
is seized by an appropriate officer under a relevant seizure power, or
is produced to an appropriate officer in compliance with a production order under section 345.
Provision under subsection (1) may, in particular—
relate to specified property, to property of a specified description or to all property to which the restraint order applies;
relate to property that has already been seized or produced or to property that may be seized or produced in future.
“Appropriate officer” means—
an accredited financial investigator;
a constable;
an officer of Revenue and Customs;
a member of staff of SOCA;
a member of staff of the relevant director (within the meaning of section 352(5A)).
“Relevant seizure power” means a power to seize property which is conferred by or by virtue of—
section 47C,
section 352, or
Part 2 or 3 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (including as applied by order under section 114(2) of that Act).
The Secretary of State may by order amend the definition of “relevant seizure power”.”
After section 44 insert—

“44A Detention of property pending appeal
This section applies where—
a restraint order includes provision under section 41A authorising the detention of property, and
the restraint order is discharged under section 42(5) or 43(3)(b).
This section also applies where—
a restraint order includes provision under section 41A authorising the detention of property, and
the restraint order is varied under section 42(5) or 43(3)(b) so as to omit any such provision.
The property may be detained until there is no further possibility of an appeal against—
the decision to discharge or vary the restraint order, or
any decision made on an appeal against that decision.”
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	43
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Power to retain seized property: Scotland
The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29) is amended as follows.
After section 120 insert—

“120A Restraint orders: power to retain seized property etc.
A restraint order may include provision authorising the detention of any property to which it applies if the property—
is seized by an appropriate officer under a relevant seizure power, or
is produced to an appropriate officer in compliance with a production order under section 380.
Provision under subsection (1) may, in particular—
relate to specified property, to property of a specified description or to all property to which the restraint order applies;
relate to property that has already been seized or produced or to property that may be seized or produced in future.
“Appropriate officer” means—
a constable;
an officer of Revenue and Customs;
a member of staff of SOCA.
“Relevant seizure power” means a power to seize property conferred by or by virtue of—
section 127C or 387,
a warrant granted under any other enactment or any rule of law, or
any other enactment, or any rule of law, under which the authority of a warrant is not required.”
After section 122 insert—

“122A Detention of property pending appeal
This section applies where—
a restraint order includes provision under section 120A authorising the detention of property, and
the restraint order is recalled under section 121(7).
This section also applies where—
a restraint order includes provision under section 120A authorising the detention of property, and
the restraint order is varied under section 121(7) so as to omit any such provision.
44	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


The property may be detained until there is no further possibility of an appeal against (or review of)—
the decision to recall or vary the restraint order, or
any decision made on an appeal against (or review of) that decision.”


Power to retain seized property: Northern Ireland
The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29) is amended as follows.
After section 190 insert—

“190A Restraint orders: power to retain seized property
A restraint order may include provision authorising the detention of any property to which it applies if the property—
is seized by an appropriate officer under a relevant seizure power, or
is produced to an appropriate officer in compliance with a production order under section 345.
Provision under subsection (1) may, in particular—
relate to specified property, to property of a specified description or to all property to which the restraint order applies;
relate to property that has already been seized or produced or to property that may be seized or produced in future.
“Appropriate officer” means—
an accredited financial investigator;
a constable;
an officer of Revenue and Customs;
a member of staff of SOCA;
a member of staff of the relevant director (within the meaning of section 352(5A)).
“Relevant seizure power” means a power to seize property conferred by or by virtue of—
section 195C,
section 352, or
Part 3 or 4 of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (including as applied by order under Article 85(1) of that Order).
The Secretary of State may by order amend the definition of “relevant seizure power”.”
After section 193 insert—
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	45
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

“193A Detention of property pending appeal
This section applies where—
a restraint order includes provision under section 190A authorising the detention of property, and
the restraint order is discharged under section 191(5) or 192(3)(b).
This section also applies where—
a restraint order includes provision under section 190A authorising the detention of property, and
the restraint order is varied under section 191(5) or 192(3)(b) so as to omit any such provision.
The property may be detained until there is no further possibility of an appeal against—
the decision to discharge or vary the restraint order, or
any decision made on an appeal against that decision.”


Search and seizure of property: England and Wales
The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29) is amended as follows.
After section 47 insert—

“Search and seizure powers

47A Sections 47B to 47S: meaning of “appropriate officer”
In sections 47B to 47S “appropriate officer” means—
an officer of Revenue and Customs,
a constable, or
an accredited financial investigator.
In subsection (1)(c) the reference to an accredited financial investigator is a reference to an accredited financial investigator who falls within a description specified in an order made for the purposes of that provision by the Secretary of State under section 453.

47B Conditions for exercise of powers
An appropriate officer may exercise the power conferred by section 47C if satisfied that any of the following conditions is met.
The first condition is that—
a criminal investigation has been started in England and Wales with regard to an indictable offence,
46	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


a person has been arrested for the offence,
proceedings for the offence have not yet been started against the person in England and Wales,
there is reasonable cause to believe that the person has benefited from conduct constituting the offence, and
a restraint order is not in force in respect of any realisable property.
The second condition is that—
a criminal investigation has been started in England and Wales with regard to an indictable offence,
a person has been arrested for the offence,
proceedings for the offence have not yet been started against the person in England and Wales, and
a restraint order is in force in respect of any realisable property.
The third condition is that—
proceedings for an indictable offence have been started in England and Wales and have not been concluded,
there is reasonable cause to believe that the defendant has benefited from conduct constituting the offence, and
a restraint order is not in force in respect of any realisable property.
The fourth condition is that—
proceedings for an indictable offence have been started in England and Wales and have not been concluded, and
a restraint order is in force in respect of any realisable property.
The fifth condition is that—
an application by the prosecutor has been made under section 19, 20, 27 or 28 and not concluded, or the officer believes that such an application is to be made, and
there is reasonable cause to believe that the defendant has benefited from criminal conduct.
The sixth condition is that—
an application by the prosecutor has been made under section 21 and not concluded, or the officer believes that such an application is to be made, and
there is reasonable cause to believe that the court will decide under that section that the amount found under the new calculation of the defendant's benefit exceeds the relevant amount (as defined in that section).
The seventh condition is that—
an application by the prosecutor has been made under section 22 and not concluded, or the officer believes that such an application is to be made, and
there is reasonable cause to believe that the court will decide under that section that the amount found under the new calculation of the available amount exceeds the relevant amount (as defined in that section).
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	47
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

The third or fourth condition is not met if the officer believes that—
there has been undue delay in continuing the proceedings, or
the prosecutor does not intend to proceed.
If an application mentioned in the fifth, sixth or seventh condition has been made the condition is not met if the officer believes that—
there has been undue delay in continuing the application, or
the prosecutor does not intend to proceed.
In relation to the first or second condition references in sections 47C to 47S to the defendant are to the person mentioned in that condition.
In relation to the first or second condition section 77(9) has effect as if proceedings for the offence had been started against the defendant when the investigation was started.

47C Power to seize property
On being satisfied as mentioned in section 47B(1) an appropriate officer may seize any realisable property if the officer has reasonable grounds for suspecting that—
the property may otherwise be made unavailable for satisfying any confiscation order that has been or may be made against the defendant, or
the value of the property may otherwise be diminished as a result of conduct by the defendant or any other person.
But the officer may not seize—
cash, or
exempt property.
“Cash” has the same meaning as in section 289.
“Exempt property” means—
such tools, books, vehicles and other items of equipment as are necessary to the defendant for use personally in the defendant's employment, business or vocation;
such clothing, bedding, furniture, household equipment, provisions or other things as are necessary for satisfying the basic domestic needs of the defendant and the defendant's family.
In relation to realisable property which is free property held by the recipient of a tainted gift, references in subsection (4) to the defendant are to be read as references to the recipient of that gift.
Section 47B(11) is subject to this subsection.
The power conferred by this section—
may be exercised only with the appropriate approval under section 47G unless, in the circumstances, it is not practicable to obtain that approval before exercising the power, and
is exercisable by an officer of Revenue and Customs only if the officer has reasonable grounds for suspecting that conduct constituting the
48	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


relevant offence relates to an assigned matter (within the meaning of the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979).
“Relevant offence” means—
in a case where the officer is satisfied that the first, second, third or fourth condition in section 47B is met, the offence mentioned in that condition,
in a case where the officer is satisfied that any of the other conditions in section 47B is met, the offence (or any of the offences) concerned.

47D Search power: premises
If an appropriate officer is lawfully on any premises the officer may search the premises for the purpose of finding any property which—
the officer has reasonable grounds for suspecting may be found there, and
if found there, the officer intends to seize under section 47C.
The power conferred by this section may be exercised only with the appropriate approval under section 47G unless, in the circumstances, it is not practicable to obtain that approval before exercising the power.
“Premises” has the meaning given by section 23 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984.

47E Search power: people
An appropriate officer may exercise the following powers if the officer has reasonable grounds for suspecting that a person is carrying property that may be seized under section 47C.
The officer may, so far as the officer thinks it necessary or expedient for the purpose of seizing the property under that section, require the person—
to permit a search of any article with the person,
to permit a search of the person.
An officer exercising a power under subsection (2) may detain the person for so long as is necessary for its exercise.
A power conferred by this section may be exercised only with the appropriate approval under section 47G unless, in the circumstances, it is not practicable to obtain that approval before exercising the power.
This section does not require a person to submit to an intimate search or strip search (within the meaning of section 164 of the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979).

47F Search power: vehicles
The powers specified in subsection (4) are exercisable if—
an appropriate officer has reasonable grounds for suspecting that a vehicle contains property that may be seized under section 47C, and
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	49
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

it appears to the officer that the vehicle is under the control of a person who is in or in the vicinity of the vehicle.
The powers are exercisable only if the vehicle is—
in any place to which, at the time of the proposed exercise of the powers, the public or any section of the public has access, on payment or otherwise, as of right or by virtue of express or implied permission, or
in any other place to which at that time people have ready access but which is not a dwelling.
But if the vehicle is in a garden or yard or other land occupied with and used for the purposes of a dwelling, the officer may exercise the powers under subsection (4) only if the officer has reasonable grounds for believing—
that the person does not reside in the dwelling, and
that the vehicle is not in the place in question with the express or implied permission of another who resides in the dwelling.
The officer may, so far as the officer thinks it necessary or expedient for the purpose of seizing the property under section 47C, require the person to—
permit entry to the vehicle,
permit a search of the vehicle.
An officer exercising a power under subsection (4) may detain the vehicle for so long as is necessary for its exercise.
A power conferred by this section may be exercised only with the appropriate approval under section 47G unless, in the circumstances, it is not practicable to obtain that approval before exercising the power.

47G “Appropriate approval”
This section has effect for the purposes of sections 47C, 47D, 47E and 47F.
The appropriate approval, in relation to the exercise of a power by an appropriate officer, means the approval of a justice of the peace or (if that is not practicable in any case) the approval of a senior officer.
A senior officer means—
in relation to the exercise of a power by an officer of Revenue and Customs, an officer of Revenue and Customs of a rank designated by the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs as equivalent to that of a senior police officer,
in relation to the exercise of a power by a constable, a senior police officer,
in relation to the exercise of a power by an accredited financial investigator, an accredited financial investigator who falls within a description specified in an order made for this purpose by the Secretary of State under section 453.
A senior police officer means a police officer of at least the rank of inspector.
50	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


47H Exercise of powers without judicial approval
An appropriate officer must give a written report to the appointed person in any case where—
the officer seizes property under section 47C without the approval of a justice of the peace, and
any of the property seized is not detained for more than 48 hours.
An appropriate officer must also give a written report to the appointed person in any case where—
the officer exercises any of the powers conferred by sections 47D, 47E and 47F without the approval of a justice of the peace, and
no property is seized under section 47C.
A report under this section must give particulars of the circumstances which led the officer to believe that—
the powers were exercisable, and
it was not practicable to obtain the approval of a justice of the peace.
The appointed person means a person appointed for the purposes of this subsection by the Secretary of State.
The appointed person must not be a person employed under or for the purposes of a government department; and the terms and conditions of appointment, including any remuneration or expenses to be paid, are to be determined by the Secretary of State.
The period of 48 hours mentioned in subsection (1)(b) is to be calculated in accordance with subsection (7).
In calculating a period of 48 hours in accordance with this subsection, no account is to be taken of—
any Saturday or Sunday,
Christmas Day,
Good Friday, or
any day that is a bank holiday under the Banking and Financial Dealings Act 1971 in England and Wales.

47I Report by appointed person on exercise of powers
As soon as possible after the end of each financial year, the person appointed under section 47H(4) must prepare a report for that year.
“Financial year” means—
the period beginning with the day on which section 55 of the Policing and Crime Act 2009 comes into force and ending with the next 31 March (which is the first financial year), and
each subsequent period of twelve months beginning with 1 April.
The report must give the appointed person's opinion as to the circumstances and manner in which the powers conferred by sections 47C, 47D, 47E and 47F
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	51
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

are being exercised in cases where the officer who exercised them is required to give a report under section 47H.
The report may make any recommendations the appointed person considers appropriate.
The appointed person must send a copy of the report to the Secretary of State.
The Secretary of State must—
publish any report received under subsection (5), and
lay a copy before Parliament.
Before acting under subsection (6) the Secretary of State must exclude from the report any matter which the Secretary of State thinks is likely to prejudice any criminal investigation or criminal proceedings.
If the Secretary of State excludes any matter from the report the Secretary of State must comply with subsection (6) in relation to the whole of the report as soon as the Secretary of State thinks that the excluded matter is no longer likely to prejudice any criminal investigation or criminal proceedings.

47J Initial detention of seized property
This section applies if an appropriate officer seizes property under section 47C.
The property may be detained initially for a period of 48 hours.
The period of 48 hours is to be calculated in accordance with section 47H(7).

47K Further detention pending making of restraint order
This section applies if—
property is detained under section 47J, and
no restraint order is in force in respect of the property.
If within the period mentioned in section 47J an application is made for a restraint order which includes provision under section 41A authorising detention of the property, the property may be detained until the application is determined or otherwise disposed of.
If such an application is made within that period and the application is refused, the property may be detained until there is no further possibility of an appeal against—
the decision to refuse the application, or
any decision made on an appeal against that decision.
In subsection (2) the reference to the period mentioned in section 47J includes that period as extended by any order under section 47M.

47L Further detention pending variation of restraint order
This section applies if—
property is detained under section 47J,
52	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


a restraint order is in force in respect of the property, and
the order does not include provision under section 41A authorising the detention of the property.
If within the period mentioned in section 47J an application is made for the order to be varied so as to include provision under section 41A authorising detention of the property, the property may be detained until the application is determined or otherwise disposed of.
If such an application is made within that period and the application is refused, the property may be detained until there is no further possibility of an appeal against—
the decision to refuse the application, or
any decision made on an appeal against that decision.

47M Further detention in other cases
This section applies if—
property is detained under section 47J,
no restraint order is in force in respect of the property, and
no application has been made for a restraint order which includes provision under section 41A authorising detention of the property.
A magistrates' court may by order extend the period for which the property or any part of it may be detained under section 47J if satisfied that—
any of the conditions in section 47B is met (reading references in that section to the officer as references to the court),
the property or part is realisable property other than exempt property (within the meaning of section 47C(4)), and
there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that—
the property may otherwise be made unavailable for satisfying any confiscation order that has been or may be made against the defendant, or
the value of the property may otherwise be diminished as a result of conduct by the defendant or any other person.
An application for an order may be made by—
the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs,
a constable,
an accredited financial investigator, or
the prosecutor.
If the property was seized in reliance on the first or second condition in section 47B, “the prosecutor” means a person who is to have conduct of any proceedings for the offence.
An order under this section must provide for notice to be given to persons affected by it.
In this section “part” includes portion.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	53
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

47N Discharge, variation and lapse of detention order
An order under section 47M may be discharged or varied.
An application for variation or discharge of the order may be made by—
a person mentioned in section 47M(3), or
any person affected by the order.
On an application under this section the court must discharge the order if—
the order was made on the ground that the first or second condition in section 47B was met but proceedings for the offence mentioned in that condition have not been started within a reasonable time,
the order was made on the ground that the third or fourth condition in section 47B was met but proceedings for the offence mentioned in that condition have now been concluded,
the order was made on the ground that the fifth, sixth or seventh condition in section 47B was met but the application mentioned in that condition has now been concluded or, as the case may be, has not been made within a reasonable time.
An order made under section 47M lapses if a restraint order is made in respect of the property to which it relates (but provision authorising detention of the property may have been included in the restraint order by virtue of section 41A).

47O Appeals
If on an application for an order under section 47M the magistrates' court decides not to make an order, a person mentioned in subsection (3) of that section may appeal to the Crown Court against the decision.
If an application is made under section 47N in relation to an order the following persons may appeal to the Crown Court in respect of the magistrates' court's decision on the application—
a person mentioned in section 47M(3), or
any person affected by the order.

47P Detention of property pending section 47O appeal
This section applies where—
an application for an order under section 47M is made within the period mentioned in section 47J, and
the application is refused.
This section also applies where—
an order is made under section 47M extending the period for which property may be detained under section 47J, and
the order is discharged or varied so that detention of the property is no longer authorised by virtue of the order.
54	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


The property may be detained until there is no further possibility of an appeal against the decision to refuse the application or discharge or vary the order (as the case may be).

47Q Hearsay evidence in detention order proceedings
Evidence must not be excluded in detention order proceedings on the ground that it is hearsay (of whatever degree).
Sections 2 to 4 of the Civil Evidence Act 1995 apply in relation to detention order proceedings as those sections apply in relation to civil proceedings.
Detention order proceedings are proceedings—
for an order under section 47M;
for the discharge or variation of such an order;
on an appeal under section 47O.
Hearsay is a statement which is made otherwise than by a person while giving oral evidence in the proceedings and which is tendered as evidence of the matters stated.
Nothing in this section affects the admissibility of evidence which is admissible apart from this section.

47R Release of property
This section applies in relation to property which—
has been seized by an appropriate officer under section 47C, and
is detained under or by virtue of any of sections 47J to 47M and 47P.
The property must be released if at any time an appropriate officer decides that the detention condition is no longer met.
The detention condition is met for so long as—
any of the conditions in section 47B is met, and
there are reasonable grounds for the suspicion mentioned in section 47C(1).
Nothing in this section requires property to be released if there is a power to detain it otherwise than under or by virtue of sections 47J to 47M and 47P.
Nothing in this section affects the operation of any power or duty to release property that arises apart from this section.

Code of practice about search and seizure and detention of property

47S Codes of practice
The Secretary of State must make a code of practice in connection with—
the carrying out by appropriate officers of the functions conferred by sections 47C to 47H,
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	55
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

the carrying out by senior officers of their functions under section 47G, and
the detention of property under or by virtue of sections 41A, 44A and 47J to 47P.
Where the Secretary of State proposes to issue a code of practice the Secretary of State must—
publish a draft,
consider any representations made about the draft,
if the Secretary of State thinks appropriate, modify the draft in the light of any such representations.
The Secretary of State must lay a draft of the code before Parliament.
When the Secretary of State has laid a draft of the code before Parliament the Secretary of State may bring it into operation by order.
The Secretary of State may revise the whole or any part of the code and issue the code as revised; and subsections (2) to (4) apply to such a revised code as they apply to the original code.
A failure by a person to comply with a provision of the code does not of itself make the person liable to criminal or civil proceedings.
The code is admissible in evidence in criminal or civil proceedings and is to be taken into account by a court or tribunal in any case in which it appears to the court or tribunal to be relevant.”
Omit section 45 (seizure).
In section 69 (powers of court and receiver)—
in subsection (1) after paragraph (b) insert—
“(c)	the powers conferred on appropriate officers by sections 47C to 47L;
(d)	the powers conferred on senior officers by section 47G.”
at the end of the heading insert “ etc. ”.


The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29) is amended as follows.
After section 127 insert—
56	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


“Search and seizure powers

127A Sections 127B to 127R: meaning of “appropriate officer”
In sections 127B to 127R “appropriate officer” means—
an officer of Revenue and Customs, or
a constable.

127B Conditions for exercise of powers
An appropriate officer may exercise the power conferred by section 127C if satisfied that any of the following conditions is met.
The first condition is that—
a criminal investigation has been started in Scotland with regard to an indictable offence,
a person has been arrested for the offence,
proceedings for the offence have not yet been started against the person in Scotland,
there is reasonable cause to believe that the person has benefited from conduct constituting the offence, and
a restraint order is not in force in respect of any realisable property.
The second condition is that—
a criminal investigation has been started in Scotland with regard to an indictable offence,
a person has been arrested for the offence,
proceedings for the offence have not yet been started against the person in Scotland, and
a restraint order is in force in respect of any realisable property.
The third condition is that—
proceedings for an indictable offence have been started in Scotland and have not been concluded,
there is reasonable cause to believe that the accused has benefited from conduct constituting the offence, and
a restraint order is not in force in respect of any realisable property.
The fourth condition is that—
proceedings for an indictable offence have been started in Scotland and have not been concluded, and
a restraint order is in force in respect of any realisable property.
The fifth condition is that—
an application by the prosecutor has been made under section 104, 105, 111 or 112 and not concluded, or the officer believes that such an application is to be made, and
there is reasonable cause to believe that the accused has benefited from criminal conduct.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	57
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

The sixth condition is that—
an application by the prosecutor has been made under section 106 and not concluded, or the officer believes that such an application is to be made, and
there is reasonable cause to believe that the court will decide under that section that the amount found under the new calculation of the accused's benefit exceeds the relevant amount (as defined in that section).
The seventh condition is that—
an application by the prosecutor has been made under section 107 and not concluded, or the officer believes that such an application is to be made, and
there is reasonable cause to believe that the court will decide under that section that the amount found under the new calculation of the available amount exceeds the relevant amount (as defined in that section).
The third or fourth condition is not met if the officer believes that—
there has been undue delay in continuing the proceedings, or
the prosecutor does not intend to proceed.
If an application mentioned in the fifth, sixth or seventh condition has been made the condition is not met if the officer believes that—
there has been undue delay in continuing the application, or
the prosecutor does not intend to proceed.
In relation to the first or second condition references in sections 127C to 127R to the accused are to the person mentioned in that condition.
In relation to the first or second condition section 144(8) has effect as if proceedings for the offence had been started against the accused when the investigation was started.

127C Power to seize property
On being satisfied as mentioned in section 127B(1) an appropriate officer may seize any realisable property if the officer has reasonable grounds for suspecting that—
the property may otherwise be made unavailable for satisfying any confiscation order that has been or may be made against the accused, or
the value of the property may otherwise be diminished as a result of conduct by the accused or any other person.
But the officer may not seize—
cash, or
exempt property.
“Cash” has the same meaning as in section 289.
“Exempt property” means—
58	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


such tools, books, vehicles and other items of equipment as are necessary to the accused for use personally in the accused's employment, business or vocation;
such clothing, bedding, furniture, household equipment, provisions or other things as are necessary for satisfying the basic domestic needs of the accused and the accused's family.
In relation to realisable property which is free property held by the recipient of a tainted gift, references in subsection (4) to the accused are to be read as references to the recipient of that gift.
Section 127B(11) is subject to this subsection.
The power conferred by this section—
may be exercised only with the appropriate approval under section 127G unless, in the circumstances, it is not practicable to obtain that approval before exercising the power, and
is exercisable by an officer of Revenue and Customs only if the officer has reasonable grounds for suspecting that conduct constituting the relevant offence relates to an assigned matter (within the meaning of the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979).
“Relevant offence” means—
in a case where the officer is satisfied that the first, second, third or fourth condition in section 127B is met, the offence mentioned in that condition,
in a case where the officer is satisfied that any of the other conditions in section 127B is met, the offence (or any of the offences) concerned.

127D Search power: premises
If an appropriate officer is lawfully on any premises the officer may search the premises for the purpose of finding any property which—
the officer has reasonable grounds for suspecting may be found there, and
if found there, the officer intends to seize under section 127C.
The power conferred by this section may be exercised only with the appropriate approval under section 127G unless, in the circumstances, it is not practicable to obtain that approval before exercising the power.
“Premises” has the meaning given by section 23 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984.

127E Search power: people
An appropriate officer may exercise the following powers if the officer has reasonable grounds for suspecting that a person is carrying property that may be seized under section 127C.
The officer may, so far as the officer thinks it necessary or expedient for the purpose of seizing the property under that section, require the person—
to permit a search of any article with the person,
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	59
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

to permit a search of the person.
An officer exercising a power under subsection (2) may detain the person for so long as is necessary for its exercise.
A power conferred by this section may be exercised only with the appropriate approval under section 127G unless, in the circumstances, it is not practicable to obtain that approval before exercising the power.
This section does not require a person to submit to an intimate search or strip search (within the meaning of section 164 of the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979).

127F Search power: vehicles
The powers specified in subsection (4) are exercisable if—
an appropriate officer has reasonable grounds for suspecting that a vehicle contains property that may be seized under section 127C, and
it appears to the officer that the vehicle is under the control of a person who is in or in the vicinity of the vehicle.
The powers are exercisable only if the vehicle is—
in any place to which, at the time of the proposed exercise of the powers, the public or any section of the public has access, on payment or otherwise, as of right or by virtue of express or implied permission, or
in any other place to which at that time people have ready access but which is not a dwelling.
But if the vehicle is in a garden or yard or other land occupied with and used for the purposes of a dwelling, the officer may exercise the powers under subsection (4) only if the officer has reasonable grounds for believing—
that the person does not reside in the dwelling, and
that the vehicle is not in the place in question with the express or implied permission of another who resides in the dwelling.
The officer may, so far as the officer thinks it necessary or expedient for the purpose of seizing the property under section 127C, require the person to—
permit entry to the vehicle,
permit a search of the vehicle.
An officer exercising a power under subsection (4) may detain the vehicle for so long as is necessary for its exercise.
A power conferred by this section may be exercised only with the appropriate approval under section 127G unless, in the circumstances, it is not practicable to obtain that approval before exercising the power.

127G “Appropriate approval”
This section has effect for the purposes of sections 127C, 127D, 127E and 127F.
60	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


The appropriate approval, in relation to the exercise of a power by an appropriate officer, means the approval of the sheriff or (if that is not practicable in any case) the approval of a senior officer.
A senior officer means—
in relation to the exercise of a power by an officer of Revenue and Customs, an officer of Revenue and Customs of a rank designated by the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs as equivalent to that of a senior police officer,
in relation to the exercise of a power by a constable, a senior police officer.
A senior police officer means a police officer of at least the rank of inspector.

127H Exercise of powers without judicial approval
An appropriate officer must give a written report to the appointed person in any case where—
the officer seizes property under section 127C without the approval of the sheriff, and
any of the property seized is not detained for more than 48 hours.
An appropriate officer must also give a written report to the appointed person in any case where—
the officer exercises any of the powers conferred by sections 127D, 127E and 127F without the approval of the sheriff, and
no property is seized under section 127C.
A report under this section must give particulars of the circumstances which led the officer to believe that—
the powers were exercisable, and
it was not practicable to obtain the approval of the sheriff.
The appointed person means a person appointed for the purposes of this subsection by the Scottish Ministers.
The appointed person must not be a person employed under or for the purposes of the Scottish Administration; and the terms and conditions of appointment, including any remuneration or expenses to be paid, are to be determined by the Scottish Ministers.
The period of 48 hours mentioned in subsection (1)(b) is to be calculated in accordance with subsection (7).
In calculating a period of 48 hours in accordance with this subsection, no account is to be taken of—
any Saturday or Sunday,
Christmas Day,
Good Friday,
any day that is a bank holiday under the Banking and Financial Dealings Act 1971 in Scotland, or
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	61
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

any day prescribed under section 8(2) of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 as a court holiday in a sheriff court in the sheriff court district within which the power is exercised.

127I Report by appointed person on exercise of powers
As soon as possible after the end of each financial year, the person appointed under section 127H(4) must prepare a report for that year.
“Financial year” means—
the period beginning with the day on which section 56 of the Policing and Crime Act 2009 comes into force and ending with the next 31 March (which is the first financial year), and
each subsequent period of twelve months beginning with 1 April.
The report must give the appointed person's opinion as to the circumstances and manner in which the powers conferred by sections 127C, 127D, 127E and 127F are being exercised in cases where the officer who exercised them is required to give a report under section 127H.
The report may make any recommendations the appointed person considers appropriate.
The appointed person must send a copy of the report to the Scottish Ministers.
The Scottish Ministers must—
publish any report received under subsection (5), and
lay a copy before the Scottish Parliament.
Before acting under subsection (6) the Scottish Ministers must exclude from the report any matter which the Scottish Ministers think is likely to prejudice any criminal investigation or criminal proceedings.
If the Scottish Ministers exclude any matter from the report they must comply with subsection (6) in relation to the whole of the report as soon as they think that the excluded matter is no longer likely to prejudice any criminal investigation or criminal proceedings.

127J Initial detention of seized property
This section applies if an appropriate officer seizes property under section 127C.
The property may be detained initially for a period of 48 hours.
The period of 48 hours is to be calculated in accordance with section 127H(7).

127K Further detention pending making of restraint order
This section applies if—
property is detained under section 127J, and
no restraint order is in force in respect of the property.
62	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


If within the period mentioned in section 127J an application is made for a restraint order which includes provision under section 120A authorising detention of the property, the property may be detained until the application is determined or otherwise disposed of.
If such an application is made within that period and the application is refused, the property may be detained until there is no further possibility of an appeal against (or review of)—
the decision to refuse the application, or
any decision made on an appeal against (or review of) that decision.
In subsection (2) the reference to the period mentioned in section 127J includes that period as extended by any order under section 127M.

127L Further detention pending variation of restraint order
This section applies if—
property is detained under section 127J,
a restraint order is in force in respect of the property, and
the order does not include provision under section 120A authorising the detention of the property.
If within the period mentioned in section 127J an application is made for the order to be varied so as to include provision under section 120A authorising detention of the property, the property may be detained until the application is determined or otherwise disposed of.
If such an application is made within that period and the application is refused, the property may be detained until there is no further possibility of an appeal against (or review of)—
the decision to refuse the application, or
any decision made on an appeal against (or review of) that decision.

127M Further detention in other cases
This section applies if—
property is detained under section 127J,
no restraint order is in force in respect of the property, and
no application has been made for a restraint order which includes provision under section 120A authorising detention of the property.
The sheriff may by order extend the period for which the property or any part of it may be detained under section 127J if satisfied that—
any of the conditions in section 127B is met (reading references in that section to the officer as references to the sheriff),
the property or part is realisable property other than exempt property (within the meaning of section 127C(4)), and
there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that—
the property may otherwise be made unavailable for satisfying any confiscation order that has been or may be made against the accused, or
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	63
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

the value of the property may otherwise be diminished as a result of conduct by the accused or any other person.
An application for an order may be made by—
the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs,
a constable, or
the prosecutor.
If the property was seized in reliance on the first or second condition in section 127B, “the prosecutor” means a person who is to have conduct of any proceedings for the offence.
An order under this section must provide for notice to be given to persons affected by it.
In this section “part” includes portion.

127N Discharge, variation and lapse of detention order
An order under section 127M may be discharged or varied.
An application for variation or discharge of the order may be made by—
a person mentioned in section 127M(3), or
any person affected by the order.
On an application under this section the sheriff must discharge the order if—
the order was made on the ground that the first or second condition in section 127B was met but proceedings for the offence mentioned in that condition have not been started within a reasonable time,
the order was made on the ground that the third or fourth condition in section 127B was met but proceedings for the offence mentioned in that condition have now been concluded,
the order was made on the ground that the fifth, sixth or seventh condition in section 127B was met but the application mentioned in that condition has now been concluded or, as the case may be, has not been made within a reasonable time.
An order made under section 127M lapses if a restraint order is made in respect of the property to which it relates (but provision authorising detention of the property may have been included in the restraint order by virtue of section 120A).

127O Appeals
If on an application for an order under section 127M the sheriff decides not to make an order, a person mentioned in subsection (3) of that section may appeal to the Court of Session against the decision.
If an application is made under section 127N in relation to an order the following persons may appeal to the Court of Session in respect of the sheriff's decision on the application—
a person mentioned in section 127M(3), or
any person affected by the order.
64	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


An appeal under this section must be made before the end of the period of 21 days starting with the day on which the order was made.
On an appeal under this section the Court of Session may—
make or (as the case may be) discharge the order, or
vary the order.

127P Detention of property pending section 127O appeal
This section applies where—
an application for an order under section 127M is made within the period mentioned in section 127J, and
the application is refused.
This section also applies where—
an order is made under section 127M extending the period for which property may be detained under section 127J, and
the order is discharged or varied so that detention of the property is no longer authorised by virtue of the order.
The property may be detained until there is no further possibility of an appeal against the decision to refuse the application or discharge or vary the order (as the case may be).

127Q Release of property
This section applies in relation to property which—
has been seized by an appropriate officer under section 127C, and
is detained under or by virtue of any of sections 127J to 127M and 127P.
The property must be released if at any time an appropriate officer decides that the detention condition is no longer met.
The detention condition is met for so long as—
any of the conditions in section 127B is met, and
there are reasonable grounds for the suspicion mentioned in section 127C(1).
Nothing in this section requires property to be released if there is a power to detain it otherwise than under or by virtue of sections 127J to 127M and 127P.
Nothing in this section affects the operation of any power or duty to release property that arises apart from this section.

Guidance about search and seizure and detention of property

127R Guidance by Lord Advocate
The Lord Advocate may issue guidance in connection with—
the carrying out by appropriate officers of the functions conferred by sections 127C to 127H,
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	65
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

the carrying out by senior officers of their functions under section 127G, and
the detention of property under or by virtue of sections 120A, 122A and 127J to 127P.
The Lord Advocate must publish any guidance issued under this section.”
Omit section 126 (seizure).
In section 132 (powers of court and administrator)—
in subsection (1) after paragraph (b) insert—
“(c)	the powers conferred on appropriate officers by sections 127C to 127L;
(d)	the powers conferred on senior officers by section 127G.”
at the end of the heading insert “ etc ”.


The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29) is amended as follows.
After section 195 insert—

“Search and seizure powers

195A Sections 195B to 195S: meaning of “appropriate officer”
In sections 195B to 195S “appropriate officer” means—
an officer of Revenue and Customs,
a constable, or
an accredited financial investigator.
In subsection (1)(c) the reference to an accredited financial investigator is a reference to an accredited financial investigator who falls within a description specified in an order made for the purposes of that provision by the Secretary of State under section 453.

195B Conditions for exercise of powers
An appropriate officer may exercise the power conferred by section 195C if satisfied that any of the following conditions is met.
The first condition is that—
a criminal investigation has been started in Northern Ireland with regard to an indictable offence,
a person has been arrested for the offence,
66	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


proceedings for the offence have not yet been started against the person in Northern Ireland,
there is reasonable cause to believe that the person has benefited from conduct constituting the offence, and
a restraint order is not in force in respect of any realisable property.
The second condition is that—
a criminal investigation has been started in Northern Ireland with regard to an indictable offence,
a person has been arrested for the offence,
proceedings for the offence have not yet been started against the person in Northern Ireland, and
a restraint order is in force in respect of any realisable property.
The third condition is that—
proceedings for an indictable offence have been started in Northern Ireland and have not been concluded,
there is reasonable cause to believe that the defendant has benefited from conduct constituting the offence, and
a restraint order is not in force in respect of any realisable property.
The fourth condition is that—
proceedings for an indictable offence have been started in Northern Ireland and have not been concluded, and
a restraint order is in force in respect of any realisable property.
The fifth condition is that—
an application by the prosecutor has been made under section 169, 170, 177 or 178 and not concluded, or the officer believes that such an application is to be made, and
there is reasonable cause to believe that the defendant has benefited from criminal conduct.
The sixth condition is that—
an application by the prosecutor has been made under section 171 and not concluded, or the officer believes that such an application is to be made, and
there is reasonable cause to believe that the court will decide under that section that the amount found under the new calculation of the defendant's benefit exceeds the relevant amount (as defined in that section).
The seventh condition is that—
an application by the prosecutor has been made under section 172 and not concluded, or the officer believes that such an application is to be made, and
there is reasonable cause to believe that the court will decide under that section that the amount found under the new calculation of the available amount exceeds the relevant amount (as defined in that section).
The third or fourth condition is not met if the officer believes that—
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	67
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

there has been undue delay in continuing the proceedings, or
the prosecutor does not intend to proceed.
If an application mentioned in the fifth, sixth or seventh condition has been made the condition is not met if the officer believes that—
there has been undue delay in continuing the application, or
the prosecutor does not intend to proceed.
In relation to the first or second condition references in sections 195C to 195S to the defendant are to the person mentioned in that condition.
In relation to the first or second condition section 225(9) has effect as if proceedings for the offence had been started against the defendant when the investigation was started.

195C Power to seize property
On being satisfied as mentioned in section 195B(1) an appropriate officer may seize any realisable property if the officer has reasonable grounds for suspecting that—
the property may otherwise be made unavailable for satisfying any confiscation order that has been or may be made against the defendant, or
the value of the property may otherwise be diminished as a result of conduct by the defendant or any other person.
But the officer may not seize—
cash, or
exempt property.
“Cash” has the same meaning as in section 289.
“Exempt property” means—
such tools, books, vehicles and other items of equipment as are necessary to the defendant for use personally in the defendant's employment, business or vocation;
such clothing, bedding, furniture, household equipment, provisions or other things as are necessary for satisfying the basic domestic needs of the defendant and the defendant's family.
In relation to realisable property which is free property held by the recipient of a tainted gift, references in subsection (4) to the defendant are to be read as references to the recipient of that gift.
Section 195B(11) is subject to this subsection.
The power conferred by this section—
may be exercised only with the appropriate approval under section 195G unless, in the circumstances, it is not practicable to obtain that approval before exercising the power, and
is exercisable by an officer of Revenue and Customs only if the officer has reasonable grounds for suspecting that conduct constituting the relevant offence relates to an assigned matter (within the meaning of the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979).
68	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


“Relevant offence” means—
in a case where the officer is satisfied that the first, second, third or fourth condition in section 195B is met, the offence mentioned in that condition,
in a case where the officer is satisfied that any of the other conditions in section 195B is met, the offence (or any of the offences) concerned.

195D Search power: premises
If an appropriate officer is lawfully on any premises the officer may search the premises for the purpose of finding any property which—
the officer has reasonable grounds for suspecting may be found there, and
if found there, the officer intends to seize under section 195C.
The power conferred by this section may be exercised only with the appropriate approval under section 195G unless, in the circumstances, it is not practicable to obtain that approval before exercising the power.
“Premises” has the meaning given by Article 25 of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989.

195E Search power: people
An appropriate officer may exercise the following powers if the officer has reasonable grounds for suspecting that a person is carrying property that may be seized under section 195C.
The officer may, so far as the officer thinks it necessary or expedient for the purpose of seizing the property under that section, require the person—
to permit a search of any article with the person,
to permit a search of the person.
An officer exercising a power under subsection (2) may detain the person for so long as is necessary for its exercise.
A power conferred by this section may be exercised only with the appropriate approval under section 195G unless, in the circumstances, it is not practicable to obtain that approval before exercising the power.
This section does not require a person to submit to an intimate search or strip search (within the meaning of section 164 of the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979).

195F Search power: vehicles
The powers specified in subsection (4) are exercisable if—
an appropriate officer has reasonable grounds for suspecting that a vehicle contains property that may be seized under section 195C, and
it appears to the officer that the vehicle is under the control of a person who is in or in the vicinity of the vehicle.
The powers are exercisable only if the vehicle is—
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	69
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

in any place to which, at the time of the proposed exercise of the powers, the public or any section of the public has access, on payment or otherwise, as of right or by virtue of express or implied permission, or
in any other place to which at that time people have ready access but which is not a dwelling.
But if the vehicle is in a garden or yard or other land occupied with and used for the purposes of a dwelling, the officer may exercise the powers under subsection (4) only if the officer has reasonable grounds for believing—
that the person does not reside in the dwelling, and
that the vehicle is not in the place in question with the express or implied permission of another who resides in the dwelling.
The officer may, so far as the officer thinks it necessary or expedient for the purpose of seizing the property under section 195C, require the person to—
permit entry to the vehicle,
permit a search of the vehicle.
An officer exercising a power under subsection (4) may detain the vehicle for so long as is necessary for its exercise.
A power conferred by this section may be exercised only with the appropriate approval under section 195G unless, in the circumstances, it is not practicable to obtain that approval before exercising the power.

195G “Appropriate approval”
This section has effect for the purposes of sections 195C, 195D, 195E and 195F.
The appropriate approval, in relation to the exercise of a power by an appropriate officer, means the approval of a lay magistrate or (if that is not practicable in any case) the approval of a senior officer.
A senior officer means—
in relation to the exercise of a power by an officer of Revenue and Customs, an officer of Revenue and Customs of a rank designated by the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs as equivalent to that of a senior police officer,
in relation to the exercise of a power by a constable, a senior police officer,
in relation to the exercise of a power by an accredited financial investigator, an accredited financial investigator who falls within a description specified in an order made for this purpose by the Secretary of State under section 453.
A senior police officer means a police officer of at least the rank of inspector.

195H Exercise of powers without judicial approval
An appropriate officer must give a written report to the appointed person in any case where—
70	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


the officer seizes property under section 195C without the approval of a lay magistrate, and
any of the property seized is not detained for more than 48 hours.
An appropriate officer must also give a written report to the appointed person in any case where—
the officer exercises any of the powers conferred by sections 195D, 195E and 195F without the approval of a lay magistrate, and
no property is seized under section 195C.
A report under this section must give particulars of the circumstances which led the officer to believe that—
the powers were exercisable, and
it was not practicable to obtain the approval of a lay magistrate.
The appointed person means a person appointed for the purposes of this subsection by the [F28Department of Justice].
The appointed person must not be a person employed under or for the purposes of a government department; and the terms and conditions of appointment, including any remuneration or expenses to be paid, are to be determined by the [F29Department of Justice].
[F30(5A) “Government department” includes a Northern Ireland department.]
The period of 48 hours mentioned in subsection (1)(b) is to be calculated in accordance with subsection (7).
In calculating a period of 48 hours in accordance with this subsection, no account is to be taken of—
any Saturday or Sunday,
Christmas Day,
Good Friday, or
any day that is a bank holiday under the Banking and Financial Dealings Act 1971 in Northern Ireland.

195I Report by appointed person on exercise of powers
As soon as possible after the end of each financial year, the person appointed under section 195H(4) must prepare a report for that year.
“Financial year” means—
the period beginning with the day on which section 57 of the Policing and Crime Act 2009 comes into force and ending with the next 31 March (which is the first financial year), and
each subsequent period of twelve months beginning with 1 April.
The report must give the appointed person's opinion as to the circumstances and manner in which the powers conferred by sections 195C, 195D, 195E and 195F are being exercised in cases where the officer who exercised them is required to give a report under section 195H.
The report may make any recommendations the appointed person considers appropriate.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	71
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

The appointed person must send a copy of the report to the [F31Department of Justice].
The [F32Department of Justice] must—
publish any report received under subsection (5), and
lay a copy before [F33the Northern Ireland Assembly].
[F34(6A) Section 41(3) of the Interpretation Act (Northern Ireland) 1954 applies for the purposes of subsection (6)(b) in relation to the laying of a copy of a report as it applies in relation to the laying of a statutory document under an enactment.]
Before acting under subsection (6) the [F35Department of Justice] must exclude from the report any matter which the [F35Department of Justice] thinks is likely to prejudice any criminal investigation or criminal proceedings.
If the [F35Department of Justice] excludes any matter from the report the [F35Department of Justice] must comply with subsection (6) in relation to the whole of the report as soon as the [F35Department of Justice] thinks that the excluded matter is no longer likely to prejudice any criminal investigation or criminal proceedings.

195J Initial detention of seized property
This section applies if an appropriate officer seizes property under section 195C.
The property may be detained initially for a period of 48 hours.
The period of 48 hours is to be calculated in accordance with section 195H(7).

195K Further detention pending making of restraint order
This section applies if—
property is detained under section 195J, and
no restraint order is in force in respect of the property.
If within the period mentioned in section 195J an application is made for a restraint order which includes provision under section 190A authorising detention of the property, the property may be detained until the application is determined or otherwise disposed of.
If such an application is made within that period and the application is refused, the property may be detained until there is no further possibility of an appeal against—
the decision to refuse the application, or
any decision made on an appeal against that decision.
In subsection (2) the reference to the period mentioned in section 195J includes that period as extended by any order under section 195M.

195L Further detention pending variation of restraint order
This section applies if—
72	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


property is detained under section 195J,
a restraint order is in force in respect of the property, and
the order does not include provision under section 190A authorising the detention of the property.
If within the period mentioned in section 195J an application is made for the order to be varied so as to include provision under section 190A authorising detention of the property, the property may be detained until the application is determined or otherwise disposed of.
If such an application is made within that period and the application is refused, the property may be detained until there is no further possibility of an appeal against—
the decision to refuse the application, or
any decision made on an appeal against that decision.

195M Further detention in other cases
This section applies if—
property is detained under section 195J,
no restraint order is in force in respect of the property, and
no application has been made for a restraint order which includes provision under section 190A authorising detention of the property.
A magistrates' court may by order extend the period for which the property or any part of it may be detained under section 195J if satisfied that—
any of the conditions in section 195B is met (reading references in that section to the officer as references to the court),
the property or part is realisable property other than exempt property (within the meaning of section 195C(4)), and
there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that—
the property may otherwise be made unavailable for satisfying any confiscation order that has been or may be made against the defendant, or
the value of the property may otherwise be diminished as a result of conduct by the defendant or any other person.
An application for an order may be made by—
the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs,
a constable,
an accredited financial investigator, or
the prosecutor.
If the property was seized in reliance on the first or second condition in section 195B, “the prosecutor” means a person who is to have conduct of any proceedings for the offence.
An order under this section must provide for notice to be given to persons affected by it.
In this section “part” includes portion.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	73
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

195N Discharge, variation and lapse of detention order
An order under section 195N may be discharged or varied.
An application for variation or discharge of the order may be made by—
a person mentioned in section 195M(3), or
any person affected by the order.
On an application under this section the court must discharge the order if—
the order was made on the ground that the first or second condition in section 195B was met but proceedings for the offence mentioned in that condition have not been started within a reasonable time,
the order was made on the ground that the third or fourth condition in section 195B was met but proceedings for the offence mentioned in that condition have now been concluded,
the order was made on the ground that the fifth, sixth or seventh condition in section 195B was met but the application mentioned in that condition has now been concluded or, as the case may be, has not been made within a reasonable time.
An order made under section 195M lapses if a restraint order is made in respect of the property to which it relates (but provision authorising detention of the property may have been included in the restraint order by virtue of section 190A).

195O Appeals
If on an application for an order under section 195M the court decides not to make one, a person mentioned in subsection (3) of that section may appeal to the county court against the decision.
If an application is made under section 195N in relation to an order the following persons may appeal to the county court in respect of the magistrates' court's decision on the application—
a person mentioned in section 195M(3), or
any person affected by the order.

195P Detention of property pending section 195O appeal
This section applies where—
an application for an order under section 195M is made within the period mentioned in section 195J, and
the application is refused.
This section also applies where—
an order is made under section 195M extending the period for which property may be detained under section 195J, and
the order is discharged or varied so that detention of the property is no longer authorised by virtue of the order.
74	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


The property may be detained until there is no further possibility of an appeal against the decision to refuse the application or discharge or vary the order (as the case may be).

195Q Hearsay evidence in detention order proceedings
Evidence must not be excluded in detention order proceedings on the ground that it is hearsay (of whatever degree).
Articles 4 and 5 of the Civil Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1997 apply in relation to detention order proceedings as those articles apply in relation to civil proceedings.
Detention order proceedings are proceedings—
for an order under section 195M;
for the discharge or variation of such an order;
on an appeal under section 195O.
Hearsay is a statement which is made otherwise than by a person while giving oral evidence in the proceedings and which is tendered as evidence of the matters stated.
Nothing in this section affects the admissibility of evidence which is admissible apart from this section.

195R Release of property
This section applies in relation to property which—
has been seized by an appropriate officer under section 195C, and
is detained under or by virtue of any of sections 195J to 195M and 195P.
The property must be released if at any time an appropriate officer decides that the detention condition is no longer met.
The detention condition is met for so long as—
any of the conditions in section 195B is met, and
there are reasonable grounds for the suspicion mentioned in section 195C(1).
Nothing in this section requires property to be released if there is a power to detain it otherwise than under or by virtue of sections 195J to 195M and 195P.
Nothing in this section affects the operation of any power or duty to release property that arises apart from this section.

Code of practice about search and seizure and detention of property[F36: Secretary of State]

195S Codes of practice
The Secretary of State must make a code of practice in connection with—
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	75
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

the carrying out by [F37officers of Revenue and Customs] of the functions conferred by section 195C to 195H,
the carrying out by senior officers of their functions under section 195G, and
the detention of property [F38by officers of Revenue and Customs and members of staff of SOCA]under or by virtue of sections 190A, 193A and 195J to 195P.
[F39(1A) In subsection (1) senior officers means officers of Revenue and Customs of a rank designated by the Commissioners for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs as equivalent to that of a police officer of at least the rank of inspector.]
Where the Secretary of State proposes to issue a code of practice the Secretary of State must—
publish a draft,
consider any representations made about the draft,
if the Secretary of State thinks appropriate, modify the draft in the light of any such representations.
The Secretary of State must lay a draft of the code before Parliament.
When the Secretary of State has laid a draft of the code before Parliament the Secretary of State may bring it into operation by order.
The Secretary of State may revise the whole or any part of the code and issue the code as revised; and subsections (2) to (4) apply to such a revised code as they apply to the original code.
A failure by a person to comply with a provision of the code does not of itself make the person liable to criminal or civil proceedings.
The code is admissible in evidence in criminal or civil proceedings and is to be taken into account by a court or tribunal in any case in which it appears to the court or tribunal to be relevant.
Codes of practice: Department of Justice
The Department of Justice must make a code of practice in connection with—
the carrying out by constables and accredited financial investigators of the functions conferred by sections 195C to 195H,
the carrying out by senior officers of their functions under section 195G, and
the detention of property by—
constables,
accredited financial investigators, and
members of staff of the relevant director (within the meaning of section 352(5A)(b)),
under or by virtue of sections 190A, 193A and 195J to 195P.
In subsection (1)(b) senior officers means—
police officers of at least the rank of inspector,
76	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


accredited financial investigators who fall within a description specified in an order made for this purpose by the Secretary of State under section 453.
Where the Department of Justice proposes to issue a code of practice the Department of Justice must—
publish a draft,
consider any representations made about the draft,
if the Department of Justice thinks appropriate, modify the draft in the light of any such representations.
The Department of Justice must lay a draft of the code before the Northern Ireland Assembly.
When the Department of Justice has laid a draft of the code before the Assembly the Department of Justice may bring it into operation by order.
Section 41(3) of the Interpretation Act (Northern Ireland) 1954 applies for the purposes of subsection (4) in relation to the laying of a draft as it applies in relation to the laying of a statutory document under an enactment.
The Department of Justice may revise the whole or any part of the code and issue the code as revised; and subsections (3) to (6) apply to such a revised code as they apply to the original code.
A failure by a person to comply with a provision of the code does not of itself make the person liable to criminal or civil proceedings.
The code is admissible in evidence in criminal or civil proceedings and is to be taken into account by a court or tribunal in any case in which it appears to the court or tribunal to be relevant.”]
Omit section 194 (seizure).
In section 217 (powers of court and receiver)—
in subsection (1) after paragraph (b) insert—
“(c)	the powers conferred on appropriate officers by sections 195C to 195L;
(d)	the powers conferred on senior officers by section 195G.”
at the end of the heading insert “ etc ”.
[F41(5) In section 459 (orders and regulations)—
in subsection (7A) after “section” (the second time it appears) insert “195T(5),”,
in subsection (7B) after “section” insert “195T(5),]

Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	77
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Power to sell seized personal property: England and Wales
The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29) is amended as follows.
After section 67 insert—

“67A Seized personal property
This section applies to personal property which is held by a person and which—
has been seized by an appropriate officer under a relevant seizure power, or
has been produced to an appropriate officer in compliance with a production order under section 345.
This section applies if the following conditions are satisfied—
a confiscation order is made against the person by whom the property is held;
a receiver has not been appointed under section 50 in relation to the property;
any period allowed under section 11 for payment of the amount ordered to be paid under the confiscation order has ended.
78	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


In such a case a magistrates' court may by order authorise an appropriate officer to realise the property.
In this section “appropriate officer” and “relevant seizure power” have the same meaning as in section 41A.

67B Costs of storage and realisation
This section applies if a magistrates' court makes an order under section 67A.
The court may determine an amount which may be recovered by the appropriate officer in respect of reasonable costs incurred in—
storing or insuring the property since it was seized or produced as mentioned in subsection (1) of that section;
realising the property.
If the court makes a determination under this section the appropriate officer is entitled to payment of the amount under section 55(4).
A determination under this section may be made on the same occasion as the section 67A order or on any later occasion; and more than one determination may be made in relation to any case.
In this section “appropriate officer” has the same meaning as in section 41A.

67C Sections 67A and 67B: appeals
If a magistrates' court decides not to make an order under section 67A, an appropriate officer may appeal to the Crown Court.
If a magistrates' court makes an order under section 67A, a person affected by the order may appeal to the Crown Court.
But the person mentioned in section 67A(2)(a) may not appeal.
An appropriate officer may appeal to the Crown Court against—
a determination made by a magistrates' court under section 67B;
a decision by a magistrates' court not to make a determination under that section.
In this section “appropriate officer” has the same meaning as in section 41A.

67D Proceeds of realisation
This section applies to sums which—
are in the hands of an appropriate officer, and
are the proceeds of the realisation of property under section 67A.
The sums must be applied as follows—
first, they must be applied in payment of such expenses incurred by a person acting as an insolvency practitioner as are payable under this subsection by virtue of section 432;
second, they must be applied in making any payments directed by the magistrates' court or the Crown Court;
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	79
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

third, they must be paid to the appropriate designated officer on account of the amount payable under the confiscation order.
If the amount payable under the confiscation order has been fully paid and any sums remain in the appropriate officer's hands, the appropriate officer must distribute them—
among such persons who held (or hold) interests in the property represented by the proceeds as the magistrates' court or the Crown Court directs, and
in such proportions as it directs.
Before making a direction under subsection (3) the court must give persons who held (or hold) interests in the property a reasonable opportunity to make representations to it.
If the magistrates' court has made a direction under subsection (2)(b) or (3) in respect of the proceeds of realisation of any property, the Crown Court may not make a direction under either of those provisions in respect of the proceeds of realisation of that property; and vice versa.
In this section—
“appropriate officer” has the same meaning as in section 41A; “appropriate designated officer” means the designated officer for
the magistrates' court which, by virtue of section 35, is responsible
for enforcing the confiscation order as if it were a fine.”
Accordingly, at the end of the cross-heading immediately above that section insert “ and personal property ”.
In section 55(3)(b) (payment of sums received by designated officer under section 54 or otherwise: insolvency practitioners' expenses) after “section 54(2)(a)” insert “ or 67D(2)(a) ”.
In section 55(4) (payment of sums received by designated officer under section 54)—
after “section 54” insert “ or 67D ”,
in paragraph (b) for “the receiver” substitute “ any receiver ”, and
after paragraph (b) insert—
“(c)	third, in payment to an appropriate officer of any amount to which the officer is entitled by virtue of section 67B.”


Power to sell seized personal property: Scotland
The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29) is amended as follows.
After section 131 insert—
80	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


“Seized personal property

131A Seized personal property
This section applies to moveable property which is held by a person and which—
has been seized by an appropriate officer under a relevant seizure power, or
has been produced to an appropriate officer in compliance with a production order under section 380.
This section applies if the following conditions are satisfied—
a confiscation order is made against the person by whom the property is held;
an administrator has not been appointed under section 128 in relation to the property;
any period allowed under section 116 for payment of the amount ordered to be paid under the confiscation order has ended.
In such a case the sheriff may by order authorise an appropriate officer to realise the property.
In this section “appropriate officer” and “relevant seizure power” have the same meaning as in section 120A.

131B Costs of storage and realisation
This section applies if the sheriff makes an order under section 131A.
The sheriff may determine an amount which may be recovered by the appropriate officer in respect of reasonable costs incurred in—
storing or insuring the property since it was seized or produced as mentioned in subsection (1) of that section;
realising the property.
If the sheriff makes a determination under this section the appropriate officer is entitled to payment of the amount under section 131(5A).
A determination under this section may be made on the same occasion as the section 131A order or on any later occasion; and more than one determination may be made in relation to any case.
In this section “appropriate officer” has the same meaning as in section 120A.

131C Sections 131A and 131B: appeals
If a sheriff decides not to make an order under section 131A, an appropriate officer may appeal to the Court of Session.
If a sheriff makes an order under section 131A, a person affected by the order may appeal to the Court of Session.
But the person mentioned in section 131A(2)(a) may not appeal.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	81
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

An appropriate officer may appeal to the Court of Session against—
a determination made by a sheriff under section 131B;
a decision by a sheriff not to make a determination under that section.
An appeal under this section must be made before the end of the period of 21 days starting with the day on which the decision or (as the case may be) the order was made.
On an appeal under this section the Court of Session may—
confirm, quash or vary the decision or (as the case may be) the order, or
make such order as Court of Session believes is appropriate.
In this section “appropriate officer” has the same meaning as in section 120A.

131D Proceeds of realisation
This section applies to sums which—
are in the hands of an appropriate officer, and
are the proceeds of the realisation of property under section 131A.
The sums must be applied as follows—
first, they must be applied in payment of such expenses incurred by a person acting as an insolvency practitioner as are payable under this subsection by virtue of section 432;
second, they must be applied in making any payments directed by the sheriff;
third, they must be paid to the appropriate clerk of court on account of the amount payable under the confiscation order.
If the amount payable under the confiscation order has been fully paid and any sums remain in the appropriate officer's hands, the appropriate officer must distribute them—
among such persons who held (or hold) interests in the property represented by the proceeds as the sheriff directs, and
in such proportions as the sheriff directs.
Before making a direction under subsection (3) the sheriff must give persons who held (or hold) interests in the property a reasonable opportunity to make representations to the sheriff.
In this section—
“appropriate officer” has the same meaning as in section 120A;
“appropriate clerk of court” means the sheriff clerk of the sheriff court responsible for enforcing the confiscation order under section 211 of the Procedure Act as applied by section 118(1).”
In section 131 (sums received by clerk of court)—
in subsection (3)(b) after “section 130(3)(a)” insert “ or 131D(2)(a) ”,
in subsection (5) after “130” insert “ or 131D ”, and
after subsection (5) insert—
82	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


“(5A) If the clerk of court received the sums from an appropriate officer under section 130 or 131D, the clerk of court must next apply them in payment to an appropriate officer of any amount to which the officer is entitled by virtue of section 131B.”


Power to sell seized personal property: Northern Ireland
The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29) is amended as follows.
After section 215 insert—

“215A Seized personal property
This section applies to personal property which is held by a person and which—
has been seized by an appropriate officer under a relevant seizure power, or
has been produced to an appropriate officer in compliance with a production order under section 345.
This section applies if the following conditions are satisfied—
a confiscation order is made against the person by whom the property is held;
a receiver has not been appointed under section 198 in relation to the property;
any period allowed under section 161 for payment of the amount ordered to be paid under the confiscation order has ended.
In such a case a magistrates' court may by order authorise an appropriate officer to realise the property.
In this section “appropriate officer” and “relevant seizure power” have the same meaning as in section 190A.

215B Costs of storage and realisation
This section applies if a magistrates' court makes an order under section 215A.
The court may determine an amount which may be recovered by the appropriate officer in respect of reasonable costs incurred in—
storing or insuring the property since it was seized or produced as mentioned in subsection (1) of that section;
realising the property.
If the court makes a determination under this section the appropriate officer is entitled to payment of the amount under section 203(4).
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	83
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

A determination under this section may be made on the same occasion as the section 215A order or on any later occasion; and more than one determination may be made in relation to any case.
In this section “appropriate officer” has the same meaning as in section 190A.

215C Sections 215A and 215B: appeals
If a magistrates' court decides not to make an order under section 215A, an appropriate officer may appeal to a county court.
If a magistrates' court makes an order under section 215A, a person affected by the order may appeal to a county court.
But the person mentioned in section 215A(2)(a) may not appeal.
An appropriate officer may appeal to a county court against—
a determination made by a magistrates' court under section 215B;
a decision by a magistrates' court not to make a determination under that section.
In this section “appropriate officer” has the same meaning as in section 190A.

215D Proceeds of realisation
This section applies to sums which—
are in the hands of an appropriate officer, and
are the proceeds of the realisation of property under section 215A.
The sums must be applied as follows—
first, they must be applied in payment of such expenses incurred by a person acting as an insolvency practitioner as are payable under this subsection by virtue of section 432;
second, they must be applied in making any payments directed by the magistrates' court or Crown Court;
third, they must be paid to the appropriate chief clerk on account of the amount payable under the confiscation order.
If the amount payable under the confiscation order has been fully paid and any sums remain in the appropriate officer's hands, the appropriate officer must distribute them—
among such persons who held (or hold) interests in the property represented by the proceeds as the magistrates' court or Crown Court directs, and
in such proportions as it directs.
Before making a direction under subsection (3) the court must give persons who held (or hold) interests in the property a reasonable opportunity to make representations to it.
If the magistrates' court has made a direction under subsection (2)(b) or (3) in respect of the proceeds of realisation of any property, the Crown Court may
84	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


not make a direction under either of those provisions in respect of the proceeds of realisation of that property; and vice versa.
In this section—
“appropriate officer” has the same meaning as in section 190A, and “appropriate  chief  clerk”  has  the  same  meaning  as  in
section 202(7).”
Accordingly, at the end of the cross-heading immediately above that section insert “ and personal property ”.
In section 203(3)(b) (payment of sums received by chief clerk under section 202 or otherwise: insolvency practitioners' expenses) after “section 202(2)(a)” insert “ or 215D(2)(a) ”.
In section 203(4) (payment of sums received by chief clerk under section 202)—
after “section 202” insert “ or 215D ”,
in paragraph (b) for “the receiver” substitute “ any receiver ”, and
after paragraph (b) insert—
“(c)	third, in payment to an appropriate officer of any amount to which the officer is entitled by virtue of section 215B.”


Payment of compensation
The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29) is amended as follows.
In section 72 (serious default in England and Wales) in subsection (9)—
after paragraph (b) insert—
“(ba) if the person in default was a member of staff of SOCA, the compensation is payable by SOCA;”, and
after paragraph (e) insert—
“(f) if the person in default was an accredited financial investigator and none of paragraphs (a) to (e) apply, the compensation is payable in accordance with paragraph (a),
or (e) of section 302(7A) (as the case may require).”
In section 139 (serious default in Scotland) after paragraph (c) of subsection (9) insert—
“(ca)	if the person in default was a member of staff of SOCA, the compensation is payable by SOCA;”.
Subsection (9) of section 220 (serious default in Northern Ireland) is amended as follows.
In paragraph (b), for “a member of the Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland” substitute “ a member of the Public Prosecution Service for Northern Ireland ”.
After paragraph (b) insert—
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	85
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

“(ba)	if the person in default was a member of staff of SOCA, the compensation is payable by SOCA;”.
After paragraph (e) insert—
“(f) if the person in default was an accredited financial investigator and none of paragraphs (a) to (e) apply, the compensation is payable in accordance with paragraph (b), (d) or (e) of section 302(7A) (as the case may require).”


Civil recovery

Limitation
In the following provisions for “twelve years” substitute “ 20 years ”
sections 27A(2) and 27B(2) of the Limitation Act 1980 (c. 58) (civil recovery of property obtained through unlawful conduct etc),
sections 19B(2) and 19C(2) of the Prescription and Limitation (Scotland) Act 1973 (c. 52) (equivalent provisions for Scotland), and
Articles 72A(2) and 72B(2) of the Limitation (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1339 (N.I. 11)) (equivalent provisions for Northern Ireland).
The amendments made by this section—
apply to causes of action which accrued before, as well as to causes of action which accrue after, the commencement of this section, but
do not apply to causes of action barred by the provisions mentioned in subsection (1) before the commencement of this section.


Power to search vehicles
Section 289 of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29) (searches) is amended as set out in subsections (2) to (4).
After subsection (1) insert—
“(1A) The powers specified in subsection (1D) are exercisable if—
a customs officer, a constable or an accredited financial investigator has reasonable grounds for suspecting that there is cash falling within subsection (1E) in a vehicle, and
it appears to the officer, constable or investigator that the vehicle is under the control of a person (the suspect) who is in or in the vicinity of the vehicle.
86	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


(1B) The powers are exercisable only if the vehicle is—
in any place to which, at the time of the proposed exercise of the powers, the public or any section of the public has access, on payment or otherwise, as of right or by virtue of express or implied permission, or
in any other place to which at that time people have ready access but which is not a dwelling.
(1C) But if the vehicle is in a garden or yard or other land occupied with and used for the purposes of a dwelling, the customs officer, constable or accredited financial investigator may exercise the powers under subsection (1D) only if the officer, constable or investigator has reasonable grounds for believing—
that the suspect does not reside in the dwelling, and
that the vehicle is not in the place in question with the express or implied permission of a person who resides in the dwelling.
(1D) The customs officer, constable or accredited financial investigator may, so far as the officer, constable or investigator thinks it necessary or expedient, require the suspect to—
permit entry to the vehicle,
permit a search of the vehicle.
(1E) Cash falls within this subsection if—
it is recoverable property or is intended by any person for use in unlawful conduct, and
the amount of it is not less than the minimum amount.”
In subsection (4) for the words from “exercising” to the end substitute “may—
in exercising powers by virtue of subsection (1D), detain the vehicle for so long as is necessary for their exercise,
in exercising powers by virtue of subsection (3)(b), detain the suspect for so long as is necessary for their exercise.”
In subsection (5)(c) for the words from “premises” to the end substitute “the following
—
premises in England, Wales or Northern Ireland (in the case of subsection (1)),
vehicles and suspects in England, Wales or Northern Ireland (in the case of subsections (1D) and (4)(a)),
suspects in England, Wales or Northern Ireland (in the case of subsections (2), (3) and (4)(b)).”

Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	87
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

Detention of seized cash
In section 295(2)(a) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29) (period for which court may authorise further detention of seized cash) for “three months” substitute “ six months ”.
The amendment made by subsection (1) applies in relation to cash seized before or after the commencement of this section.


Forfeiture of detained cash
After section 297 of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 insert—

“Forfeiture without court order

297A Forfeiture notice
Subsection (2) applies while any cash is detained in pursuance of an order under section 295(2) made by a magistrates' court in England and Wales or Northern Ireland.
A senior officer may give a notice for the purpose of forfeiting the cash or any part of it if satisfied that the cash or part—
is recoverable property, or
is intended by any person for use in unlawful conduct.
The Secretary of State must make regulations about how a notice is to be given.
The regulations may provide—
for a notice to be given to such person or persons, and in such manner, as may be prescribed;
for a notice to be given by publication in such manner as may be prescribed;
for circumstances in which, and the time at which, a notice is to be treated as having been given.
The regulations must ensure that where a notice is given it is, if possible, given to every person to whom notice of an order under section 295(2) in respect of the cash has been given.
A senior officer means—
an officer of Revenue and Customs of a rank designated by the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs as equivalent to that of a senior police officer,
a senior police officer, or
an accredited financial investigator.
88	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


A senior police officer means a police officer of at least the rank of inspector.
A notice under this section is referred to in this Chapter as a forfeiture notice.

297B Content
A forfeiture notice must—
state the amount of cash in respect of which it is given,
state when and where the cash was seized,
confirm that the senior officer is satisfied as mentioned in section 297A(2),
specify a period for objecting to the proposed forfeiture and an address to which any objections must be sent, and
explain that the cash will be forfeited unless an objection is received at that address within the period for objecting.
The period for objecting must be at least 30 days starting with the day after the notice is given.

297C Effect
This section applies if a forfeiture notice is given in respect of any cash.
The cash is to be detained until—
the cash is forfeited under this section,
the notice lapses under this section, or
the cash is released under a power conferred by this Chapter.
If no objection is made within the period for objecting, and the notice has not lapsed, the cash is forfeited (subject to section 297E).
If an objection is made within the period for objecting, the notice lapses.
If an application is made for the forfeiture of the whole or any part of the cash under section 298, the notice lapses.
If the cash or any part of it is released under a power conferred by this Chapter, the notice lapses or (as the case may be) lapses in relation to that part.
An objection may be made by anyone, whether a recipient of the notice or not.
An objection means a written objection sent to the address specified in the notice; and an objection is made when it is received at the address.
An objection does not prevent forfeiture of the cash under section 298.
Nothing in this section affects the validity of an order under section 295(2).

297D Detention following lapse of notice
This section applies if—
a forfeiture notice is given in respect of any cash,
the notice lapses under section 297C(4), and
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	89
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

the period for which detention of the cash was authorised under section 295(2) has expired.
The cash may be detained for a further period of up to 48 hours (calculated in accordance with section 295(1B)).
But if within that period the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs, a constable or an accredited financial investigator decides that neither of the applications mentioned in subsection (4) ought to be made, the cash must be released.
The applications are—
an application for a further order under section 295(2);
an application for forfeiture of the cash under section 298.
“ If within that period an application is made for a further order under section 295(2) the cash may be detained until the application is determined or otherwise disposed of. ”

297E Application to set aside forfeiture
This section applies if any cash is forfeited in pursuance of a forfeiture notice.
A person aggrieved by the forfeiture may apply to a magistrates' court in England and Wales or Northern Ireland for an order setting aside the forfeiture of the cash or any part of it.
The application must be made before the end of the period of 30 days starting with the day on which the period for objecting ended.
But the court may give permission for an application to be made after the 30- day period has ended if it thinks that there are exceptional circumstances to explain why the applicant—
failed to object to the forfeiture within the period for objecting, and
failed to make an application within the 30-day period.
On an application under this section the court must consider whether the cash to which the application relates could be forfeited under section 298 (ignoring the forfeiture mentioned in subsection (1) above).
If the court is satisfied that the cash to which the application relates or any part of it could not be forfeited under that section it must set aside the forfeiture of that cash or part.
Where the court sets aside the forfeiture of any cash—
it must order the release of that cash, and
that cash is to be treated as never having been forfeited.

297F Release of cash subject to forfeiture notice
This section applies while any cash is detained under section 297C or 297D.
A magistrates' court may direct the release of the whole or any part of the cash if the following condition is met.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 5 – Proceeds of crime
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


The condition is that the court is not satisfied, on an application by the person from whom the cash was seized, that the cash to be released—
is recoverable property, or
is intended by any person for use in unlawful conduct.
An officer of Revenue and Customs, constable or accredited financial investigator may release the cash or any part of it if satisfied that the detention of the cash to be released is no longer justified.

297G Application of forfeited cash
Cash forfeited in pursuance of a forfeiture notice, and any accrued interest on it, is to be paid into the Consolidated Fund.
But it is not to be paid in—
before the end of the period within which an application under section 297E may be made (ignoring the possibility of an application by virtue of section 297E(4)), or
if an application is made within that period, before the application is determined or otherwise disposed of.”
In section 298(1) of that Act (forfeiture by court order) after “section 295” insert “ , 297C or 297D ”.
In section 299(4) of that Act (appeal against forfeiture order: release of cash) for “order the release of the cash” substitute “ order the release of the whole or any part of the cash ”.
In section 297A(1) of that Act (inserted by subsection (1) above) the reference to an order includes an order made before the commencement of this section.


Detained cash investigations

Transfer of jurisdiction to Crown Court
The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29) is amended as follows.
In section 343 (judges)—
in subsection (2) for “or a money laundering investigation” substitute “ , a money laundering investigation or a detained cash investigation ”, and
in subsection (3) omit “or a detained cash investigation”.
In section 344 (courts)—
in paragraph (a) for “or a money laundering investigation” substitute “ , a money laundering investigation or a detained cash investigation ”, and
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	91
Part 6 – Extradition
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

in paragraph (b) omit “or a detained cash investigation”.
(4) In section 350 (government departments), in subsection (5)—
in paragraph (a) for “or a money laundering investigation” substitute “ , a money laundering investigation or a detained cash investigation ”, and
in paragraph (b) omit “or a detained cash investigation”.
In section 351 (supplementary provisions in connection with production orders and orders to grant entry), in subsection (8) omit “or a detained cash investigation”.
In section 355 (further provisions: confiscation and money laundering), in subsection (1)(a) for “or a money laundering investigation” substitute “ , a money laundering investigation or a detained cash investigation ”.
In section 356 (further provisions: civil recovery and detained cash)—
in the title omit “and detained cash”,
in subsection (1) omit “or detained cash investigations”,
in subsection (10) for “if the appropriate person has reasonable” substitute “ if an appropriate officer has reasonable ”, and
omit subsections (11) and (12).



Part 6

Extradition

Alerts

Article 26 alerts
For section 204 of the Extradition Act 2003 (c. 41) (Part 1 warrant: transmission by other electronic means) substitute—

“204 Warrant issued by category 1 territory: transmission by other electronic means
This section applies if—
an arrest warrant is issued by an authority of a category 1 territory in a case in which an article 26 alert is issued,
the information contained in the warrant and the alert are transmitted to the designated authority by electronic means, and
that information is received by the designated authority in a qualifying form.
This section also applies if—
92	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 6 – Extradition
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


an arrest warrant is issued by an authority of a category 1 territory in a case in which no article 26 alert is issued,
the information contained in the warrant is transmitted to the designated authority by electronic means, and
that information is received by the designated authority in a qualifying form.
The reference in section 2(2) to an arrest warrant issued by a judicial authority of a category 1 territory is to be read as if it were a reference to the information received by the designated authority.
The references in section 63(1) to an arrest warrant are to be read as if they were references to the information received by the designated authority.
For the purposes of subsection (1), a reference to the information contained in the article 26 alert includes a reference to any information sent with that information relating to the case in question.
For the purposes of this section—
an article 26 alert is an alert issued pursuant to article 26 of the Council Decision on the establishment, operation and use of the second generation Schengen Information System of 12 June 2007,
references to information being transmitted by electronic means do not include facsimile transmission, and
information is received in a qualifying form if it is received in a form in which it is intelligible and which is capable of being used for subsequent reference.”


Article 95 alerts
Section 212 of the Extradition Act 2003 (c. 41) (the title to which becomes “Article 95 alerts”) is amended as follows.
For subsections (1) and (2) substitute—
“(1) This section applies in a case where an article 95 alert is issued at the request of an authority of a category 1 territory.
(2) The reference in section 2(2) to an arrest warrant issued by a judicial authority of a category 1 territory is to be read—
as if it were a reference to the alert issued at the request of the authority, and
as if the alert included any information sent with it which relates to the case.
(2A) The references in section 63(1) to an arrest warrant are to be read in accordance with paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (2) above.”
In subsection (3) for “As applied by” substitute “ In consequence of ”.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	93
Part 6 – Extradition
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Deferral of extradition

Extradition to category 1 territory
After section 8 of the Extradition Act 2003 insert—

“8A Person charged with offence in United Kingdom before extradition hearing
This section applies if—
a person has been brought before the appropriate judge under section 4(3) or 6(2) but the extradition hearing has not begun; and
the judge is informed that the person is charged with an offence in the United Kingdom.
The judge must order further proceedings in respect of the extradition to be adjourned until one of these occurs—
the charge is disposed of;
the charge is withdrawn;
proceedings in respect of the charge are discontinued;
an order is made for the charge to lie on the file, or in relation to Scotland, the diet is deserted pro loco et tempore.
If a sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention is imposed in respect of the offence charged, the judge may order further proceedings in respect of the extradition to be adjourned until the person is released from detention pursuant to the sentence (whether on licence or otherwise).

8B Person serving sentence in United Kingdom before extradition hearing
This section applies if—
a person has been brought before the appropriate judge under section 4(3) or 6(2) but the extradition hearing has not begun; and
the judge is informed that the person is in custody serving a sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention in the United Kingdom.
The judge may order further proceedings in respect of the extradition to be adjourned until the person is released from detention pursuant to the sentence (whether on licence or otherwise).
In a case where further proceedings in respect of the extradition are adjourned under subsection (2)—
section 131 of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 (remand of accused already in custody) has effect as if a reference to 28 clear days in subsection (1) or (2) of that section were a reference to six months;
94	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 6 – Extradition
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Article 47(2) of the Magistrates' Courts (Northern Ireland) Order 1981 (period of remand in custody) has effect as if a reference to 28 days in—
sub-paragraph (a)(iii), or
the words after sub-paragraph (b), were a reference to six months.”


Extradition to category 2 territory
After section 76 of the Extradition Act 2003 (c. 41) insert—

“76A Person charged with offence in United Kingdom before extradition hearing
This section applies if—
a person has been brought before the appropriate judge under section 72(3) or 74(3) but the extradition hearing has not begun; and
the judge is informed that the person is charged with an offence in the United Kingdom.
The judge must order further proceedings in respect of the extradition to be adjourned until one of these occurs—
the charge is disposed of;
the charge is withdrawn;
proceedings in respect of the charge are discontinued;
an order is made for the charge to lie on the file, or in relation to Scotland, the diet is deserted pro loco et tempore.
If a sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention is imposed in respect of the offence charged, the judge may order further proceedings in respect of the extradition to be adjourned until the person is released from detention pursuant to the sentence (whether on licence or otherwise).

76B Person serving sentence in United Kingdom before extradition hearing
This section applies if—
a person has been brought before the appropriate judge under section 72(3) or 74(3) but the extradition hearing has not begun; and
the judge is informed that the person is in custody serving a sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention in the United Kingdom.
The judge may order further proceedings in respect of the extradition to be adjourned until the person is released from detention pursuant to the sentence (whether on licence or otherwise).
In a case where further proceedings in respect of the extradition are adjourned under subsection (2)—
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	95
Part 6 – Extradition
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

section 131 of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 (remand of accused already in custody) has effect as if a reference to 28 clear days in subsection (1) or (2) of that section were a reference to six months;
Article 47(2) of the Magistrates' Courts (Northern Ireland) Order 1981 (period of remand in custody) has effect as if a reference to 28 days in—
sub-paragraph (a)(iii), or
the words after sub-paragraph (b), were a reference to six months.”


Person charged with offence or serving sentence of imprisonment
The Extradition Act 2003 (c. 41) is amended as follows.
In section 22(3) (power to adjourn extradition hearing in Part 1 case) for “the sentence has been served” substitute “ the person is released from detention pursuant to the sentence (whether on licence or otherwise) ”.
In section 23 (person serving sentence in Part 1 case)—
in subsection (1), after “issued is” insert “ in custody ”, and
in subsection (2), for “the sentence has been served” substitute “ the person is released from detention pursuant to the sentence (whether on licence or otherwise) ”.
In section 88(3) (power to adjourn extradition hearing in Part 2 case) for “the sentence has been served” substitute “ the person is released from detention pursuant to the sentence (whether on licence or otherwise) ”.
In section 89 (person serving sentence in Part 2 case)—
in subsection (1) after “person is” insert “ in custody ”, and
in subsection (2) for “the sentence has been served” substitute “ the person is released from detention pursuant to the sentence (whether on licence or otherwise) ”.
In section 97(3) (power to defer decision on extradition) for “the sentence has been served” substitute “ the person is released from detention pursuant to the sentence (whether on licence or otherwise) ”.
In section 98 (person serving sentence in Part 2 case: reference by judge)—
in subsection (1)(b) after “person is” insert “ in custody ”, and
in subsection (2) for “the sentence has been served” substitute “ the person is released from detention pursuant to the sentence (whether on licence or otherwise) ”.
In section 102(3) (meaning of “appropriate day” where decision deferred) for the words from “until the person” to the end substitute “ , the appropriate day is the day on which the person is released from detention pursuant to the sentence (whether on licence or otherwise). ”
96	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 6 – Extradition
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


In section 197A (extradition of serving prisoner) after “a person who is” insert “ in custody ”.
F42(10) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Return to overseas territory

Return from category 1 territory
For section 59 of the Extradition Act 2003 substitute—

“59 Return of person to serve remainder of sentence
This section applies if—
a person who is serving a sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention in the United Kingdom is extradited to a category 1 territory in accordance with this Part;
the person is returned to the United Kingdom to serve the remainder of the sentence or the person otherwise returns to the United Kingdom.
Time during which the person was outside the United Kingdom as a result of the extradition does not count as time served by the person as part of the sentence.
But subsection (2) does not apply if—
the person was extradited for the purpose of being prosecuted for an offence, and
the person has not been convicted of the offence or of any other offence in respect of which the person was permitted to be dealt with in the category 1 territory.
In a case falling within subsection (3), time during which the person was outside the United Kingdom as a result of the extradition counts as time served by the person as part of the sentence if (and only if) it was spent in custody in connection with the offence or any other offence in respect of which the person was permitted to be dealt with in the territory.
In a case where the person is not entitled to be released from detention pursuant to the sentence—
the person is liable to be detained in pursuance of the sentence, and
if at large, the person must be treated as being unlawfully at large.
In a case where the person is entitled to be released from detention on licence pursuant to the sentence—
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	97
Part 6 – Extradition
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

if the person was released on licence at the time of extradition, the licence is suspended until the person's return;
if the person was not released on licence at that time, subsections (7) to (10) apply in relation to the person (“the offender”).
The offender is liable to be detained, on return, in any place in which the offender could have been detained pursuant to the sentence before the time of extradition.
A constable or immigration officer may—
take the offender into custody, and
convey the offender to the place mentioned in subsection (7).
The offender must be released on licence within the period of 5 days beginning when the offender is taken (or retaken) into custody under this section.
In calculating a period of 5 days for the purposes of subsection (9) no account is to be taken of—
any Saturday or Sunday,
Christmas Day,
Good Friday, or
in any part of the United Kingdom, any day that is a bank holiday under the Banking and Financial Dealings Act 1971 in that part of the United Kingdom.
A person is entitled to be released from detention if there is—
a duty to release the person under section 33(1), (1A) or (2) of the Criminal Justice Act 1991,
a duty to release the person under section 244 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (other than temporarily on licence pursuant to an intermittent custody order under section 183(1)(b) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003),
a duty to release the person under section 1, 1AA or 7(1) of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993 or section 5, 11(2), 13, 19 or 23 of the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland)
Act 2007, or
a duty to release the person under section 1 of the Northern Ireland (Remission of Sentences) Act 1995, Article 26 of the Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 1996 or Article 17 or 18(8) of the Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 2008.
The powers conferred on a constable by subsection (8) are exercisable in any part of the United Kingdom.
An immigration officer is a person who is an immigration officer within the meaning of the Immigration Act 1971.”

98	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 6 – Extradition
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Return from category 2 territory
For section 132 of the Extradition Act 2003 substitute—

“132 Return of person to serve remainder of sentence
This section applies if—
a person who is serving a sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention in the United Kingdom is extradited to a category 2 territory in accordance with this Part;
the person is returned to the United Kingdom to serve the remainder of the sentence or the person otherwise returns to the United Kingdom.
Time during which the person was outside the United Kingdom as a result of the extradition does not count as time served by the person as part of the sentence.
But subsection (2) does not apply if—
the person was extradited for the purpose of being prosecuted for an offence, and
the person has not been convicted of the offence or of any other offence in respect of which the person was permitted to be dealt with in the category 2 territory.
In a case falling within subsection (3), time during which the person was outside the United Kingdom as a result of the extradition counts as time served by the person as part of the sentence if (and only if) it was spent in custody in connection with the offence or any other offence in respect of which the person was permitted to be dealt with in the territory.
In a case where the person is not entitled to be released from detention pursuant to the sentence—
the person is liable to be detained in pursuance of the sentence, and
if at large, the person must be treated as being unlawfully at large.
In a case where the person is entitled to be released from detention on licence pursuant to the sentence—
if the person was released on licence at the time of extradition, the licence is suspended until the person's return,
if the person was not released on licence at that time, subsections (7) to (10) apply in relation to the person (“the offender”).
The offender is liable to be detained, on return, in any place in which the offender could have been detained pursuant to the sentence before the time of extradition.
A constable or immigration officer may—
take the offender into custody, and
convey the offender to the place mentioned in subsection (7).
The offender must be released on licence within the period of 5 days beginning when the offender is taken (or retaken) into custody under this section.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	99
Part 6 – Extradition
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

In calculating a period of 5 days for the purposes of subsection (9) no account is to be taken of any day mentioned in any of paragraphs (a) to (d) of section 59(10).
A person is entitled to be released from detention if there is—
a duty to release the person under section 33(1), (1A) or (2) of the Criminal Justice Act 1991,
a duty to release the person under section 244 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (other than temporarily on licence pursuant to an intermittent custody order under section 183(1)(b) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003),
a duty to release the person under section 1, 1AA or 7(1) of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993 or section 5, 11(2), 13, 19 or 23 of the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland)
Act 2007, or
a duty to release the person under section 1 of the Northern Ireland (Remission of Sentences) Act 1995, Article 26 of the Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 1996 or Article 17 or 18(8) of the Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 2008.
The powers conferred on a constable by subsection (8) are exercisable in any part of the United Kingdom.
An immigration officer is a person who is an immigration officer within the meaning of the Immigration Act 1971.”


Extradition to UK

Return to extraditing territory etc
The Extradition Act 2003 (c. 41) is amended as follows.
Omit sections 143 (undertaking in relation to person serving sentence) and 144 (return to extraditing territory to serve sentence).
After section 153 insert—

“153A Undertaking in relation to person serving sentence
This section applies if—
a person is accused in the United Kingdom of the commission of an offence or has been convicted of an offence by or before a court in the United Kingdom;
a Part 3 warrant is issued in respect of the person or the Secretary of State makes a request for the extradition of the person;
the person is serving a sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention in a territory;
100	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 6 – Extradition
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


the person's extradition to the United Kingdom from the territory in pursuance of the warrant or request is made subject to a condition that an undertaking is given by or on behalf of the United Kingdom with regard to the person's treatment in the United Kingdom or return to the territory (or both).
The Secretary of State may give an undertaking to a person acting on behalf of the territory with regard to either or both of these things—
the treatment in the United Kingdom of the person in respect of whom the warrant is issued or the request for extradition is made;
the return of that person to the territory.
The terms which may be included by the Secretary of State in an undertaking given under subsection (2) in relation to a person accused in the United Kingdom of the commission of an offence include terms—
that the person be kept in custody until the conclusion of the proceedings against the person for the offence and any other offence in respect of which the person is permitted to be dealt with in the United Kingdom;
that the person be returned to the territory to serve the remainder of the sentence on the conclusion of those proceedings.
The terms which may be included by the Secretary of State in an undertaking given under subsection (2) in relation to a person who has been convicted of an offence by or before a court in the United Kingdom include terms that the person be returned to the territory to serve the remainder of the sentence after the person would otherwise be released from detention pursuant to the sentence imposed in the United Kingdom (whether or not on licence).
If a person is to be returned to a territory by virtue of an undertaking given under subsection (2), the undertaking is sufficient authority for a constable—
to remove the person from any prison or other institution where the person is detained;
to keep the person in custody until returned;
to convey the person to the territory.

153B Return of person in pursuance of undertaking
This section applies if—
an undertaking is given under section 153A(2) as to the return of a person to a territory;
the person is returned to the territory in pursuance of the undertaking;
the person is returned to the United Kingdom to serve the remainder of any sentence imposed in the United Kingdom or the person otherwise returns to the United Kingdom.
Time during which the person was outside the United Kingdom as a result of the undertaking given under section 153A(2) does not count as time served by the person as part of the sentence.
If the person is not entitled to be released from detention pursuant to the sentence—
the person is liable to be detained in pursuance of the sentence, and
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Part 6 – Extradition
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
101


if at large, the person must be treated as being unlawfully at large.
If the person is entitled to be released from detention on licence pursuant to the sentence—
if the person was released on licence at the time of return to the territory, the licence is suspended until the person's return to the United Kingdom;
if the person was not released on licence at that time, subsections (5) to (8) apply in relation to the person (“the offender”).
The offender is liable to be detained, on return to the United Kingdom, in any place in which the offender could have been detained pursuant to the sentence before the time of return to the territory.
A constable or immigration officer may—
take the offender into custody, and
convey the offender to the place mentioned in subsection (5).
The offender must be released on licence within the period of 5 days beginning when the offender is taken (or retaken) into custody under this section.
In calculating a period of 5 days for the purposes of subsection (7) no account is to be taken of any day mentioned in any of paragraphs (a) to (d) of section 59(10).
The powers conferred on a constable by subsection (6) are exercisable in any part of the United Kingdom.
For the purposes of this section—
a person is entitled to be released from detention if there is—
a duty to release the person under section 33(1), (1A) or (2) of the Criminal Justice Act 1991,
a duty to release the person under section 244 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (other than temporarily on licence pursuant to an intermittent custody order under section 183(1)(b) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003),
a duty to release the person under section 1, 1AA or 7(1) of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993 or section 5, 11(2), 13, 19 or 23 of the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Act 2007, or
a duty to release the person under section 1 of the Northern Ireland (Remission of Sentences) Act 1995, Article 26 of the Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 1996 or Article 17 or 18(8) of the Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 2008;
an immigration officer is a person who is an immigration officer within the meaning of the Immigration Act 1971.

153C Return to extraditing territory to serve sentence
This section applies if—
a person is extradited to the United Kingdom from a territory for the purposes of being prosecuted for an offence;
102	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 6 – Extradition
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


the person's extradition is made subject to a condition that an undertaking is given by or on behalf of the United Kingdom as to the person's return to the territory.
The Secretary of State may give an undertaking to a person acting on behalf of the territory as to the person's return to the territory.
The terms which may be included by the Secretary of State in an undertaking given under subsection (2) in relation to a person include terms that if the person is convicted of the offence and a sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention is imposed in respect of it, the person is to be returned to the territory to serve the sentence.
A person who is to be returned to a territory by virtue of an undertaking given under subsection (2) must be returned as soon as is reasonably practicable after the sentence is imposed and any other proceedings in respect of the offence are concluded.
If subsection (4) is complied with the sentence for the offence is treated as served but the person's conviction for the offence must be treated as a conviction for all other purposes.
The sentence for the offence is treated as served under subsection (5) only in so far as it consists of the sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention mentioned in subsection (3).
Subsection (8) applies if—
subsection (4) is not complied with, and
the person applies to the court which imposed the sentence to expedite return to the territory.
The court must order return by such date as is specified in the order unless reasonable cause is shown for the delay.
If a person is to be returned by virtue of an undertaking given under subsection (2), a constable may—
remove the person from any prison or other institution where the person is detained;
keep the person in custody until returned;
convey the person to the territory to which the person is to be returned.

153D Sections 153A and 153C etc: supplementary
Nothing in section 153A or 153C requires the return of a person to a territory in a case in which the Secretary of State is not satisfied that the return is compatible with the Convention rights within the meaning of the Human Rights Act 1998 or with the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.
References in sections 153A and 153C and subsection (1) above to the Secretary of State are to be read as references to the Scottish Ministers in a case in which—
a Part 3 warrant was issued in respect of the person to be returned, and
the warrant was issued by a sheriff.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Part 6 – Extradition
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
103


The reference in subsection (1) to the Refugee Convention is to the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees done at Geneva on 28 July 1951 and the Protocol to the Convention.”
In section 153(1)(b) (return of person acquitted or not tried) for the words from “from” to the end substitute “ from a territory; ”.
In section 197(2) (powers on escape from custody) after “Part 2” insert “ , or kept in custody by virtue of a power under Part 3, ”.


Cases in which sentence treated as served
The Extradition Act 2003 (c. 41) is amended as follows.
In section 145(2) (sentence in territory executing Part 3 warrant) for “punishment for the offence must be treated as remitted” substitute “ sentence for the offence must be treated as served ”.
In section 152 (sentence in United Kingdom)—
in subsection (1)(a) for the words from “from” to the end substitute “ from a territory; ”, and
in subsection (2) for “punishment for the offence must be treated as remitted” substitute “ sentence for the offence must be treated as served ”.


Dealing with person for other offences
The Extradition Act 2003 is amended as follows.
Omit section 151 (dealing with person for other offences: other category 2 territories).
Before section 152 insert—

“151A Dealing with person for other offences
This section applies if a person is extradited to the United Kingdom from a territory which is not—
a category 1 territory, or
a territory falling within section 150(1)(b).
The person may be dealt with in the United Kingdom for an offence committed before the person's extradition only if—
the offence is one falling within subsection (3), or
the condition in subsection (4) is satisfied.
104	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 6 – Extradition
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


The offences are—
the offence in respect of which the person is extradited;
an offence disclosed by the information provided to the territory in respect of that offence;
an offence in respect of which consent to the person being dealt with is given on behalf of the territory.
The condition is that—
the person has returned to the territory from which the person was extradited, or
the person has been given an opportunity to leave the United Kingdom.
A person is dealt with in the United Kingdom for an offence if—
the person is tried there for it;
the person is detained with a view to trial there for it.”


Ancillary matters

Provisional arrest
Section 6 of the Extradition Act 2003 (c. 41) (requirements in relation to person subject to provisional arrest) is amended as follows.
For subsections (2) and (3) substitute—
“(2) The person must be brought before the appropriate judge within 48 hours starting with the time when the person is arrested.
(2A) The documents specified in subsection (4) must be produced to the judge within 48 hours starting with the time when the person is arrested but this is subject to any extension under subsection (3B).
(2B) Subsection (3) applies if—
the person has been brought before the judge in compliance with subsection (2); but
documents have not been produced to the judge in compliance with subsection (2A).
The person must be brought before the judge when the documents are produced to the judge.
(3A) While the person is before the judge in pursuance of subsection (2), the authority of the category 1 territory may apply to the judge for an extension of the 48 hour period mentioned in subsection (2A) by a further 48 hours.
(3B) The judge may grant an extension if the judge decides that subsection (2A) could not reasonably be complied with within the initial 48 hour period.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Part 6 – Extradition
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
105


(3C) The judge must decide whether that subsection could reasonably be so complied with on a balance of probabilities.
(3D) Notice of an application under subsection (3A) must be given in accordance with rules of court.”
After subsection (5) insert—
“(5A) Subsection (5B) applies if—
the person is before the judge in pursuance of subsection (2); and
the documents specified in subsection (4) have not been produced to the judge.
(5B) The judge must remand the person in custody or on bail (subject to subsection (6)).”
In subsection (6) after “subsection (2)” insert “ , (2A) or (3) ”.
After subsection (8) insert—
“(8A) In calculating a period of 48 hours for the purposes of this section no account is to be taken of—
any Saturday or Sunday;
Christmas Day;
Good Friday; or
any day falling within subsection (8B).
(8B) The following days fall within this subsection—
in Scotland, any day prescribed under section 8(2) of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 as a court holiday in the court of the appropriate judge;
in any part of the United Kingdom, any day that is a bank holiday under the Banking and Financial Dealings Act 1971 in that part of the United Kingdom.”
In section 7(1)(b) of the Extradition Act 2003 (c. 41) (application of provisions for verifying the identity of the person arrested) for “is arrested under section 5 and section 6(2)” substitute “ arrested under section 5 is brought before the appropriate judge under section 6 and section 6(2A) ”.


Use of live link in extradition proceedings
After section 206 of the Extradition Act 2003 insert—
106	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 6 – Extradition
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


“Live links

206A Use of live links at certain hearings
This section applies in relation to—
a hearing before the appropriate judge in proceedings under Part 1, other than—
an extradition hearing within the meaning of that Part;
a hearing under section 54 or 56, and
a hearing before the appropriate judge in proceedings under Part 2, other than an extradition hearing within the meaning of that Part.
If satisfied that the person affected by an extradition claim is likely to be in custody during the hearing, the appropriate judge may give a live link direction at any time before the hearing.
A live link direction is a direction that, if the person is being held in custody at the time of the hearing, any attendance at the hearing is to be through a live link from the place at which the person is held.
Such a direction—
may be given on the appropriate judge's own motion or on the application of a party to the proceedings, and
may be given in relation to all subsequent hearings to which this section applies, or to such hearing or hearings to which this section applies as may be specified or described in the direction.
The appropriate judge may give such a direction only if satisfied that it is not contrary to the interests of justice to give the direction.
A person affected by an extradition claim is to be treated as present in court when, by virtue of a live link direction, the person attends a hearing through a live link.

206B Live links: supplementary
The appropriate judge may rescind a live link direction at any time before or during a hearing to which it relates.
The appropriate judge must not give a live link direction or rescind such a direction unless the parties to the proceedings have been given the opportunity to make representations.
If a hearing takes place in relation to the giving or rescinding of a live link direction, the appropriate judge may require or permit any party to the proceedings who wishes to make representations to do so through a live link.
If in a case where an appropriate judge has power to give a live link direction but decides not to do so, the appropriate judge must—
state in open court the reasons for not doing so, and
cause those reasons to be entered in the register of proceedings.
Subsection (7) applies if—
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Part 6 – Extradition
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
107


an application for a live link direction is made under section 206A(4) in relation to a qualifying hearing but the application is refused, or
a live link direction is given in relation to a qualifying hearing but the direction is rescinded before the hearing takes place.
A hearing is a qualifying hearing—
in relation to proceedings under Part 1, if it is a hearing by virtue of which section 4(3) would be complied with;
in relation to proceedings under Part 2, if it is a hearing by virtue of which section 72(3) or 74(3) would be complied with.
The requirement in section 4(3), 72(3) or 74(3) (as the case requires) to bring the person as soon as practicable before the appropriate judge is to be read as a requirement to bring the person before that judge as soon as practicable after the application is refused or the direction is rescinded.

206C Live links: interpretation
This section applies for the purposes of section 206A and subsections (2) and
(3) also apply for the purposes of section 206B.
In relation to proceedings under Part 1, section 67 applies for determining the appropriate judge.
In relation to proceedings under Part 2, section 139 applies for determining the appropriate judge.
A person is affected by an extradition claim if—
a Part 1 warrant is issued in respect of the person;
the person is arrested under section 5;
a request for the person's extradition is made; or
a warrant under section 73 is issued in respect of the person.
References to being in custody include—
in England and Wales, references to being in police detention within the meaning of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984;
in Northern Ireland, references to being in police detention within the meaning of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989;
in Scotland, references to detention under section 14 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995.
“Live link” means an arrangement by which a person, while absent from the place where the hearing is being held, is able—
to see and hear the appropriate judge, and other persons,
to  be  seen  and  heard  by  the  judge,  other  persons, and for this purpose any impairment of eyesight or hearing is to be disregarded.”

108	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 7 – Aviation security
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Part 7

Aviation security

Security planning for airports
After Part 2 of the Aviation Security Act 1982 (c. 36) insert—

“Part 2A
Security planning for aerodromes

Aerodromes to which Part 2A applies

24AA Aerodromes to which Part 2A applies
This Part applies to—
any aerodrome in respect of which a direction under section 12, 13 or 14 to the manager of the aerodrome is in force, and
any other aerodrome specified in an order made by the Secretary of State.
Any reference in the following provisions of this Part to an aerodrome is a reference to an aerodrome to which this Part applies.
The power to make an order under this section is exercisable by statutory instrument subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.

Risk assessment at aerodromes

24AB Risk advisory groups
The manager of an aerodrome must establish a group (“a risk advisory group”) for the aerodrome.
The group is to consist of—
an individual nominated by the manager,
the chief officer of police for the relevant police area or an individual nominated by the chief officer, and
the individuals (if any) nominated under subsections (3) to (6).
The manager of the aerodrome may at any time nominate one or more individuals to be members of the group (in addition to the individual nominated under subsection (2)(a)).
The chief officer of police may at any time nominate one individual to be a member of the group (in addition to the individual, if any, nominated under subsection (2)(b)).
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 2A – Security planning for aerodromes Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
109


The Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs may at any time nominate one individual to be a member of the group.
The Secretary of State may at any time nominate one or more individuals to be members of the group.
If the manager of the aerodrome wishes to make a nomination under subsection (3) at any time after the establishment of the group, the manager must consult the group before making the nomination.
An individual may be nominated under subsections (2) to (6) only if the individual has knowledge or experience which is relevant to the assessment of threats, or particular kinds of threats, to the security of aerodromes.
The group must permit any individuals nominated by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this subsection to attend meetings of the group as observers.

24AC Functions of risk advisory groups
The risk advisory group for an aerodrome must prepare a risk report for the aerodrome before the end of the period of 2 months beginning with the day by which the group is required to be established.
A risk report is a document containing an assessment of each threat to the security of the aerodrome.
In relation to each such threat, the risk report must also—
contain an assessment of the effectiveness of any security measures that are being taken in relation to the aerodrome in response to the threat, and
set out the recommendations of the group as to the security measures that should be taken, or continue to be taken, in response to the threat.
The group—
must from time to time revise the assessments contained in the report so as to keep them up to date, and
may at any time revise the recommendations.
Where the report is prepared or revised, the group must give a copy of it to the manager of the aerodrome.
The manager of the aerodrome must then give a copy of the report to each member of the security executive group for the aerodrome.
If the Secretary of State at any time requests a copy of the risk report for an aerodrome, the manager of the aerodrome must give the Secretary of State a copy of the report (or, in the case of a report which has been revised, the report as so revised).
In subsection (1), “the day by which the group is required to be established” means the day which is the relevant day in relation to the aerodrome for the purposes of section 24AL.
110	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 2A – Security planning for aerodromes
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


24AD Discharge of functions by risk advisory groups
In exercising its functions, the risk advisory group for an aerodrome must have regard to—
any directions given under section 12, 13, 13A or 14,
any national threat assessment, and
any guidance given by the Secretary of State which is relevant to the group's functions.
A member of the risk advisory group may not disclose any information received by the member in the exercise of the member's functions under this Part except—
for the purpose of any of those functions, or
for any other purpose connected with the making of aerodrome security plans or their implementation.
In this section, “national threat assessment” means any assessment issued by the Secretary of State of a threat to the aviation industry.

Aerodrome security planning

24AE Aerodrome security plans
There must be an aerodrome security plan in force in relation to an aerodrome at all times after the period of 9 months beginning with the day by which the security executive group for the aerodrome is required to be established.
An aerodrome security plan is a plan which specifies—
the security measures, if any, that each relevant person is to take in relation to the aerodrome during the period for which the plan is in force, and
the arrangements for monitoring the implementation of those measures (“monitoring arrangements”).
An aerodrome security plan may specify steps to be taken by a relevant person for the purposes of the monitoring arrangements (“monitoring steps”).
The relevant persons are—
the manager of the aerodrome,
the chief officer of police for the relevant police area,
any operator of an aircraft that takes off from, or lands at, the aerodrome,
any person who is permitted to have access to the aerodrome for the purposes of a business carried on by the person,
any person who occupies any land forming part of the aerodrome,
the Serious Organised Crime Agency,
the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs, and
the Secretary of State.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 2A – Security planning for aerodromes Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
111


If the plan specifies security measures to be taken by a person within subsection (4)(a) or (c) to (h) (“B”), the plan may also specify—
that any other relevant person is to make payments in respect of the costs reasonably incurred by B in connection with the security measures, and
the amount of those payments or the manner in which their amount is to be assessed.
If the plan specifies security measures to be taken by a person within subsection (4)(c) to (h), the plan may also specify that the manager of the aerodrome is to provide accommodation or facilities in connection with those measures.
A relevant person must comply with any provision of an aerodrome security plan which provides that the person is to—
take a security measure,
take a monitoring step, or
make any payments or provide any accommodation or facilities.
In subsection (1), “the day by which the security executive group for the aerodrome is required to be established” means the day which is the relevant day in relation to the aerodrome for the purposes of section 24AL.

24AF Aerodrome security plans: duration etc.
An aerodrome security plan must specify the period for which it is to be in force.
In the case of the first plan for the aerodrome, the period specified must—
begin on the day after the end of the period mentioned in section 24AE(1), and
end on either the 31 March next following that day or on any subsequent 31 March specified in the plan.
In the case of any subsequent plan, the period specified must—
begin on 1 April, and
end on either the 31 March next following that day or on any subsequent 31 March specified in the plan.
An aerodrome security plan ceases to be in force if the aerodrome to which it relates ceases to be one to which this Part applies.
If there is a dispute about security planning for an aerodrome which relates to an aerodrome security plan which is not in force, the Secretary of State may direct that the plan is to come into force at the beginning of a day other than that specified in subsection (2)(a) or (3)(a).

24AG Security executive groups
The manager of an aerodrome must establish a group (“the security executive group”) for the aerodrome.
The group is to consist of—
a representative of the manager of the aerodrome,
112	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 2A – Security planning for aerodromes
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


the chief officer of police for the relevant police area or a representative of the chief officer,
a representative of the police authority for the relevant police area,
if the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs so request, a representative of the Commissioners,
if the Serious Organised Crime Agency so request, a representative of the Agency,
the individual nominated under subsection (3), and
any individuals nominated under subsections (4) to (6).
The manager of the aerodrome must nominate as a member of the group an individual who appears to the manager to represent the interests of the operators of aircraft that take off from, or land at, the aerodrome.
The Secretary of State may at any time nominate as a member of the group an official of the Secretary of State who exercises functions relating to immigration.
The manager of the aerodrome or the Secretary of State may at any time nominate as a member of the group an individual who is, or who appears to the manager or (as the case may be) the Secretary of State to represent the interests of, a particular relevant person within section 24AE(4)(c) to (e).
The manager of the aerodrome or the Secretary of State may at any time nominate as a member of the group an individual who appears to the manager or (as the case may be) the Secretary of State to represent the interests of any description of relevant persons within section 24AE(4)(c) to (e).
More than one individual may be nominated under subsection (5) or (6) (but not in relation to the same relevant person or description of relevant persons).
The group must permit any individuals nominated by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this subsection to attend meetings of the group as observers.

24AH Functions of security executive groups
The security executive group for an aerodrome must—
decide the contents of each aerodrome security plan for the aerodrome, and
keep the contents of each plan under review and decide whether (and, if so, how) they should be varied.
No provision may be included in an aerodrome security plan unless all the members of the group unanimously agree that it should be included.
An aerodrome security plan may not be varied unless all the members of the group unanimously agree to the variation.
But the agreement of a member is not required for the purposes of subsection (2) or (3) if the member unreasonably fails to inform the other members of the group whether the member agrees or disagrees to the inclusion of the provision or (as the case may be) to the variation.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 2A – Security planning for aerodromes Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
113


If the Secretary of State at any time requests a copy of an aerodrome security plan, the manager of the aerodrome must give a copy of the plan to the Secretary of State.

24AI Objections to proposals by security executive groups
The security executive group for an aerodrome must notify a person to whom this section applies if—
the group proposes to include a provision in an aerodrome security plan or to vary a provision in a plan, and
the provision (or the provision as varied) would by virtue of section 24AE require the person to—
take a security measure,
take a monitoring step, or
make any payments.
This section applies to—
any relevant person within section 24AE(4)(c) to (e), other than such a person who is represented on the security executive group by virtue of section 24AG(5),
the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs, unless the Commissioners are represented on the group,
the Serious Organised Crime Agency, unless the Agency is represented on the group,
the Secretary of State, unless the Secretary of State has made a nomination under section 24AG(4).
A person notified under subsection (1) may object to the proposal by informing the group that the person objects.
The person must give the group the reasons for the objection.
The objection must be made before the end of the period of 30 days beginning with the day on which the person was notified of the proposal (“the 30 day period”).
The group must consider an objection made by a person in accordance with this section.
If the members of the group and the person are unable to reach agreement on whether or not the proposal should be withdrawn or varied in the light of the objection, the member of the group who represents the manager of the aerodrome must refer the matter under section 24AN(1) (disputes about security plans).
A provision mentioned in subsection (1) may not be included in an aerodrome security plan or (as the case may be) may not be varied before the end of the 30 day period.
If an objection is made in accordance with this section before the end of the 30 day period the provision may not be included in the plan or (as the case may be) may not be varied unless—
114	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 2A – Security planning for aerodromes
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


the members of the group and the person who objected agree that it may be included or varied, or
it is included or varied by virtue of section 24AQ (powers in relation to disputes about security plans).

24AJ Discharge of functions by security executive groups
In exercising its functions, the security executive group for an aerodrome must have regard to—
any directions given under section 12, 13, 13A or 14,
the risk report for the aerodrome,
any national threat assessment, and
any guidance given by the Secretary of State which is relevant to the group's functions.
The group must—
consider each recommendation in the risk report, and
ensure that a record of its decision whether to accept or reject the recommendation, together with the reasons for the decision, is appended to an aerodrome security plan.
A member of the security executive group may not disclose any information received by the member in the exercise of the member's functions under this Part except—
for the purpose of any of those functions, or
for any other purpose connected with the making of aerodrome security plans or their implementation.
In this section, “national threat assessment” means any assessment issued by the Secretary of State of a threat to the aviation industry.

Aerodrome security groups: general

24AK Aerodrome groups: supplemental
An individual may be a member of both the risk advisory group and the security executive group for an aerodrome.
The manager of the aerodrome may at any time—
revoke a nomination under section 24AB(2)(a) or 24AG(3), and
make another nomination under that provision.
A person who makes a nomination under section 24AB(2)(b) or (3) to (6) or
(9) or section 24AG(4) to (6) or (8) may at any time revoke the nomination (whether or not the person makes another nomination under the provision in question).
Except as provided by this Part, risk advisory groups and security executive groups may decide their own procedures (and, in particular, may allow individuals who are not members of the groups to attend meetings and take part in discussions).
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 2A – Security planning for aerodromes Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
115


The manager of an aerodrome must ensure that the risk advisory group and the security executive group for the aerodrome have such accommodation and facilities as are necessary to enable them to discharge their functions.

24AL Period for establishment of aerodrome groups
The risk advisory group and the security executive group for an aerodrome must each be established before the relevant day.
In the case of an aerodrome to which this Part applies on the commencement date, the relevant day is —
in relation to the risk advisory group, the end of the period of 1 month beginning with the commencement date, and
in relation to the security executive group, the end of the period of 3 months beginning with the commencement date.
In subsection (2), “commencement date” means the date on which section 79 of the Policing and Crime Act 2009 comes into force.
In the case of any other aerodrome to which this Part applies, the relevant day is—
in relation to the risk advisory group, the end of the period of 1 month beginning with the date on which the aerodrome becomes one to which this Part applies, and
in relation to the security executive group, the end of the period of 3 months beginning with that date.

Disputes about security planning

24AM Meaning of dispute about security planning
This section applies for the purposes of the following provisions of this Part.
There is a dispute about security planning for an aerodrome if there is—
a dispute about the contents of an aerodrome security plan for the aerodrome (see subsection (3)), or
a dispute about the implementation of an aerodrome security plan for the aerodrome (see subsection (4)).
There is a dispute about the contents of an aerodrome security plan for an aerodrome if—
there is a dispute between any of the members of the security executive group about the provisions to be included in a plan and, in consequence, there is, or there is likely to be, a breach of the requirement imposed by section 24AE(1),
there is a dispute between any of the members of the security executive group about whether or how a plan should be varied, or
the members of the security executive group and a relevant person who makes an objection under section 24AI are unable to reach agreement on whether or not a proposal by the group should be withdrawn or varied in the light of the objection.
116	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 2A – Security planning for aerodromes
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


There is a dispute about the implementation of an aerodrome security plan if a member of the security executive group for the aerodrome thinks that a relevant person in relation to the aerodrome is failing to, or has failed to, comply with the duty in section 24AE(7).

24AN Power to refer dispute to Secretary of State
If there is a dispute about the contents of an aerodrome security plan, any member of the security executive group for the aerodrome may refer the dispute to the Secretary of State.
If there is a dispute about the implementation of an aerodrome security plan, any member of the security executive group for the aerodrome may refer the dispute to the Secretary of State.

24AO Powers of Secretary of State in relation to disputes
This section applies where—
a dispute about security planning for an aerodrome is referred to the Secretary of State under section 24AN, or
although no such reference is made, the Secretary of State thinks that there is a dispute about security planning for the aerodrome.
The Secretary of State may require—
any member of the security executive group for the aerodrome, or
any relevant person in relation to the aerodrome,
to take such steps as the Secretary of State thinks may assist to resolve the dispute.
The Secretary of State may require any relevant person in relation to the aerodrome to make payments in respect of any costs incurred by another person (whether or not a relevant person) in connection with the taking of the steps mentioned in subsection (2).
The payments that may be required under subsection (3) include payments in respect of any costs incurred by the Secretary of State (including any costs attributable to the work of officials of the Secretary of State).
If the Secretary of State decides not to exercise the power in subsection (2), or if the Secretary of State exercises that power but the dispute is not resolved, the Secretary of State may determine the dispute.

24AP Dispute resolution: procedure
This section applies where the Secretary of State is determining a dispute about security planning for an aerodrome.
The Secretary of State must give—
each relevant person who appears to the Secretary of State to have an interest in the matter in dispute, and
each member of the security executive group,
an opportunity to make representations about the matter in dispute.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 2A – Security planning for aerodromes Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
117


In the case of a dispute about the contents of an aerodrome security plan, the Secretary of State must have regard to the matters specified in section 24AJ(1) (so far as relevant to the matter in dispute).
Subject to subsections (2) and (3), the Secretary of State may decide the procedure for determining the dispute.
In particular, the Secretary of State may require a person mentioned in subsection (2)(a) or (b) to provide the Secretary of State or another person mentioned in that subsection with such information as the Secretary of State may specify.
Subsection (7) applies if, in determining a dispute about security planning, the Secretary of State—
provides information to a person mentioned in subsection (2)(a) or (b), or
requires such a person to provide information to another person under subsection (5).
The Secretary of State may require the person to whom the information is provided not to disclose the information without the consent of the Secretary of State.

24AQ Dispute resolution: powers
This section applies where the Secretary of State has considered a dispute about security planning at an aerodrome.
Where the dispute is about the contents of an aerodrome security plan, the Secretary of State may—
make a declaration that a provision specified in the declaration is or is not to be included in the plan;
make a declaration varying the plan.
Where the dispute is about the implementation of a plan, the Secretary of State may do any or all of the following—
make a declaration as to how any provision of the plan is to be construed;
make a declaration as to how any provision of the plan is to be, or ought to have been, implemented;
make a declaration varying the plan.
In relation to any dispute, the Secretary of State may (whether or not the Secretary of State exercises any other power under this section) do either or both of the following—
determine that a relevant person must pay to any other relevant person (“B”) a specified sum, or a sum to be assessed in a specified manner, in respect of costs reasonably incurred by B in connection with any security measures taken by B in relation to the aerodrome;
make an order requiring a relevant person to pay costs.
Subsection (4)(a) does not apply in relation to security measures taken by the chief officer of police for the relevant police area.
118	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 2A – Security planning for aerodromes
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


In subsection (4)(b) “costs” means—
the legal or other costs incurred by the Secretary of State (including costs attributable to the work of officials of the Secretary of State), and
the legal or other costs incurred by any members of the security executive group or any of the relevant persons.

24AR Dispute resolution: appeals and enforcement etc.
A relevant person may appeal to the High Court against—
any requirement imposed on the person under section 24AO(3), or
any declaration, determination or order of the Secretary of State under section 24AQ which affects that person.
Any requirement imposed under section 24AO(3) or 24AP(7), and any declaration, determination or order made under section 24AQ, may, with the permission of the High Court, be enforced as if it were a judgment of the High Court (and may, in particular, be enforced by the use of powers in relation to contempt of court).
In the application of this section to Scotland, references to the High Court are to be read as references to the Court of Session.

General and supplemental

24AS Power to except or modify
The Secretary of State may by order provide that this Part—
does not apply in relation to a specified aerodrome in respect of which any directions under section 12, 13, 13A or 14 are in force, or
applies in relation to such an aerodrome with specified modifications.
In subsection (1) “specified” means specified in the order.
The power to make an order under this section is exercisable by statutory instrument subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.

24AT Interpretation
In this Part—
“aerodrome” is to be construed in accordance with section 24AA(2); “aerodrome  security  plan”  has  the  meaning  given  by
section 24AE(2);
“dispute about security planning for an aerodrome”, “dispute about the contents of an aerodrome security plan” and “dispute about the implementation of an aerodrome security plan” have the meanings given by section 24AM(2) to (4);
“relevant persons”, in relation to an aerodrome, means the persons mentioned in section 24AE(4);
“relevant police area”, in relation to an aerodrome, means the police area in which the aerodrome is wholly or mainly situated;
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 2A – Security planning for aerodromes Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
119


“risk advisory group”, in relation to an aerodrome, means the group established for the aerodrome in accordance with section 24AB;
“risk report”, in relation to an aerodrome, has the meaning given by section 24AC(2);
“security executive group”, in relation to an aerodrome, means the group established for the aerodrome in accordance with section 24AG; “security measure”, in relation to an aerodrome, means any measure
taken for a purpose to which Part 2 applies (protection of aerodromes etc. against acts of violence) or otherwise for the purpose of preventing crime or preserving the peace at the aerodrome, but it does not include—
any measure specified in a direction under Part 2, or
any measure which an officer of Revenue and Customs or an official of the Secretary of State exercising functions in relation to immigration is required to take by virtue of any enactment.
Any reference in this Part to the security of an aerodrome includes a reference to the preservation of the peace at the aerodrome (and any reference to a threat to the security of the aerodrome is to be construed accordingly).
Any reference in the preceding provisions of this Part to a person nominated under a provision of this Part is a reference to a person who has been nominated under that provision and accepts that nomination (unless the context otherwise requires).
If an aerodrome to which this Part applies—
ceases to be such an aerodrome, but
subsequently becomes such an aerodrome again,
this Part applies in relation to the aerodrome as if it had become an aerodrome to which this Part applies for the first time.
For the purposes of this Part the risk advisory group for an aerodrome is to be treated as established when both of the following conditions are first met—
the person nominated by the manager of the aerodrome under section 24AB(2)(a) accepts the nomination;
the chief officer of police for the relevant police area informs the manager of the aerodrome that either the chief officer will serve as a member of the group or that a person nominated by the chief officer for the purposes of section 24AB(2)(b) has accepted the nomination.
For the purposes of this Part the security executive group for an aerodrome is to be treated as established when all of the following conditions are first met—
the manager of the aerodrome appoints a representative under section 24AG(2)(a);
the chief officer of police for the relevant police area informs the manager of the aerodrome that either the chief officer will serve as a member of the group or that the chief officer has appointed a representative for the purposes of section 24AG(2)(b);
the police authority for the relevant police area informs the manager of the aerodrome that the police authority has appointed a representative for the purposes of section 24AG(2)(c);
120	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 8 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 1 – Safeguarding vulnerable groups and criminal records
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

a person nominated by the manager of the aerodrome under section 24AG(3) accepts the nomination.
In the application of this Part to Scotland—
references to the chief officer of police for the relevant police area are to be read as references to the chief constable of the police force for that area, and
references to the police authority for the relevant police area are, where a joint police board is constituted for that area in accordance with an amalgamation scheme made under the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 (c. 77), to be read as references to that joint police board.
In the application of this Part to Northern Ireland—
references to the chief officer of police for the relevant police area are to be read as references to the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland, and
references to the police authority for the relevant police area are to be read as references to the Northern Ireland Policing Board.”


Policing at airports
Schedule 6 (which amends Part 3 of the Aviation Security Act 1982 (c. 36) and makes transitional and saving provision) has effect.



Part 8

Miscellaneous


Chapter 1

Safeguarding vulnerable groups and criminal records

Renaming of Independent Barring Board

Renaming of Independent Barring Board
The Independent Barring Board is renamed the Independent Safeguarding Authority.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Part 8 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 1 – Safeguarding vulnerable groups and criminal records Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
121


For the words in the left-hand column of the table, wherever they appear in the enactments mentioned in subsection (3), substitute the corresponding words in the right-hand column of the table.

Existing words	Substitution
“Independent Barring Board”	“Independent Safeguarding Authority” “Independent Barring Board's”	“Independent Safeguarding Authority's” “IBB”	“ISA”
“IBB's”	“ISA's”

The enactments are—
Schedule 1 to the Superannuation Act 1972 (c. 11),
sections 7 and 11 of the Police Pensions Act 1976 (c. 35),
section 35C of the Medical Act 1983 (c. 54),
section 13D of the Opticians Act 1989 (c. 44),
section 20 of the Osteopaths Act 1993 (c. 21),
section 20 of the Chiropractors Act 1994 (c. 17),
section 97 of the Police Act 1996 (c. 16),
sections 113BA, 113BB, 113CA and 113CB of the Police Act 1997 (c. 50),
sections 56 and 75 of the Data Protection Act 1998 (c. 29),
paragraph 1 of Schedule 2 to the Teaching and Higher Education Act 1998 (c. 30),
section 167C of the Education Act 2002 (c. 32),
section 171 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 (c. 40),
the following enactments in the Safeguarding Vulnerable Groups Act 2006 (c. 47) (including any relevant headings)—
sections 1, 2, 4[F43, 6, 15, 25], 35, 36 to 47 and 50,
paragraphs 1, 3 to 7 and 9 to 16 of Schedule 1,
paragraphs 1 and 2 of Schedule 2,
paragraphs 2 to 6, 8 to 21, 23 and 25 of Schedule 3,
[F44paragraphs 4 and 8 of Schedule 4,]
[F45paragraph 2 of Schedule 5, and]
paragraphs 1 to 3 of Schedule 8,
sections 39, 40 and 97 of, and Schedule 5 to, the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007 (asp 14),
the following enactments in the Safeguarding Vulnerable Groups (Northern Ireland) Order 2007 (S.I. 2007/1351 (N.I. 11)) (including any relevant headings)—
Articles 2, 5, 6, 8, 10, 19, 29, 37 to 49 and 52,
paragraphs 2 to 6, 8 to 21, 23 and 25 of Schedule 1,
paragraphs 4 and 8 of Schedule 2,
paragraph 2 of Schedule 3, and
paragraphs 1 to 3 of Schedule 6, and
sections 130 and 141 of the Education and Skills Act 2008 (c. 25).
In the following enactments for “the Board” substitute “ the Authority ”
122	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 8 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 1 – Safeguarding vulnerable groups and criminal records
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

section 167C of the Education Act 2002 (c. 32) (both as inserted by the Education and Inspections Act 2006 (c. 40) and as substituted by the Education and Skills Act 2008 (c. 25)), and
section 130(4) of the Education and Skills Act 2008 (c. 25).
Any reference (other than those dealt with by subsections (2) to (4) above) to the Independent Barring Board in any enactment or other document passed or made before the commencement of this section is to be read as a reference to the Independent Safeguarding Authority.
Any reference to the Independent Safeguarding Authority which arises by virtue of this section is to be read, in relation to times before the commencement of this section, as a reference to the Independent Barring Board.
In this section—
“enactment” includes an Act of the Scottish Parliament, Northern Ireland legislation and an enactment comprised in subordinate legislation,
“subordinate legislation” has the same meaning as in the Interpretation Act 1978 (c. 30)) and also includes an instrument made under—
an Act of the Scottish Parliament, or
Northern Ireland legislation.


Safeguarding vulnerable groups: England and Wales


Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Part 8 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 1 – Safeguarding vulnerable groups and criminal records Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

F4683	Monitoring application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123



F4684	Monitoring: additional fees
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .





124	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 8 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 1 – Safeguarding vulnerable groups and criminal records
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



88	Provision of safeguarding information to the police
After section 50 of the Safeguarding Vulnerable Groups Act 2006 (c. 47) insert—

“Provision of information to the police

50A Provision of information to the police
ISA may provide any information it has to a chief officer of police for use for any of the following purposes—
the prevention, detection and investigation of crime;
the apprehension and prosecution of offenders.
The power conferred by subsection (1) does not limit any other power of ISA to provide information for any purpose or to any person.”



Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Part 8 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 1 – Safeguarding vulnerable groups and criminal records Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

Safeguarding vulnerable groups: Northern Ireland
125




Provision of safeguarding information to the police: Northern Ireland
After Article 52 of the Safeguarding Vulnerable Groups (Northern Ireland) Order 2007 (S.I. 2007/1351 (N.I. 11)) insert—

“Provision of information to the police

52A	Provision of information to the police
ISA may provide any information it has to the chief constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland for use for any of the following purposes—
the prevention, detection and investigation of crime;
the apprehension and prosecution of offenders.
The power conferred by paragraph (1) does not limit any other power of ISA to provide information for any purpose or to any person.”



126	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 8 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 1 – Safeguarding vulnerable groups and criminal records
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

Criminal records etc



PROSPECTIVE

94	Certificates of criminal records etc: right to work information
In the Police Act 1997 after section 113CC insert—

“113CD Immigration information relevant to employment
This section applies where—
an application for a certificate under section 112, 113A or 113B contains a request for information under this section,
in the case of an application for a certificate under section 112, the application contains a statement that the information is sought for the purposes of employment with a person specified in the application, and
the applicant pays in the prescribed manner any additional fee prescribed in respect of the application.
The certificate must state—
whether according to records held by the Secretary of State the applicant is subject to immigration control, or
that records held by the Secretary of State do not show whether the applicant is subject to immigration control.
If the records show that the applicant is subject to immigration control, the certificate must state—
whether according to the records the applicant has been granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom, or
that the records do not show whether the applicant has been granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom.
If the records show that the applicant has been granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom, the certificate must state—
whether according to the records the applicant's leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom is current, or
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Part 8 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 1 – Safeguarding vulnerable groups and criminal records Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
127




Registered persons
Section 120A of the Police Act 1997 (refusal and cancellation of registration), as inserted by section 134 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16), is amended as follows.
In subsection (3) (matters to which Secretary of State may have regard in considering suitability of persons likely to have access to information) for paragraph (b) substitute—
“(b) any information relating to the person of a kind specified in subsection (3A);”.
After subsection (3) insert— “(3A) The information is—
whether the person is barred from regulated activity;
128	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 8 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 1 – Safeguarding vulnerable groups and criminal records
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

if the person is barred from such activity, such details as are prescribed of the circumstances in which the person became barred;
whether the Independent Safeguarding Authority is considering whether to include the person in a barred list in pursuance of paragraph 3, 5, 9 or 11 of Schedule 3 to the Safeguarding Vulnerable
Groups Act 2006;
whether the person is subject to a direction under section 167A of the Education Act 2002 (prohibition on participation in management of independent school).
(3B) Subsection (3C) applies if—
the Secretary of State receives an application for registration, and
it appears to the Secretary of State that the registration is likely to make it possible for information to become available to an individual who the Independent Safeguarding Authority is considering whether to include in a barred list as mentioned in subsection (3A)(c).
(3C) The Secretary of State may postpone consideration of the application until the Authority has decided whether to include the individual in the barred list.
(3D) Expressions used in subsections (3A) to (3C) and in the Safeguarding Vulnerable Groups Act 2006 have the same meaning in those subsections as in that Act, except that “prescribed” must be construed in accordance with section 125 of this Act.”
After subsection (6) insert—
“(7) The Secretary of State may by order made by statutory instrument amend subsection (3A) for the purpose of altering the information specified in that subsection.
(8) Such an order is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”


Criminal records: applications
Before section 126 of the Police Act 1997 (c. 50) insert—

“125B Form of applications
The Secretary of State may determine the form, manner and contents of an application for the purposes of any provision of this Part.
A determination may, in particular, impose requirements about the form or manner in which an electronic application is to be signed or countersigned.”
In the following provisions of that Act omit “in the prescribed manner and form”— section 112(1)(a) (criminal conviction certificates),
section 113A(1)(a) (criminal record certificates),
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Part 8 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 2 – Other
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
129


section 113B(1)(a) (enhanced criminal record certificates).
In the following provisions of that Act omit “in the prescribed form”— section 114(1)(a) (criminal record certificates: Crown employment),
section 116(1)(a) (enhanced criminal record certificates: judicial appointments and Crown employment).



Chapter 2

Other

Border controls

General information powers in relation to persons entering or leaving the UK
After section 157 of the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979 (c. 2) (general powers: bonds and security) insert—

“157A General information powers in relation to persons entering or leaving the United Kingdom
The proper officer of Revenue and Customs may require any person entering or leaving the United Kingdom—
to produce the person's passport or travel documents for examination, or
to answer any questions put by the proper officer of Revenue and Customs about the person's journey.
In subsection (1) “passport” means—
a United Kingdom passport (within the meaning of the Immigration Act 1971),
a passport issued by or on behalf of the authorities of a country or territory outside the United Kingdom, or by or on behalf of an international organisation, or
a document that can be used (in some or all circumstances) instead of a passport.
Subsections (1) and (2) apply in relation to a transit air passenger arriving at the passenger's final destination in the United Kingdom as they apply in relation to a person entering the United Kingdom.
For the purposes of subsection (3) a transit air passenger is a person—
who has arrived by air in the United Kingdom; and
whose journey is continued or resumed by air to a destination in the United Kingdom which is not the place where the person is regarded for the purposes of this section as entering the United Kingdom;
130	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 8 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 2 – Other Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

and the passenger's final destination is the destination of the continued or resumed journey.”
In section 4(3) of the Finance (No. 2) Act 1992 (c. 48) (non-application of enforcement powers in the Act of 1979 to certain movements between member States), after paragraph (g), insert—
“(ga) section 157A (general information powers in relation to persons entering or leaving the United Kingdom)”.


Powers in relation to cash
After section 164 of the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979 (c. 2) (general powers etc: powers to search persons) insert—

“164A Powers to search for cash
(1) The provisions of this Act which fall within subsection (2) (search powers for officers of Revenue and Customs etc.) apply in accordance with subsection (3)
—
for the purposes of searching for cash—
which is recoverable property or is intended by any person for use in unlawful conduct; and
the amount of which is not less than the minimum amount;
for the purposes of searching for cash to ensure compliance with the Cash Control Regulation; or
for purposes connected to any such purposes.
The provisions of this Act which fall within this subsection are—
section 28(1) (powers of access etc.);
section 77(1) and (2) (information powers);
section 159(1) to (4) (powers to examine and take account of goods); and
section 164 (power to search persons including intimate searches).
Those provisions apply for the purposes mentioned in subsection (1) as if—
any reference in them to goods included a reference to cash; and
in section 164(1)—
the reference to an article were a reference to cash; and
paragraphs (a) and (b) were omitted.
The Treasury may by regulations provide for—
any provision of this Act to apply with modifications for the purposes of the provisions applied by subsections (1) to (3), or
any other enactment to apply, with or without modifications, for the purposes of the provisions so applied.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Part 8 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 2 – Other
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
131


This section does not limit the scope of any powers that exist apart from this section (whether under this Act or otherwise).
In this section—
“the 2002 Act” means the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002; “cash”—
so far as relating to purposes falling within subsection (1)(a) above, has the meaning given by section 289(6) and (7) of the 2002 Act; and
so far as relating to purposes falling within subsection (1)(b) above, has the same meaning as in the Cash Control Regulation; “the	Cash	Control	Regulation”	means	Regulation	(EC)
No. 1889/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 October 2005 on controls of cash entering or leaving the Community;
“minimum amount” has the meaning given by section 303 of the 2002 Act;
“modifications” includes omissions;
“recoverable property” has the meaning given by section 316(1) of the 2002 Act;
“unlawful conduct” has the meaning given by section 241 of the 2002 Act.”
In section 4(2) of the Finance (No. 2) Act 1992 (c. 48) (cases where enforcement powers exercisable)—
after “member States;” at the end of paragraph (b) omit “or”, and
after “Kingdom” at the end of paragraph (c) insert “; or
(d)	searching for cash that is recoverable property or intended for use in unlawful conduct”.
In section 4(5) of that Act (interpretation)—
after “In this section—”, insert—
““cash” has the meaning given by section 289(6) and (7) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002;”,
after “Economic Community;” omit “and”, and
after “1979;” insert—
““recoverable property” has the same meaning as in section 316(1) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002; and
“unlawful conduct” has the same meaning as in section 241 of that Act;”.
After section 105(5) of the Postal Services Act 2000 (c. 26) (application of customs and excise enactments to certain postal packets) insert—
“(6) And in this section “goods” includes cash (within the meaning of section 289(6) and (7) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002).”
132	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 8 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 2 – Other Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F51100  Lawful interception of postal items by Revenue and Customs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Prohibition on importation or exportation of false identity documents etc
The importation or exportation of any identity document to which this section applies is prohibited.
This section applies to—
any false identity document,
any identity document issued or obtained in contravention of the law of the country or territory under whose jurisdiction the document is issued, and
any identity document intended to be used (whether by itself or otherwise and with or without modifications)—
to establish for unlawful purposes a false identity or address, or
to provide for such purposes evidence of a false identity or address.
In this section—
“document” includes an article, or a combination of a document and an article, [F52in or on which information is or may be recorded, ]
“false”, in relation to an identity document, has the same meaning as it has in section 9(1) of the Forgery and Counterfeiting Act 1981 (c. 45) in relation to an instrument,
“identity document” means any document which may be used (whether by itself or otherwise and with or without modifications) to establish, or provide evidence of, a person's identity or address.

Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Part 8 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 2 – Other
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
133


PROSPECTIVE

Prohibition on importation of offensive weapons
After section 141ZA of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 (c. 33) insert—

“141ZB Importation of offensive weapons: prohibition
The importation of an offensive weapon is prohibited, subject to section 141ZC.
In this section “offensive weapon” means a weapon of a description specified in an order made by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this subsection.
The Secretary of State may not specify any of the following under subsection (2)—
a weapon subject to the Firearms Act 1968;
a crossbow.
Orders under this section are to be made by statutory instrument.
A statutory instrument containing an order under this section may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.
In the application of this section to Northern Ireland the reference in subsection (3) to the Firearms Act 1968 is to be construed as a reference to the Firearms (Northern Ireland) Order 2004.

141ZC Prohibition on importation of offensive weapons: exceptions
The importation of a weapon is not prohibited by section 141ZB if one of the following exceptions applies.
Exception 1 is that the weapon is imported for the purposes only of functions carried out on behalf of—
the Crown, or
a visiting force.
Exception 2 is that the weapon is imported for the purposes only of making it available to a museum or gallery which does not distribute profits.
Exception 3 is that the weapon is imported for the purposes only of making it available for one or more of the following—
theatrical performances;
rehearsals of theatrical performances;
the production of films;
the production of television programmes.
In subsection (4)—
“films” has the meaning given by section 5B of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988;
134	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 8 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 2 – Other Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

“television programmes” has the meaning given by section 405 of the Communications Act 2003.
The Secretary of State may by order provide for further exceptions from the prohibition on importation of weapons under section 141ZB.
Orders under this section are to be made by statutory instrument.
A statutory instrument containing an order under this section may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.
Expressions used in this section and in section 141 have the same meaning in this section as in that section.

141ZD Prohibition on importation of offensive weapons: burdens of proof
This section applies for the purposes of proceedings for an offence under the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979 relating to a weapon the importation of which is prohibited by section 141ZB above.
An exception conferred by or under section 141ZC is to be taken not to apply unless sufficient evidence is adduced to raise an issue with respect to the exception.
Where sufficient evidence is adduced to raise an issue with respect to an exception, it is to be taken to apply unless the contrary is proved beyond a reasonable doubt.”
Subsection (3) applies where in any proceedings—
a person (“the defendant”) is charged in respect of the same conduct with—
an offence under any provision of the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979 by virtue of the prohibition on importation in section 141(4) of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 as it had effect before its repeal by this Act (“the old offence”), and
an offence under that provision of the 1979 Act by virtue of the prohibition on importation in section 141ZB(1) of the 1988 Act (“the new offence”),
the only thing preventing the defendant from being found guilty of the new offence is the fact that it has not been proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the conduct took place after the commencement of this section, and
the only thing preventing the defendant from being found guilty of the old offence is the fact that it has not been proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the conduct took place before the commencement of this section.
For the purpose of determining the guilt of the defendant it is to be conclusively presumed that the conduct took place after the commencement of this section.
A reference in subsection (2) to an offence includes a reference to—
aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring the commission of the offence,
conspiracy to commit the offence,
an attempt to commit the offence,
incitement to commit the offence, and
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Part 8 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 2 – Other
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
135



Football spectators

Prohibiting attendance at matches in Scotland and Northern Ireland etc
In the provisions of the Football Spectators Act 1989 (c. 37) listed in subsection (2) for “England and Wales” (in each place) substitute “ the United Kingdom ”.
The provisions are—
in section 14 (definition of banning order and other terms), subsections (2), (3), (4), (5) and (6),
in section 19 (functions of enforcing authority and local police), subsections (2), (2A) and (2E)(a), and
in section 21A (summary measures: detention), subsection (1).
In section 19(2B)(b) of that Act omit “if the match is outside the United Kingdom”.


Requirements to report at police stations
The police station specified under any of the provisions listed in subsection (2) may be in England, Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland.
The provisions are—
section 14E(2) of the Football Spectators Act 1989 (banning order to include requirement to report initially at specified police station),
section 19(2B) of that Act (notice, in connection with regulated football match outside United Kingdom, requiring person to report at specified police station),
section 53(2) of the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006 (asp 10) (football banning order to include requirement to report initially at specified police station),
section 61(4) of that Act (notice, in connection with regulated football match outside United Kingdom, requiring person to report at specified police station).
In section 14E(2) of the Football Spectators Act 1989 (c. 37) omit “in England and Wales”.
In section 53(2)(a) of the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006 omit “in Scotland”.
In section 66(1) of that Act for “Scotland” substitute “ the United Kingdom ”.
136	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 8 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 2 – Other Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Enforcement of 1989 Act in Scotland and Northern Ireland
The following provisions of the Football Spectators Act 1989 extend to Scotland and Northern Ireland—
section 14J(1) (offence of failing to comply with a requirement imposed by a banning order or a requirement imposed under section 19(2B) or (2C)),
section 19(6) (offence of failing, without reasonable excuse, to comply with a requirement imposed under section 19(2)),
section 20(10) (offence of making a false statement, etc. in connection with an application for exemption from requirements imposed by or under Part 2).
But in Scotland it is a defence where a person is charged with an offence by virtue of subsection (1)(a) to prove that the person had a reasonable excuse for failing to comply with the requirement in question.
A person guilty of an offence by virtue of subsection (1)(a) is liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale (or both).
A person guilty of an offence by virtue of subsection (1)(b) is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 2 on the standard scale.
A person guilty of an offence by virtue of subsection (1)(c) is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.


Enforcement of 2006 Act in England and Wales and Northern Ireland
The following provisions of the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006 extend to England and Wales and Northern Ireland—
section 68(1) and (2) (offences of failing to comply with a requirement imposed by a football banning order, under section 61(1) or by a notice under section 61(4), and defence of reasonable excuse),
section 68(5) (offence of making a false statement, etc. in connection with an application for exemption from a notice under section 61(4)).
A person guilty of an offence under section 68(1)(a) or (c) of that Act by virtue of subsection (1)(a) is liable on summary conviction—
in England and Wales, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 51 weeks or a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale (or both),
in Northern Ireland, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale (or both).
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Part 8 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 2 – Other
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
137


But in relation to an offence committed before the commencement of section 281(5) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (c. 44) the reference in paragraph (a) to 51 weeks is to be read as a reference to 6 months.
A person guilty of an offence under section 68(1)(b) of the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006 (asp 10) by virtue of subsection (1)(a) is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 2 on the standard scale.
A person guilty of an offence by virtue of subsection (1)(b) is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.
Omit articles 1(5) and 5 of the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006 (Consequential Provisions and Modifications) Order 2007 (S.I. 2007/1098).


Relevant offences for purposes of Part 2 of 1989 Act
In Schedule 1 to the Football Spectators Act 1989 (c. 37) (offences) in paragraph 1(a)
—
after “14J(1)” insert “ , 19(6), 20(10) ”, and
after “of this Act” insert “ or section 68(1) or (5) of the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006 by virtue of section 106 of the Policing and Crime Act 2009 ”.


Other

Strategies for crime reduction etc: probation authorities
The Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (c. 37) is amended as follows.
In section 5 (authorities responsible for strategies) after subsection (1)(a) insert— “(aa)	every provider of probation services operating within the area
in pursuance of arrangements under section 3 of the Offender
Management Act 2007 which provide for it to be a responsible authority under this section;”.
In that section, in subsection (1B)(b), after “substances” insert “ or of reducing re- offending ”.
In section 6 (duty to formulate and implement strategy) at the end of subsection (1)
insert “; and
a strategy for the reduction of re-offending in the area”.
In that section, in subsection (9)(c), after “disorder” insert “ or re-offending ”.
138	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 8 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 2 – Other Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

In section 17(1) (duty to consider crime and disorder implications etc) at the end insert “; and
re-offending in its area”.


Application of aspects of UK law to SOCA employees working abroad
In paragraph 20 of Schedule 1 to the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c.15) (SOCA not a Crown body)—
at the beginning insert “ (1) Subject to sub-paragraphs (2) to (4), ”, and
at the end insert—
“(2) A member of SOCA's staff who is acting, or purporting to act, in the course of service as a member of SOCA's staff is to be treated, for the purposes of section 31(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1948 (jurisdiction in respect of certain indictable offences committed in foreign countries), as a British subject employed under Her Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom in the service of the Crown who is acting, or purporting to act, in the course of the employment.
A member of SOCA's staff, so far as performing outside the United Kingdom in the course of employment with SOCA or another person duties as a member of SOCA's staff, is to be treated as having overseas Crown employment for the purposes of sections 26 to 28 of the Income Tax (Earnings and Pensions) Act 2003 (liability to income tax on earnings for employees who are resident but not ordinarily resident in the UK or who are not resident in the UK).
A member of SOCA's staff who is obliged to live outside the United Kingdom in order to perform duties as a member of SOCA's staff is to be treated as being in employment under the Crown for the purposes of section 299 of the Act of 2003 (no liability to income tax for Crown employees' foreign service allowances).”


Partial exemption for SCDEA from Firearms Act 1968
In section 54(3) of the Firearms Act 1968 (c. 27) (police and other persons who are exempt from certain provisions of the Act and to whom other provisions apply with modifications), at the end of paragraph (c), insert “, or
a member of the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency”.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Part 9 – General
Chapter 2 – Other
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
139



Removal of limitation on warrants under Misuse of Drugs Act 1971
Section 23 of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (c. 38) (powers to search and obtain evidence) is amended as follows.
In subsection (3) omit “acting for the police area in which the premises are situated”.
Omit subsection (5).

Part 9

General

Minor and consequential amendments and repeals and revocations
Schedule 7 (which contains minor and consequential amendments and repeals and revocations of provisions which are superseded or no longer required or which have not been brought into force) has effect.
The provisions listed in Schedule 8 are repealed or revoked to the extent specified.
The Secretary of State may by order make such supplementary, incidental or consequential provision as the Secretary of State considers appropriate for the general purposes, or any particular purpose, of this Act or in consequence of any provision made by or under this Act or for giving full effect to this Act or any such provision.
The power conferred by subsection (3)—
is exercisable by statutory instrument, and
includes power to make transitional, transitory or saving provision.
The power conferred by this section may, in particular, be exercised by amending, repealing, revoking or otherwise modifying any provision made by or under an enactment (including this Act and any Act passed in the same Session as this Act).
An instrument containing an order under this section may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.
Subsection (6) does not apply to an instrument containing an order under this section if the order does not amend or repeal a provision of a public general Act.
An instrument containing an order under this section to which subsection (6) does not apply is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
For the purposes of subsection (7), an amendment or repeal is not an amendment or repeal of a provision of a public general Act if it is an amendment or repeal of a provision which has been inserted (whether by substitution or otherwise) into such an Act by a local Act or by any other Act which is not a public general Act.
140	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 9 – General
Chapter 2 – Other Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Transitional, transitory and saving provision
The Secretary of State may by order made by statutory instrument make such transitional, transitory or saving provision as the Secretary of State considers appropriate in connection with the coming into force of any provision of this Act.

[F53113ANorthern Ireland: minor and consequential amendments etc
In relation to the making of provision that could be made by an Act of the Northern Ireland Assembly without the consent of the Secretary of State (see sections 6 to 8 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998), in sections 112(3) and 113 references to the Secretary of State are to be read as references to the Department of Justice in Northern Ireland.
The power of the Department of Justice to make an order under section 112 or 113 is exercisable by statutory rule for the purposes of the Statutory Rules (Northern Ireland) Order 1979 (and not by statutory instrument).
Section 112(6) to (8) does not apply in relation to the power of the Department of Justice to make an order under section 112.
The Department of Justice may not make an order under section 112 unless a draft of the order has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, the Northern Ireland Assembly.
Subsection (4) does not apply to an order if the order does not amend or repeal a provision of a public general Act.
An order made by the Department of Justice under section 112 to which subsection (4) does not apply is subject to negative resolution (within the meaning of section 41(6) of the Interpretation Act (Northern Ireland) 1954).
Section 112(9) applies for the purposes of subsection (5) as it applies for the purposes of section 112(7).
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Part 9 – General
Chapter 2 – Other
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
141


Section 41(3) of the Interpretation Act (Northern Ireland) 1954 applies for the purposes of subsection (4) in relation to the laying of a draft as it applies in relation to the laying of a statutory document under an enactment.]


Financial provisions
The following are to be paid out of money provided by Parliament—
any expenditure incurred by virtue of this Act by a Minister of the Crown or government department, and
any increase attributable to this Act in the sums payable by virtue of any other Act out of money so provided.

Extent
An amendment, repeal or revocation made by this Act has the same extent as the provision amended, repealed or revoked subject to—
subsections (2) to (6), and
any express limitation contained in Schedule 7 or 8.
The following provisions extend to England and Wales and Northern Ireland only—
section 21 and Schedule 2,
sections 22 to 25,
section 30,
section 97,
section 106.
The following provisions extend to England and Wales only—
section 10(2),
section 27 and Schedule 3,
Part 4,
sections 93, 94 and 95,
section 104(1) and (2) (so far as relating to the Football Spectators Act 1989 (c. 37)).
Section 102 extends to England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Section 104(1) and (2) (so far as relating to the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006 (asp 10)) extends to Scotland only.
Subsections (1) and (3) to (5) of section 105 extend to Scotland and Northern Ireland and subsection (2) of that section extends to Scotland only.
142	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Part 9 – General
Chapter 2 – Other Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

Commencement
Subject as follows, this Act comes into force on such day as the Secretary of State may by order appoint.
[F54(1A) [F55Subject to subsection (2A),] the power to make provision by order under subsection (1) is exercisable by the Department of Justice in Northern Ireland (and not by the Secretary of State) so far as it may be used to make provision which could be made by an Act of the Northern Ireland Assembly without the consent of the Secretary of State (see sections 6 to 8 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998).]
Before making an order under subsection (1) relating to section 104 or 105, the Secretary of State [F56(but not the Department of Justice)] must obtain the consent of the Scottish Ministers.
[F57(2A) The power to make an order under subsection (1) relating to section 57 is exercisable by the Secretary of State only with the consent of the Department of Justice in Northern Ireland.]
The following provisions come into force on such day as the Treasury may by order appoint—
section 98,
section 99 and Part 9 of Schedule 8 (and section 112(2) so far as relating to that Part), and
section 101.
Section 27, Schedule 3 and paragraph 23 of Schedule 7 come into force—
in relation to England, on such day as the Secretary of State may by order appoint, and
in relation to Wales, on such day as the Welsh Ministers may by order appoint.
The following provisions come into force on the day on which this Act is passed—
section 81,
section 100,
section 111 and Part 12 of Schedule 8 (and section 112(2) so far as relating to that Part), and
sections 112(3) to (9) and 113 to 115, this section and section 117.
The following provisions come into force at the end of the period of 2 months beginning with the day on which this Act is passed—
Part 13 of Schedule 7 (and section 112(1) so far as relating to that Part), and
Part 13 of Schedule 8 (and section 112(2) so far as relating to that Part).
Any power to make an order under this section—
may be exercised by statutory instrument [F58(subject to subsection (8))],
may be exercised so as to appoint different days for different purposes or different areas,
includes power to make transitional, transitory or saving provision.
[F59(8) The power of the Department of Justice in Northern Ireland to make an order under subsection (1) is exercisable by statutory rule for the purposes of the Statutory Rules (Northern Ireland) Order 1979.]
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Part 9 – General
Chapter 2 – Other
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
143



Short title
This Act may be cited as the Policing and Crime Act 2009.
144	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 1 – Schedule to the Street Offences Act 1959
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes






SCHEDULES 


SCHEDULE 1	Section 17(4)

Schedule to the Street Offences Act 1959


“SCHEDULE	Section 1A(11)

ORDERS UNDER SECTION 1(2A): BREACH, AMENDMENT ETC.

Part 1

Preliminary

Interpretation and application
(1) This Schedule applies to an order made under section 1(2A).
In this Schedule, in relation to the order—
“the offender” means the person in respect of whom the order was made; “the supervisor” means the person for the time being specified as the
supervisor in the order.
For the purposes of this Schedule, the offender fails to comply with the order if the offender fails to attend any of the three meetings mentioned in section 1(2A) at the time and place determined by the supervisor.

Part 2

Breach of requirement of order

Breach of requirement of order
(1) If the supervisor is of the opinion that the offender has failed without reasonable excuse to comply with the order, the supervisor must cause an information to be laid before a justice of the peace in respect of the failure.
If it appears on information to the justice of the peace that the offender has failed to comply with the order, the justice may issue a summons requiring the offender to appear at the place and time specified in it.
Any such summons must direct the offender to appear before—
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 1 – Schedule to the Street Offences Act 1959 Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
145


a youth court acting in the relevant local justice area, if the offender is under the age of 18, or
a magistrates' court (other than a youth court) acting in the relevant local justice area, if the offender is aged 18 or over.
In sub-paragraph (3) “the relevant local justice area” means—
the local justice area for the time being specified in the order, or
if it appears to the justice of the peace that the offender resides in another local justice area, that local justice area.

Failure to answer to a summons
(1) This paragraph applies where the offender does not appear in answer to a summons issued under paragraph 2.
The magistrates' court may issue a warrant for the arrest of the offender.
Any such warrant must require the offender to be brought before—
a youth court acting in the relevant local justice area, if the offender is under the age of 18, or
a magistrates' court (other than a youth court) acting in the relevant local justice area, if the offender is aged 18 or over.
In sub-paragraph (3) “the relevant local justice area” means—
the local justice area for the time being specified in the order, or
if it appears to the magistrates' court that the offender resides in another local justice area, that local justice area.

Powers of magistrates' court
(1) This paragraph applies where—
the offender appears or is brought before a magistrates' court in accordance with this Part of this Schedule, and
it is proved to the satisfaction of the court that the offender has failed without reasonable excuse to comply with the order.
The court—
must revoke the order (if it remains in force), and
may deal with the offender in respect of the failure by dealing with the offender, for the offence in respect of which the order was made, in any way in which the court could deal with the offender if the offender had just been convicted by it of the offence.
In dealing with an offender under sub-paragraph (2)(b), the court must take into account the extent to which the offender has complied with the order.
A person sentenced under sub-paragraph (2)(b) may appeal to the Crown Court against the sentence.
146	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 1 – Schedule to the Street Offences Act 1959
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Part 3

Amendment of order

Change of supervisor
(1) Where the supervisor is unable to continue acting in that capacity, the supervisor, a constable or the offender may apply to the relevant magistrates' court to amend the order by specifying a different person to act as supervisor.
Where the court is satisfied that the supervisor is unable to continue acting, the court must—
amend the order by specifying a different person to act as supervisor, or
if no such person is available, revoke the order.
The person specified to act as supervisor must be a suitable person (within the meaning given by section 1A(3)).
In this paragraph “the relevant magistrates' court” means—
a youth court acting in the relevant local justice area, if the offender is under the age of 18, or
a magistrates' court (other than a youth court) acting in the relevant local justice area, if the offender is aged 18 or over.
In sub-paragraph (4) “the relevant local justice area” means—
the local justice area for the time being specified in the order, or
if the offender resides in another local justice area, that local justice area.
(1) Where a court revokes an order under paragraph 5(2)(b), it may deal with the offender, for the offence in respect of which the order was made, in any way in which the court could deal with the offender if the offender had just been convicted by it of the offence (other than by making an order under section 1(2A)).
In dealing with an offender under sub-paragraph (1), the court must take into account the extent to which the offender has complied with the order.
A person sentenced under sub-paragraph (1) may appeal to the Crown Court against the sentence.

Substitution of different local justice area
(1) The offender or the supervisor may apply to the relevant magistrates' court to amend the order by substituting another local justice area for the area specified in the order.
An application under sub-paragraph (1) may only be made if the offender resides or will reside in the other local justice area.
If the application is made by the supervisor, the relevant magistrates' court must amend the order by substituting the other local justice area for the area specified in the order.
If the application is made by the offender, the relevant magistrates' court may amend the order by substituting the other local justice area for the area specified in the order.
Sub-paragraphs (4) and (5) of paragraph 5 apply for the purposes of this paragraph as they apply for the purposes of that paragraph.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 1 – Schedule to the Street Offences Act 1959 Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
147


Supplementary
(1) Where the relevant magistrates' court proposes to exercise its powers under paragraph 5, otherwise than on the application of the offender, it must summon the offender to appear before the court and, if the offender does not appear in answer to the summons, may issue a warrant for the arrest of the offender.
An order may not be amended under this Part of this Schedule while an appeal against the order is pending.

Part 4

Supplementary

Detention and remand of arrested offender
(1) This paragraph applies where the offender is arrested in pursuance of a warrant under this Schedule and cannot be brought immediately before the court before which the warrant directs him to be brought (“the appropriate court”).
The person in whose custody the offender is must, as soon as practicable and in any event before the end of the period of 72 hours beginning with the time of the arrest, bring the offender before—
any youth court, if the offender is under the age of 18, or
any magistrates' court other than a youth court, if the offender is aged 18 or over.
That person may make arrangements for the offender to be detained until brought before the court.
If the offender is under the age of 18 at the time of the arrest, the arrangements made under sub-paragraph (3) must be for the detention of the offender in a place of safety (within the meaning of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933).
A person who is detained in pursuance of arrangements made under sub-paragraph (3) is deemed to be in legal custody.
(1) This paragraph applies where the court before which an offender is brought under paragraph 9(2) is not the appropriate court (within the meaning of paragraph 9).
The alternative court may direct that the offender is to be released forthwith or remand him to appear before the appropriate court.
(3) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (2), section 128 of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 (remand in custody or on bail) applies as if the court referred to in subsections (1)(a), (3), (4)(a) and (5) were the appropriate court.
Any power to remand the offender in custody which is conferred by section 128 of the Magistrates' Court Act 1980 (as modified by sub-paragraph (3)) is to be taken to be a power to remand the offender—
if the offender is under the age of 18, to accommodation provided by or on behalf of a local authority (within the meaning of the Children Act 1989), and
if the offender is aged 18 or over, to a prison.
148	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 1 – Schedule to the Street Offences Act 1959
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Where the court remands the offender to accommodation provided by or on behalf of a local authority, the court must designate, as the authority who are to receive the offender, the local authority for the area in which it appears that the offender resides or will reside.

Adjournments
(1) This paragraph applies to any hearing relating to an offender held by a youth court or other magistrates' court in any proceedings under this Schedule.
The court may adjourn the hearing, and, where it does so, may—
direct that the offender be released forthwith, or
remand the offender.
Where the court remands the offender under sub-paragraph (2)—
it must fix the time and place at which the hearing is to be resumed, and
that time and place must be the time and place at which the offender is required to appear or be brought before the court by virtue of the remand.
Where the court adjourns the hearing under sub-paragraph (2) but does not remand the offender—
it may fix the time and place at which the hearing is to be resumed, but
if it does not do so, must not resume the hearing unless it is satisfied that the offender and, where appropriate, the supervisor have had adequate notice of the time and place for the resumed hearing.
The powers of a magistrates' court under this paragraph may be exercised by a single justice of the peace, notwithstanding anything in the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980.
This paragraph—
applies to any hearing in any proceedings under this Schedule in place of section 10 of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 (adjournment of trial) where that section would otherwise apply, but
is not to be taken to affect the application of that section to hearings of any other description.

Notification
(1) This paragraph applies where a court revokes or amends an order under any provision of this Schedule.
The proper officer must—
provide copies of the revoking or amending order to the offender and the supervisor, and
in the case of an amending order which substitutes a new local justice area, provide a copy of the amending order to a magistrates' court acting for that area.
If the court that revokes or amends the order is a magistrates' court acting in a local justice area other than the area specified in the order, the proper officer must provide a copy of the revoking or amending order to a magistrates' court acting in the local justice area specified in the order.
Where the proper officer acts under sub-paragraph (2)(b), the officer must also provide to the court such documents and information relating to the case as it considers likely to
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Schedule 2 – Closure orders Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
149


be of assistance to a court acting for that area in the exercise of any function in relation to the order.
In this paragraph “proper officer” means the designated officer for the court.”


SCHEDULE 2	Section 21

Closure orders
After Part 2 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (c. 42) insert the following new Part—

“Part 2A
Closure orders

Basic definitions

Meaning of specified prostitution offence etc.
136A(1) This section applies for the purposes of this Part.
The specified prostitution offences are—
an offence under section 47 of this Act or Article 37 of the Sexual Offences (Northern Ireland) Order 2008 (“the Northern Ireland Order”);
an offence under section 48 of this Act, or Article 38 of the Northern Ireland Order, committed by causing or inciting a child to become a prostitute;
an offence under section 49 of this Act, or Article 39 of the Northern Ireland Order, committed by controlling the activities of a child relating to the child's prostitution;
an offence under section 50 of this Act, or Article 40 of the Northern Ireland Order, committed by arranging or facilitating a child's prostitution;
an offence under section 52 of this Act or Article 62 of the Northern Ireland Order;
an offence under section 53 of this Act or Article 63 of the Northern Ireland Order.
The specified pornography offences are—
an offence under section 48 of this Act, or Article 38 of the Northern Ireland Order, committed by causing or inciting a child to be involved in pornography;
an offence under section 49 of this Act, or Article 39 of the Northern Ireland Order, committed by controlling the activities of a child relating to the child's involvement in pornography;
an offence under section 50 of this Act, or Article 40 of the Northern Ireland Order, committed by arranging or facilitating a child's involvement in pornography.
150	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 2 – Closure orders
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Premises are being used for activities related to a specified prostitution offence—
in the case of an offence under section 47 of this Act or Article 37 of the Northern Ireland Order, at any time when the sexual services mentioned in subsection (1)(a) of that section or, as the case may be, paragraph (1)(a) of that Article are being provided on the premises, and
in the case of any other specified prostitution offence, at any time when the person in respect of whom the offence is committed is providing sexual services as a prostitute on the premises.
Premises are being used for activities related to a specified pornography offence at any time when the person in respect of whom the offence is committed is doing anything on the premises which enables an indecent image of himself or herself to be recorded.
Any reference to an offence under this Act includes a reference to—
an offence under section 70 of the Army Act 1955, section 70 of the Air Force Act 1955 or section 42 of the Naval Discipline Act 1957 of which the corresponding civil offence (within the meaning of the Act in question) is such an offence;
an offence under section 42 of the Armed Forces Act 2006 as respects which the corresponding offence under the law of England and Wales (within the meaning given by that section) is such an offence.

Closure notices

Power to authorise issue of closure notice
136B(1) A member of a police force not below the rank of superintendent (“the authorising officer”) may authorise the issue of a closure notice in respect of any premises if three conditions are met.
(2) The first condition is that the officer has reasonable grounds for believing that either subsection (3) or (4) (or both) applies.
This subsection applies if, during the relevant period, the premises were used for activities related to one or more specified prostitution offences.
But this subsection does not apply if only one person obtained all of the sexual services in question (whether or not on a single occasion).
This subsection applies if, during the relevant period, the premises were used for activities related to one or more specified pornography offences.
In subsections (3) and (4), “the relevant period” means the period of 3 months ending with the day on which the officer is considering whether to authorise the issue of the notice.
The second condition is that the officer has reasonable grounds for believing that the making of a closure order under section 136D is necessary to prevent the premises being used for activities related to one or more specified prostitution or pornography offences.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Schedule 2 – Closure orders Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
151


The third condition is that the officer is satisfied—
that the local authority for the area in which the premises are situated has been consulted, and
that reasonable steps have been taken to establish the identity of any person who resides on the premises or who has control of or responsibility for or an interest in the premises.
For the purposes of the second condition, it does not matter whether the officer believes that the offence or offences in question have been committed or that they will be committed (or will be committed unless a closure order is made).
An authorisation under subsection (1) may be given orally or in writing, but if it is given orally the authorising officer must confirm it in writing as soon as it is practicable.
The issue of a closure notice may be authorised whether or not a person has been convicted of any specified prostitution or pornography offence that the authorising officer believes has been committed.
The Secretary of State may by regulations specify premises or descriptions of premises to which this section does not apply.

Contents and service of closure notice
136C(1) A closure notice must—
state that no-one other than a person who regularly resides on, or owns, the premises may enter or remain on them,
state that failure to comply with the notice amounts to an offence,
specify the offence or offences in respect of which the authorising officer considers that the first and second conditions in section 136B are met,
state that an application will be made under section 136D for the closure of the premises,
specify the date and time when, and the place at which, that application will be heard, and
explain the effects of an order under section 136D.
A closure notice must be served by a constable.
Service is effected by—
fixing a copy of the notice to at least one prominent place on the premises,
fixing a copy of the notice to each normal means of access to the premises,
fixing a copy of the notice to any outbuildings which appear to the constable to be used with or as part of the premises, and
giving a copy of the notice to the persons identified in pursuance of section 136B(7)(b) and to any other person appearing to the constable to be a person of a description mentioned in that provision.
152	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 2 – Closure orders
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


A constable must also serve a copy of the notice on any person who occupies any other part of a building or other structure in which the premises are situated if, at the time of acting under subsection (3), the constable reasonably believes that the person's access to the other part of the building or structure will be impeded if a closure order is made.
Subsection (3)(d) or (4) does not require a constable to serve a copy of the notice on a person if it is not reasonably practicable to do so.
A constable acting under subsection (3) may enter any premises, using reasonable force if necessary, for the purpose of complying with subsection (3)(a) to (c).
A closure notice has effect until an application for a closure order is determined under section 136D.
But, if the hearing of an application for a closure order is adjourned, the closure notice ceases to have effect unless the court makes an order under section 136E(2).

Closure orders

Power to make a closure order
136D(1) If a closure notice has been issued, a constable must apply under this section to a magistrates' court for a closure order.
A closure order is an order that the premises in respect of which the order is made are closed to all persons for such period not exceeding 3 months as is specified in the order.
The application must be heard by the magistrates' court not later than 48 hours after the notice was served in pursuance of section 136C(3)(a).
The magistrates' court may make a closure order if three conditions are met.
(5) The first condition is that the court is satisfied that either subsection (6) or subsection (7) (or both) applies.
This subsection applies if, during the relevant period, the premises were used for activities related to one or more specified prostitution offences.
But this subsection does not apply if only one person obtained all of the sexual services in question (whether or not on a single occasion).
This subsection applies if, during the relevant period, the premises were used for activities related to one or more specified pornography offences.
In subsections (6) and (7), “the relevant period” means the period of 3 months ending with the day on which the issue of the closure notice was authorised.
The second condition is that the court is satisfied that the making of the closure order is necessary to prevent the premises being used for activities related to one or more specified prostitution or pornography offences during the period to be specified in the order.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Schedule 2 – Closure orders Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
153


The third condition is that the court is satisfied that—
before the issue of the closure notice was authorised, reasonable steps were taken to establish the identity of any person of a description mentioned in section 136B(7)(b), and
a constable complied with section 136C(3)(d) in relation to the persons so identified.
For the purposes of the second condition, it does not matter whether the court is satisfied that the offence or offences in question have been committed or that they will be committed (or will be committed unless a closure order is made).
A closure order may be made whether or not a person has been convicted of any specified prostitution or pornography offence that the court is satisfied has been committed.

Making of closure orders: supplementary provision
136(E1) The magistrates' court may adjourn the hearing of an application for a closure order for a period of not more than 14 days to enable any of the following to show why a closure order should not be made—
an occupier of the premises;
a person who has control of or responsibility for the premises;
any other person with an interest in the premises.
If the court adjourns the hearing, it may order that the closure notice continues in effect until the end of the period of the adjournment.
A closure order may include such provision as the court thinks appropriate relating to access to any other part of a building or other structure in which the premises are situated.
A closure order may be made in respect of the whole or any part of the premises in respect of which the closure notice was issued.

Enforcement

Closure order: enforcement
136(F1) This section applies if a closure order is made.
A constable or an authorised person may—
enter the premises in respect of which the order is made;
do anything reasonably necessary to secure the premises against entry by any person.
A constable or an authorised person seeking to enter premises for the purposes of subsection (2) must, if required to do so by or on behalf of the owner, occupier or other person in charge of the premises, produce evidence of the constable's or (as the case may be) the authorised person's identity and authority before entering the premises.
154	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 2 – Closure orders
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


A constable or an authorised person may also enter the premises at any time while the order has effect for the purpose of carrying out essential maintenance of, or repairs to, the premises.
A constable or an authorised person acting under subsection (2) or (4) may use reasonable force.
In this section “authorised person”—
in the application of this section to England and Wales, means a person authorised by the chief officer of police for the area in which the premises are situated;
in the application of this section to Northern Ireland, means a person authorised by the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland.

Closure of premises: offences
136G(1) A person who remains on or enters premises in contravention of a closure notice commits an offence.
A person who remains on or enters premises in contravention of a closure order commits an offence.
A person does not commit an offence under subsection (1) or (2) if the person has a reasonable excuse for remaining on or entering the premises.
A person who obstructs a constable or an authorised person acting under section 136C(3) or (4) or 136F(2) or (4) commits an offence.
A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable on summary conviction—
to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 51 weeks, or
to a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale, or to both.
In relation to an offence committed before the commencement of section 281(5) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003, the reference in subsection
In the application of this section to Northern Ireland—
the reference in subsection (5)(a) to 51 weeks is to be read as a reference to 6 months, and
subsection (6) is omitted.
In this section “authorised person” has the same meaning as in section 136F.

Extension and discharge of closure orders

Applications for extension of closure order
136H(1) At any time before the end of the period for which a closure order is made or extended a constable may make a complaint to the appropriate judicial officer for an extension or further extension of the period for which it has effect.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Schedule 2 – Closure orders Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
155


A complaint may not be made under subsection (1) unless it is authorised by a member of a police force not below the rank of superintendent.
Authorisation may be given under subsection (2) if two conditions are met.
The first condition is that the officer has reasonable grounds for believing that it is necessary to extend the period for which the order has effect to prevent the premises being used for activities related to any of the specified prostitution or pornography offences in respect of which section 136D(9) applied.
The second condition is that the officer is satisfied that the local authority has been consulted about the intention to make a complaint.
If a complaint is made under subsection (1) the appropriate judicial officer may issue a summons directed to—
any person on whom the closure notice relating to the closed premises was served under section 136C(3)(d) or (4), or
any other person who appears to the judicial officer to have an interest in the closed premises but on whom the closure notice was not served,
requiring such person to appear before the magistrates' court to answer to the complaint.
If a summons is issued in accordance with subsection (6), a notice stating the date and time when, and the place at which, the complaint will be heard must be served on—
the persons to whom the summons is directed,
such constable as the judicial officer thinks appropriate (unless the complainant is a constable), and
the local authority.
In this section “the appropriate judicial officer” means—
in the application of this section to England and Wales, a justice of the peace;
in the application of this section to Northern Ireland, a lay magistrate.

Orders extending closure orders
136(I1) This section applies where a complaint is made under section 136H.
The court may make an order extending the period for which the closure order has effect by a period specified in the order if the court is satisfied that the extension is necessary to prevent the premises being used for activities related to any of the specified prostitution or pornography offences in respect of which section 136D(9) applied.
The period specified in the order may not exceed 3 months.
The total period for which a closure order has effect may not exceed 6 months.
156	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 2 – Closure orders
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


An order under this section may include such provision as the court thinks appropriate relating to access to any other part of a building or other structure in which the premises are situated.

Discharge of closure order
136(J1) Any of the following persons may make a complaint to an appropriate judicial officer for an order that a closure order be discharged—
a constable;
the local authority;
a person on whom the closure notice relating to the closed premises was served under section 136C(3)(d) or (4);
any other person who has an interest in the closed premises but on whom the closure notice was not served.
If a complaint is made under subsection (1) by a person other than a constable the judicial officer may issue a summons directed to such constable as the judicial officer thinks appropriate requiring the constable to appear before the magistrates' court to answer to the complaint.
The court may not make an order discharging a closure order unless it is satisfied that the order is no longer necessary to prevent the premises being used for activities related to any of the specified prostitution or pornography offences in respect of which section 136D(9) applied.
If a complaint is made under subsection (1), a notice stating the date and time when, and the place at which, the complaint will be heard must be served on—
the persons mentioned in subsection (1)(c) and (d) (other than the complainant),
a constable (unless a constable is the complainant), and
the local authority (unless it is the complainant).
In this section “appropriate judicial authority” has the same meaning as in section 136H.

Appeals against closure orders etc.

Appeals
136K(1) An appeal against an order under section 136D or 136I, or an appeal against a decision not to be make an order under section 136J, may be made to the appropriate appeal court by—
a person on whom the closure notice relating to the closed premises was served under section 136C(3)(d), or
any other person who has an interest in the closed premises but on whom the closure notice was not served.
An appeal against a decision of a court not to make an order under section 136D or 136I, or an appeal against an order under section 136J, may be made to the appropriate appeal court by—
a constable, or
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Schedule 2 – Closure orders Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
157


the local authority.
An appeal under subsection (1) or (2) must be made before the end of the period of 21 days beginning with the day on which the order or decision is made.
On an appeal under this section the court may make such order as it thinks appropriate.
In this section “the appropriate appeal court” means—
in the application of this section to England and Wales, the Crown Court;
in the application of this section to Northern Ireland, a county court.

Access to other premises

Access to other premises
136(L1) This section applies to any person who occupies or has an interest in any part of a building or other structure—
in which closed premises are situated, and
in respect of which the closure order does not have effect.
A person to whom this section applies may at any time while a closure order has effect apply to—
the magistrates' court in respect of an order made under section 136D or 136I, or
the appropriate appeal court in respect of an order made by that court under section 136K.
If an application is made under this section notice of the date and time when, and the place at which, the hearing to consider the application will take place must be given to—
a constable,
the local authority.
each person on whom the closure notice relating to the closed premises was served under section 136C(3)(d) or (4), and
any other person who appears to the court to have an interest in the closed premises but on whom the closure notice was not served.
On an application under this section the court may make such order as it thinks appropriate in relation to access to any other part of a building or other structure in which the closed premises are situated.
It is immaterial whether any provision has been made as mentioned in section 136E(3) or 136I(5).
In this section “appropriate appeal court” has the same meaning as in section 136K.
158	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 2 – Closure orders
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Reimbursement of costs, compensation etc.

Reimbursement of costs
136M(1) A police authority or a local authority which incurs expenditure for the purpose of clearing, securing, repairing or maintaining closed premises may apply to the court which made the closure order for an order under this section.
On an application under this section, the court may make such order as it thinks appropriate in the circumstances for the reimbursement (in full or in part) by the owner of the premises of the expenditure mentioned in subsection (1).
An application under this section must not be entertained unless it is made before the end of the period of three months beginning with the day the closure order ceases to have effect.
An application under this section must be served on—
the police authority for the area in which the premises are situated, if the application is made by the local authority,
the local authority, if the application is made by a police authority, and
the owner of the premises.
In the application of this section to Northern Ireland references to the police authority are to be read as references to the Northern Ireland Policing Board.

Exemption from liability for certain damages
136N(1) A constable is not liable for relevant damages in respect of anything done or omitted to be done by the constable in the performance or purported performance of the constable's functions under this Part.
A chief officer of police who has direction or control of a constable is not liable for relevant damages in respect of anything done or omitted to be done by the constable in the performance or purported performance of the constable's functions under this Part.
An authorised person is not liable for relevant damages in respect of anything done or omitted to be done by the authorised person in the performance or purported performance of the authorised person's functions under this Part.
No person is vicariously liable for anything done or omitted to be done by an authorised person as mentioned in subsection (3).
Subsections (1) to (4) do not apply—
if the act or omission is shown to have been in bad faith;
so as to prevent an award of damages made in respect of an act or omission on the ground that the act or omission was unlawful by virtue of section 6(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Schedule 2 – Closure orders Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
159


This section does not affect any other exemption from liability for damages (whether at common law or otherwise).
In this section—
“authorised person” has the same meaning as in section 136F;
“relevant damages” means damages in proceedings for judicial review or for the tort of negligence or misfeasance in public office.
In the application of this section to Northern Ireland, the reference in subsection (2) to the chief officer of police is to be read as a reference to the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland.

Compensation
136O(1) A person who claims to have incurred financial loss in consequence of a closure notice or closure order may apply for compensation.
The application must be made—
to the appropriate appeal court, if the closure order was made or extended by an order of that court on an appeal under section 136K;
in any other case, to the magistrates' court which considered the application for a closure order.
In a case where a closure notice is issued but a closure order is not made, the application must not be entertained unless it is made before the end of the period of three months beginning with—
the day the magistrates' court decides not to make a closure order, or
if there is an appeal against that decision, the day the appropriate appeal court dismisses that appeal.
In a case where a closure order is made, the application must not be entertained unless it is made before the end of the period of three months beginning with the day the closure order ceases to have effect.
The court which hears the application may order the payment of compensation out of central funds if it is satisfied—
that the person was not associated with the use of the premises for the activities in relation to which the first condition in section 136B was met,
if the person is the owner or occupier of the premises, that the person took reasonable steps to prevent that use,
that the person has incurred financial loss as mentioned in subsection (1), and
having regard to all the circumstances it is appropriate to order payment of compensation in respect of that loss.
In this section—
“appropriate appeal court” has the same meaning as in section 136K;
“central funds” has the same meaning as in enactments providing for the payment of costs.
In the application of this section to Northern Ireland—
160	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 2 – Closure orders
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


the reference in subsection (5) to “central funds” is to be read as a reference to monies provided by Parliament, and
subsection (6)(b) is omitted.

General

Guidance
136(P1) The Secretary of State may issue guidance relating to the discharge of any functions under or for the purposes of this Part by a constable or by an authorised person (within the meaning of section 136F).
(2) A person discharging a function to which guidance under this section relates must have regard to the guidance in discharging the function.

Issue of closure notices by persons other than police officers
136Q(1) The Secretary of State may by order amend this Part so as to extend the power to authorise the issue of a closure notice to persons other than members of police forces.
(2) An order under subsection (1) may make such further amendments of this Part as the Secretary of State thinks appropriate in consequence of the extension of that power to persons other than members of police forces.

Interpretation
136R(1) This section applies for the purposes of this Part.
“A closure notice” means a notice issued under section 136B.
“A closure order” means—
an order made under section 136D;
an order extended under section 136I;
an order made or extended under section 136K which has the like effect as an order made or extended under section 136D or 136I (as the case may be).
“Closed premises” means premises in respect of which a closure order has effect.
“Local authority”, in relation to England, means—
a district council;
a London borough council;
a county council for an area for which there is no district council;
the Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as a local authority;
the Council of the Isles of Scilly.
“Local authority”, in relation to Wales, means—
a county council;
a county borough council.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Schedule 2 – Closure orders Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
161


“Local authority”, in relation to Northern Ireland, means a district council.
In the application of this Part to England and Wales, references to the local authority in relation to—
any premises,
a closure notice relating to any premises, or
a closure order relating to any premises,
are references to the local authority for the area in which the premises are situated.
[F60(8A) In the application of this Part to Northern Ireland, references to the Secretary of State are to be read as references to the Department of Justice in Northern Ireland.]
In the application of this Part to Northern Ireland, references to the local authority in relation to—
any premises,
a closure notice relating to any premises, or
a closure order relating to any premises,
are references to the council for the district in which the premises are situated.
In the application of this Part to Northern Ireland, the reference in section 136B(7)(a) to the area is to be read as a reference to the district.
“The owner”, in relation to premises, means—
a person who, whether alone or jointly with another person, is for the time being entitled to dispose of the fee simple in the premises, whether in possession or in reversion (apart from a mortgagee not in possession);
a person who, whether alone or jointly with another person, holds or is entitled to the rents and profits of the premises under a lease which (when granted) was for a term of not less than 3 years.
“Premises” includes—
any land or other place (whether enclosed or not);
any outbuildings which are, or are used as, part of the premises.
“Specified prostitution offence” means an offence listed in section 136A(2).
“Specified	pornography	offence”	means	an	offence	listed	in section 136A(3).”

162	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 3 – Lap dancing and other sexual entertainment venues etc: transitional provision
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


In section 138 of that Act (orders and regulations), in [F61subsections (2) and (6)]for “or section 130” substitute “ , section 130 or section 136Q(1) ”.

In section 142 of that Act (extent), in subsection (2)(c) for “Part 2” substitute “ Parts 2 and 2A ”.




SCHEDULE 3	Section 27

Lap dancing and other sexual entertainment venues etc: transitional provision

Effect of section 27: cases where no existing resolutions passed
A resolution made on or after the coming into force of section 27 by a local authority under section 2 of the 1982 Act that Schedule 3 to that Act is to apply to the area of the local authority applies to that Schedule as amended by section 27.


Effect of section 27: cases where existing resolutions in force
(1) Sub-paragraph (2) applies if a local authority has, before the coming into force of section 27, resolved under section 2 of the 1982 Act that Schedule 3 to that Act is to apply to the area of the local authority.
The amendments made by section 27 do not apply to the area of the local authority concerned and the resolution concerned does not apply to the Schedule as amended by section 27 but the local authority may resolve that the Schedule as amended by section 27 is to apply to their area.
Section 2 of the 1982 Act has effect in relation to a resolution under sub-paragraph (2) that Schedule 3 to that Act as amended by section 27 is to apply to the area of a local authority as section 2 of that Act has effect in relation to any resolution under that section that the Schedule is to apply to the area of a local authority.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 3 – Lap dancing and other sexual entertainment venues etc: transitional provision Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
163


The definition of “the appropriate authority” in paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to the 1982 Act has effect as if the reference to a resolution under section 2 of that Act included a reference to a resolution under sub-paragraph (2).


Power to make transitional provision on adoption of Schedule 3 to the 1982 Act as amended
(1) The relevant national authority may by order make such transitional, transitory or saving provision as the relevant national authority considers appropriate in connection with the coming into force, in consequence of a resolution of a local authority under section 2 of the 1982 Act or paragraph 2(2) above, of Schedule 3 to that Act as amended by section 27.
An order under this paragraph may, in particular, make different provision from that made by paragraphs 28 and 29 of Schedule 3 to that Act (and may accordingly provide for those paragraphs not to apply).
The power of the relevant national authority under this paragraph—
is exercisable by statutory instrument,
may be exercised so as to make different provision for different purposes or different areas,
includes power to make supplementary, incidental or consequential provision.


Duty to consult about adopting Schedule 3 to the 1982 Act as amended
(1) Sub-paragraph (2) applies if a local authority has not made a resolution under section 2 of the 1982 Act or (as the case may be) paragraph 2(2) above within the period of one year beginning with the coming into force of section 27.
The local authority must, as soon as reasonably practicable, consult local people about whether the local authority should make such a resolution.
In sub-paragraph (2) “local people” means persons who live or work in the area of the local authority.
164	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 4 – Mandatory licensing conditions relating to alcohol
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Interpretation
In this Schedule—
“the 1982 Act” means the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (c. 30),
“relevant national authority” means—
in relation to England, the Secretary of State, and
in relation to Wales, the Welsh Ministers,
“local authority” has the same meaning as in Part 2 of the 1982 Act (see section 2(5) of that Act);
and references in this Schedule to the coming into force of section 27 are references to the coming into force of that section for purposes other than the purposes of the Secretary of State or the Welsh Ministers making orders.




SCHEDULE 4	Section 32

Mandatory licensing conditions relating to alcohol


Part 1

Premises licences

Types of mandatory conditions
After section 19(3) of the Licensing Act 2003 (c. 17) (mandatory conditions where licence authorises supply of alcohol) insert—
“(4) The other conditions are any conditions specified in an order under section 19A and applicable to the premises licence.”
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 4 – Mandatory licensing conditions relating to alcohol Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Power of Secretary of State to impose section 19(4) mandatory conditions
After section 19 of that Act insert—
165

“19A Power of Secretary of State to impose section 19(4) mandatory conditions
The Secretary of State may by order specify conditions relating to the supply of alcohol and applicable to all relevant premises licences or relevant premises licences of a particular description if the Secretary of State considers it appropriate to do so for the promotion of the licensing objectives.
The number of conditions in force by virtue of subsection (1) in relation to all relevant premises licences and the number of conditions in force by virtue of that subsection in relation to relevant premises licences of particular descriptions must not (when added together) exceed at any time nine.
An order under subsection (1) may—
relate to existing or future relevant premises licences,
specify conditions which involve, or consist of, the exercise of a discretion by any person.
Any conditions specified by an order under subsection (1) in relation to existing relevant premises licences are to be treated as—
included in those licences from the coming into force of the order, and
overriding any conditions already included in those licences (“the existing conditions”) so far as they are—
identical to the existing conditions, or
inconsistent with, and more onerous than, the existing conditions.
Any conditions included, or treated as included, in relevant premises licences by virtue of section 19(4) and this section cease to have effect so far as they cease to be specified under this section in relation to those licences.
Any conditions treated as mentioned in subsection (4)(b) cease to be so treated so far as they cease to be specified under this section in relation to the relevant premises licences concerned.
So far as conditions cease to be treated as mentioned in subsection (4)(b), the existing conditions revive.
Subsections (5) to (7) are subject to any alternative transitional or saving provision made by the order revoking the specification.
In this section—
“existing relevant premises licence”, in relation to an order, means a relevant premises licence granted before the coming into force of the order and in effect, or capable of having effect, on its coming into force,
“future relevant premises licence”, in relation to an order, means a relevant premises licence granted on or after the coming into force of the order,
166	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 4 – Mandatory licensing conditions relating to alcohol
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


“relevant premises licence” means a premises licence authorising the supply of alcohol.”



Part 2

Club premises certificates

Mandatory conditions relating to the supply of alcohol to members or guests
After section 73 of the Licensing Act 2003 (c. 17) (certificate authorising supply of alcohol for consumption off the premises) insert—

“73A Mandatory conditions relating to the supply of alcohol to members or guests
Where a club premises certificate authorises the supply of alcohol to members or guests, the certificate must include any conditions specified in an order under section 73B and applicable to the certificate.”


Power of Secretary of State to impose section 73A mandatory conditions
After section 73A of that Act (as inserted by paragraph 3 above) insert—

“73B Power of Secretary of State to impose section 73A mandatory conditions
The Secretary of State may by order specify conditions relating to the supply of alcohol to members or guests and applicable to all relevant club premises certificates or relevant club premises certificates of a particular description if the Secretary of State considers it appropriate to do so for the promotion of the licensing objectives.
The number of conditions in force by virtue of subsection (1) in relation to all relevant club premises certificates and the number of conditions in force by virtue of that subsection in relation to relevant club premises certificates of particular descriptions must not (when added together) exceed at any time nine.
An order under subsection (1) may—
relate to existing or future relevant club premises certificates,
specify conditions which involve, or consist of, the exercise of a discretion by any person.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Schedule 5 – Injunctions: powers to remand Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
167


Any conditions specified by an order under subsection (1) in relation to existing relevant club premises certificates are to be treated as—
included in those certificates from the coming into force of the order, and
overriding any conditions already included in those certificates (“the existing conditions”) so far as they are—
identical to the existing conditions, or
inconsistent with, and more onerous than, the existing conditions.
Any conditions included, or treated as included, in relevant club premises certificates by virtue of section 73A and this section cease to have effect so far as they cease to be specified under this section in relation to those certificates.
Any conditions treated as mentioned in subsection (4)(b) cease to be so treated so far as they cease to be specified under this section in relation to the relevant club premises certificates concerned.
So far as conditions cease to be treated as mentioned in subsection (4)(b), the existing conditions revive.
Subsections (5) to (7) are subject to any alternative transitional or saving provision made by the order revoking the specification.
In this section—
“existing relevant club premises certificate”, in relation to an order, means a relevant club premises certificate granted before the coming into force of the order and in effect, or capable of having effect, on its coming into force,
“future relevant club premises certificate”, in relation to an order, means a relevant club premises certificate granted on or after the coming into force of the order,
“relevant club premises certificate” means a club premises certificate authorising the supply of alcohol to members or guests.”




SCHEDULE 5	Section 46

Injunctions: powers to remand

Introductory
(1) The provisions of this Schedule apply where the court has power to remand a person under section 43(5) or 44(4).
168	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 5 – Injunctions: powers to remand
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


In this Schedule, “the court” means the [F62High Court, ][F63the county] court [F64or a youth court] and includes—
in relation to the High Court, a judge of that court, F65...
in relation to [F63the county] court, a judge F66... of that court[F67, and
in relation to a youth court, a judge of that court.]


Remand in custody or on bail
(1) The court may—
[F68in the case of a person aged 18 or over ] remand the person in custody, that is, commit the person to custody to be brought before the court at the end of the period of remand or at such earlier time as the court may require, or
remand the person on bail.
The court may remand the person on bail—
by taking from the person a recognizance, with or without sureties, conditioned as provided in paragraph 3, or
by fixing the amount of the recognizances with a view to their being taken subsequently and, in the meantime, committing the person to custody as mentioned in sub-paragraph (1)(a).
Where a person is brought before the court after remand, the court may further remand the person.

Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Schedule 5 – Injunctions: powers to remand Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
169



(1) Where a person is remanded on bail, the court may direct that the person's recognizance be conditioned for the person's appearance—
before that court at the end of the period of remand, or
at every time and place to which during the course of the proceedings the hearing may from time to time be adjourned.
Where a recognizance is conditioned for a person's appearance as mentioned in sub- paragraph (1)(b), the fixing of any time for the person next to appear is to be treated as a remand.
Nothing in this paragraph affects the power of the court at any subsequent hearing to remand the person afresh.

(1) The court may not remand a person for a period exceeding 8 clear days unless—
the person is remanded on bail, and
both that person and the person who applied for the injunction consent to a longer period.
(2) Where the court has power to remand a person in custody it may, if the remand is for a period not exceeding 3 clear days, commit the person to the custody of a constable.


Further remand
(1) If the court is satisfied that a person who has been remanded is unable by reason of illness or accident to appear or be brought before the court at the expiration of the period of remand, the court may, in the absence of the person, further remand the person.
The power mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) may, in the case of a person who was remanded on bail, be exercised by enlarging the person's recognizance and those of any sureties for the person to a later time.
Where a person remanded on bail is bound to appear before the court at any time and the court has no power to remand the person under sub-paragraph (1), the court may (in the person's absence) enlarge the person's recognizance and those of any sureties for the person to a later time.
The enlargement of the person's recognizance is to be treated as a further remand.
Paragraph 4(1) (limit of remand) does not apply to the exercise of the powers conferred by this paragraph.
170	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
SCHEDULE 5A – Breach of injunction: powers of court in respect of under-18s
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Postponement of taking recognizance
Where under paragraph 2(2)(b) the court fixes the amount in which the principal and the sureties, if any, are to be bound, the recognizance may afterwards be taken by such person as may be prescribed by rules of court, with the same consequences as if it had been entered into before the court.


Requirements imposed on remand on bail
The court may when remanding a person on bail under this Schedule require the person to comply, before release on bail or later, with such requirements as appear to the court to be necessary to secure that the person does not interfere with witnesses or otherwise obstruct the course of justice.



[F69SCHEDULE 5A	Section 46A
Breach of injunction: powers of court in respect of under-18s



Part 1

Introductory

Power to make supervision order or detention order
(1) Where—
an injunction under Part 4 [F70has been] granted against a person under the age of 18,
[	the person is still under the age of 18,] and
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
SCHEDULE 5A – Breach of injunction: powers of court in respect of under-18s Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
171



F71(aa)
on an application made by the injunction applicant, [F72a youth court] is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the person is in breach of any provision of the injunction,
[F73that court] may make one of the orders specified in sub-paragraph (2) in respect of the person.
(2) Those orders are—
a supervision order (see Part 2 of this Schedule);
a detention order (see Part 3 of this Schedule).
F74(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Before making an application under paragraph 1(1)(b) the injunction applicant must consult—
the youth offending team consulted under section 38(1) or 39(5) in relation to the injunction, and
any other person previously so consulted.
In considering whether and how to exercise its powers under this paragraph, the court must consider a report made to assist the court in that respect by the youth offending team referred to in sub-paragraph (4)(a).
An order under sub-paragraph (1) may not be made in respect of a person aged 18 or over.
The court may not make a detention order under sub-paragraph (1) unless it is satisfied, in view of the severity or extent of the breach, that no other power available to the court is appropriate.
Where the court makes a detention order under sub-paragraph (1) it must state in open court why it is satisfied as specified in sub-paragraph (7).
In this Schedule—
“ defaulter ”, in relation to an order under this Schedule, means the person in respect of whom the order is made;
“ injunction applicant ”, in relation to an injunction under Part 4 or an order under this Schedule made in respect of such an injunction, means the person who applied for the injunction;
F75 ...

172	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
SCHEDULE 5A – Breach of injunction: powers of court in respect of under-18s
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Part 2

Supervision orders

Supervision orders
(1) A supervision order is an order imposing on the defaulter one or more of the following requirements—
a supervision requirement;
an activity requirement;
a curfew requirement.
Before making a supervision order the court must obtain and consider information about the defaulter's family circumstances and the likely effect of such an order on those circumstances.
Before making a supervision order imposing two or more requirements, the court must consider their mutual compatibility.
The court must ensure, as far as practicable, that any requirement imposed by a supervision order is such as to avoid—
any conflict with the defaulter's religious beliefs,
any interference with the times, if any, at which the defaulter normally works or attends school or any other educational establishment, and
any conflict with the requirements of any other court order or injunction to which the defaulter may be subject.
A supervision order must for the purposes of this Schedule specify a maximum period for the operation of any requirement contained in the order.
The period specified under sub-paragraph (5) may not exceed six months beginning with the day after that on which the supervision order is made.
A supervision order must for the purposes of this Schedule specify a youth offending team established under section 39 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998.
The youth offending team specified under sub-paragraph (7) is to be—
the youth offending team in whose area it appears to the court that the respondent will reside during the period specified under sub-paragraph (5), or
where it appears to the court that the respondent will reside in the area of two or more such teams, such one of those teams as the court may determine.

Supervision requirements
(1) In this Schedule, “ supervision requirement ”, in relation to a supervision order, means a requirement that the defaulter attend appointments with—
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
SCHEDULE 5A – Breach of injunction: powers of court in respect of under-18s Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
173


the responsible officer, or
another person determined by the responsible officer,
at such times and places as may be instructed by the responsible officer.
(2) The appointments must be within the period for the time being specified in the order under paragraph 2(5).

Activity requirements
(1) In this Schedule, “ activity requirement ”, in relation to a supervision order, means a requirement that the defaulter do any or all of the following within the period for the time being specified in the order under paragraph 2(5)—
participate, on such number of days as may be specified in the order, in activities at a place, or places, so specified;
participate in an activity or activities specified in the order on such number of days as may be so specified;
participate in one or more residential exercises for a continuous period or periods comprising such number or numbers of days as may be specified in the order;
in accordance with sub-paragraphs (6) to (9), engage in activities in accordance with instructions of the responsible officer on such number of days as may be specified in the order.
The number of days specified in a supervision order in relation to an activity requirement must not, in aggregate, be less than 12 or more than 24.
A requirement referred to in sub-paragraph (1)(a) or (b) operates to require the defaulter, in accordance with instructions given by the responsible officer, on the number of days specified in the order in relation to the requirement—
in the case of a requirement referred to in sub-paragraph (1)(a), to present himself or herself at a place specified in the order to a person of a description so specified, or
in the case of a requirement referred to in sub-paragraph (1)(b), to participate in an activity specified in the order,
and, on each such day, to comply with instructions given by, or under the authority of, the person in charge of the place or the activity (as the case may be).
Where the order includes a requirement referred to in sub-paragraph (1)(c) to participate in a residential exercise, it must specify, in relation to the residential exercise—
a place, or
an activity.
A requirement under sub-paragraph (1)(c) to participate in a residential exercise operates to require the defaulter, in accordance with instructions given by the responsible officer—
if a place is specified under sub-paragraph (4)(a)—
to present himself or herself at the beginning of the period specified in the order in relation to the exercise, at the place so specified to a person of a description specified in the instructions, and
to reside there for that period;
174	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
SCHEDULE 5A – Breach of injunction: powers of court in respect of under-18s
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


if an activity is specified under sub-paragraph (4)(b), to participate, for the period specified in the order in relation to the exercise, in the activity so specified,
and, during that period, to comply with instructions given by, or under the authority of, the person in charge of the place or the activity (as the case may be).
Subject to sub-paragraph (8), instructions under sub-paragraph (1)(d) relating to any day must require the defaulter to do either of the following—
present himself or herself to a person of a description specified in the instructions at a place so specified;
participate in an activity specified in the instructions.
Any such instructions operate to require the defaulter, on that day or while participating in that activity, to comply with instructions given by, or under the authority of, the person in charge of the place or, as the case may be, the activity.
If the supervision order so provides, instructions under sub-paragraph (1)(d) may require the defaulter to participate in a residential exercise for a period comprising not more than seven days, and, for that purpose—
to present himself or herself at the beginning of that period to a person of a description specified in the instructions at a place so specified and to reside there for that period, or
to participate for that period in an activity specified in the instructions.
Instructions such as are mentioned in sub-paragraph (8)—
may not be given except with the consent of a parent or guardian of the defaulter, and
operate to require the defaulter, during the period specified under that sub- paragraph, to comply with instructions given by, or under the authority of, the person in charge of the place or activity specified under paragraph (a) or
(b) of that sub-paragraph.
Instructions given by, or under the authority of, a person in charge of a place under sub-paragraph (3), (5), (7) or (9)(b) may require the defaulter to engage in activities otherwise than at that place.
Where a supervision order contains an activity requirement, [F76a youth] court may on the application of the injunction applicant or the defaulter amend the order by substituting for any number of days, place, activity, period or description of persons specified in the order a new number of days, place, activity, period or description (subject, in the case of a number of days, to sub-paragraph (2)).
A court may only include an activity requirement in a supervision order or vary such a requirement under sub-paragraph (11) if—
it has consulted the youth offending team which is to be, or is, specified in the order,
it is satisfied that it is feasible to secure compliance with the requirement or requirement as varied,
it is satisfied that provision for the defaulter to participate in the activities proposed can be made under the arrangements for persons to participate in such activities which exist in the area of the youth offending team which is to be or is specified in the order, and
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
SCHEDULE 5A – Breach of injunction: powers of court in respect of under-18s Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
175


in a case where the requirement or requirement as varied would involve the co-operation of a person other than the defaulter and the responsible officer, that person consents to its inclusion or variation.
For the purposes of sub-paragraph (9) “ guardian ” has the same meaning as in the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 (subject to sub-paragraph (14)).
If a local authority has parental responsibility for a defaulter who is in its care or provided with accommodation by it in the exercise of any social services functions, the reference to “guardian” in sub-paragraph (9) is to be read as a reference to that authority.
In sub-paragraph (14)—
“ parental responsibility ” has the same meaning as it has in the Children Act 1989 by virtue of section 3 of that Act;
[F77(b)  “ social services functions ” means—
in relation to a local authority in England, its social services functions within the meaning of the Local Authority Social Services Act 1970; and
in relation to a local authority in Wales, its social services functions for the purposes of the Social Services and Well-being (Wales) Act 2014 (anaw 4).]


Curfew requirements
(1) In this Schedule, “ curfew requirement ”, in relation to a supervision order, means a requirement that the defaulter remain, for periods specified in the order, at a place so specified.
A supervision order imposing a curfew requirement may specify different places or different periods for different days.
The periods specified under sub-paragraph (1)—
must be within the period for the time being specified in the order under paragraph 2(5);
may not amount to less than two or more than eight hours in any day.
Before specifying a place under sub-paragraph (1) in a supervision order, the court making the order must obtain and consider information about the place proposed to be specified in the order (including information as to the attitude of persons likely to be affected by the enforced presence there of the defaulter).
Where a supervision order contains a curfew requirement, [F78a youth] court may, on the application of the injunction applicant or the defaulter amend the order by—
substituting new periods for the periods specified in the order under this paragraph (subject to sub-paragraph (3)); or
176	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
SCHEDULE 5A – Breach of injunction: powers of court in respect of under-18s
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


substituting a new place for the place specified in the order under this paragraph (subject to sub-paragraph (4)).


Electronic monitoring requirements
(1) A supervision order containing a curfew requirement may also contain a requirement (an “electronic monitoring requirement”) for securing the electronic monitoring of compliance with the curfew requirement during a period—
specified in the order, or
determined by the responsible officer in accordance with the order.
In a case referred to in sub-paragraph (1)(b), the responsible officer must, before the beginning of the period when the electronic monitoring requirement is to take effect, notify—
the defaulter,
the person responsible for the monitoring, and
any person falling within sub-paragraph (3)(b), of the time when that period is to begin.
Where—
it is proposed to include an electronic monitoring requirement in a supervision order, but
there is a person (other than the defaulter) without whose co-operation it will not be practicable to secure that the monitoring takes place,
the requirement may not be included in the order without that person's consent.
A supervision order imposing an electronic monitoring requirement must include provision for making a person responsible for the monitoring.
The person who is made responsible for the monitoring must be of a description specified in an order under paragraph 26(5) of Schedule 1 to the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008.
An electronic monitoring requirement may not be included in a supervision order unless the court making the order—
has been notified by the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order that arrangements for electronic monitoring are available in the area where the place which the court proposes to specify in the order for the purposes of the curfew requirement is situated, and
is satisfied that the necessary provision can be made under the arrangements currently available.
Where a supervision order contains an electronic monitoring requirement, [F79a youth] court may, on the application of the injunction applicant or the defaulter, amend the order by substituting a new period for the period specified in the order under this paragraph.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
SCHEDULE 5A – Breach of injunction: powers of court in respect of under-18s Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
177


Sub-paragraph (3) applies in relation to the variation of an electronic monitoring requirement under sub-paragraph (7) as it applies in relation to the inclusion of such a requirement.


“Responsible officer”
(1) For the purposes of this Part of this Schedule, the “ responsible officer ”, in relation to a supervision order, means—
in a case where the order imposes a curfew requirement and an electronic monitoring requirement, but does not impose an activity or supervision requirement, the person who under paragraph 6(4) is responsible for the electronic monitoring;
in any other case, the member of the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order who, as respects the defaulter, is for the time being responsible for discharging the functions conferred by this Schedule on the responsible officer.
Where a supervision order has been made, it is the duty of the responsible officer—
to make any arrangements that are necessary in connection with the requirements contained in the order, and
to promote the defaulter's compliance with those requirements.
In giving instructions in pursuance of a supervision order, the responsible officer must ensure, so far as practicable, that any instruction is such as to avoid the matters referred to in paragraph 2(4).
A defaulter in respect of whom a supervision order is made must—
keep in touch with the responsible officer in accordance with such instructions as the responsible officer may from time to time give to the defaulter, and
notify the responsible officer of any change of address.
The obligations imposed by sub-paragraph (4) have effect as a requirement of the supervision order.

Amendment of operative period
(1) [F80A youth] court may, on the application of the injunction applicant or the defaulter, amend a supervision order by substituting a new period for that for the time being specified in the order under paragraph 2(5) (subject to paragraph 2(6)).
(2) [F81A youth court may,] on amending a supervision order pursuant to sub- paragraph (1), make such other amendments to the order in relation to any requirement imposed by the order as the court considers appropriate.
178	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
SCHEDULE 5A – Breach of injunction: powers of court in respect of under-18s
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Amendment on change of area of residence
(1) This paragraph applies where, on an application made by the injunction applicant or the defaulter in relation to a supervision order, [F82a youth] court is satisfied that the defaulter proposes to reside, or is residing, in the area of a youth offending team other than the team for the time being specified in the order.
If the application is made by the defaulter, the court to which it is made may amend the order by substituting for the youth offending team specified in the order the youth offending team for the area referred to in sub-paragraph (1) (or, if there is more than one such team for that area, such of those teams as the court may determine).
If the application is made by the injunction applicant, the court to which it is made must, subject as follows, so amend the order.
Where a court amends the supervision order pursuant to sub-paragraph (2) or (3) but the order contains a requirement which, in the opinion of the court, cannot reasonably be complied with if the defaulter resides in the area referred to in sub-paragraph (1), the court must also amend the order by—
removing that requirement, or
substituting for that requirement a new requirement which can reasonably be complied with if the defaulter resides in that area.
Sub-paragraph (3) does not require a court to amend the supervision order if in its opinion sub-paragraph (4) would produce an inappropriate result.
The injunction applicant must consult the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order before making an application under sub-paragraph (1).


Revocation of supervision order
(1) Where a supervision order is made, the injunction applicant or the defaulter may apply to [F83a youth] court—
to revoke the order, or
to amend the order by removing any requirement from it.
If it appears to the court to which an application under sub-paragraph (1)(a) or (b) is made to be in the interests of justice to do so, having regard to circumstances which have arisen since the supervision order was made, the court may grant the application and revoke or amend the order accordingly.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
SCHEDULE 5A – Breach of injunction: powers of court in respect of under-18s Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
179


The circumstances referred to in sub-paragraph (2) include the conduct of the defaulter.
If an application made under sub-paragraph (1) in relation to a supervision order is dismissed, no further such application may be made in relation to the order by any person without the consent of [F84a youth] court.
The injunction applicant must consult the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order before making an application under sub-paragraph (1).


Compliance with supervision order
If the responsible officer considers that the defaulter has complied with all the requirements of the supervision order, the responsible officer must inform the injunction applicant.

Non-compliance with supervision order
(1) If the responsible officer considers that the defaulter has failed to comply with any requirement of the supervision order, the responsible officer must inform the injunction applicant.
On being informed as specified in sub-paragraph (1) the injunction applicant may apply to [F85a youth] court.
Before making an application under sub-paragraph (2) the injunction applicant must consult—
the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order, and
any person consulted by virtue of section 38(2)(a) or (b).
If on an application under sub-paragraph (2) the court to which it is made is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the defaulter has without reasonable excuse failed to comply with any requirement of the supervision order, the court may—
revoke the supervision order and make a new one; or
revoke the order and make a detention order (see Part 3 of this Schedule).
F86(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F87(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The court to which an application under sub-paragraph (2) is made must consider representations made by the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order before exercising its powers under this paragraph.
180	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
SCHEDULE 5A – Breach of injunction: powers of court in respect of under-18s
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Copies of supervision order etc
(1) The court by which a supervision order is made must forthwith provide a copy of the order to—
the defaulter, and
the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order.
Where a supervision order is made, the injunction applicant must forthwith provide a copy of so much of the order as is relevant—
in a case where the order includes an activity requirement specifying a place under paragraph 4(1)(a), to the person in charge of that place;
in a case where the order includes an activity requirement specifying an activity under paragraph 4(1)(b), to the person in charge of that activity;
in a case where the order includes an activity requirement specifying a residential exercise under paragraph 4(1)(c), to the person in charge of the place or activity specified under paragraph 4(4) in relation to that residential exercise;
in a case where the order contains an electronic monitoring requirement, to—
any person who by virtue of paragraph 6(4) will be responsible for the electronic monitoring, and
any person without whose consent that requirement could not have been included in the order.
The court by which a supervision order is revoked or amended must forthwith provide a copy of the revoking order, or of the order as amended, to—
the defaulter, and
the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order.
Where—
a copy of a supervision order (or part of a supervision order) has been given to a person under sub-paragraph (2) by virtue of any requirement contained in the order, and
the order is revoked, or amended in respect of that requirement,
the injunction applicant must forthwith give a copy of the revoking order, or of so much of the order as amended as is relevant, to that person.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
SCHEDULE 5A – Breach of injunction: powers of court in respect of under-18s Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Part 3

Detention orders
181

Detention orders
(1) A detention order is an order that the defaulter be detained for a period specified in the order in such youth detention accommodation as the Secretary of State may determine.
The period specified under sub-paragraph (1) may not exceed the period of three months beginning with the day after that on which the order is made.
In sub-paragraph (1) “ youth detention accommodation ” means—
a secure training centre;
[	a secure college;]
F88(aa)
a young offender institution;
[F89(c)	a secure children's home, as defined by section 102(11) of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012.]
The function of the Secretary of State under sub-paragraph (1) is exercisable concurrently with the Youth Justice Board.
A person detained under a detention order is in legal custody.


Revocation of detention order
(1) Where a detention order is made, the injunction applicant or the defaulter may apply to [F90a youth] court to revoke it.
If it appears to the court to which an application under sub-paragraph (1) is made to be in the interests of justice to do so, having regard to circumstances which have arisen since the detention order was made, the court may grant the application and revoke the order accordingly.
The circumstances referred to in sub-paragraph (2) include the conduct of the defaulter.
If an application made under sub-paragraph (1) in relation to a detention order is dismissed, no further such application may be made in relation to the order by any person without the consent of [F91a youth] court.
Before making an application under sub-paragraph (1) the injunction applicant must consult—
182	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 6 – Amendment of Part 3 of the Aviation Security Act 1982
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


in the case of a detention order made under paragraph 1(1), the youth offending team referred to in paragraph 1(4)(a); or
in the case of a detention order made under paragraph 12(4)(b), the youth offending team referred to in paragraph 12(3)(a).]




SCHEDULE 6	Section 80

Amendment of Part 3 of the Aviation Security Act 1982


Part 1

Amendments
Part 3 of the Aviation Security Act 1982 (c. 36) (policing of aerodromes) has effect subject to the following amendments.

Omit section 25 (designated airports) and the cross-heading before it.

Omit section 25A (consultation about policing of designated airports).

Before section 25B (police services agreements) insert—
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 6 – Amendment of Part 3 of the Aviation Security Act 1982 Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


“Policing of aerodromes to which Part 2A applies
183

Relevant aerodromes
25AA(1) In this Part, “relevant aerodrome” means an aerodrome to which Part 2A applies (other than an aerodrome specified in an order under subsection (2)).
The Secretary of State may by order provide that a specified aerodrome to which Part 2A applies is not a relevant aerodrome for the purposes of this Part.
In subsection (2) “specified” means specified in the order.
The power to make an order under this section is exercisable by statutory instrument subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”




	For section 25B substitute— “25B Police services agreements
There must be a police services agreement in force in relation to a relevant aerodrome at any time when an aerodrome security plan containing policing measures is in force in relation to the aerodrome.
The requirement in subsection (1) does not apply during the period of 3 months beginning with the day when the first aerodrome security plan for the aerodrome is agreed by the members of the security executive group for the aerodrome.
A police services agreement is an agreement between the relevant persons which specifies—
the level of policing to be provided for the aerodrome in accordance with section 26(2A) during the period for which the agreement is in force,
whether any payments are to be made by the manager of the aerodrome in connection with that policing and, if so, the amount of the payments or the manner in which their amount is to be assessed, and
the accommodation and facilities (if any) that are to be provided by the manager in connection with that policing.
The relevant persons are—
the manager of the aerodrome,
the police authority for the relevant police area, and
the chief officer of police for that area.
184	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 6 – Amendment of Part 3 of the Aviation Security Act 1982
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


If the Secretary of State so requests, the manager of a relevant aerodrome must supply the Secretary of State with a copy of any police services agreement which is in force in relation to the aerodrome.
In this section, “policing measures”, in relation to an aerodrome security plan, means the security measures specified in the plan as the measures to be taken by the chief officer of police for the relevant police area.

25C Police services agreements: duration etc.
A police services agreement must specify the period for which it is to be in force.
In the case of the first police services agreement for the aerodrome, the period specified must—
begin on the day when the requirement in section 25B(1) first applies in relation to the aerodrome, and
end on either the 31 March next following that day or on any subsequent 31 March specified in the plan.
In the case of any subsequent police services agreement other than one to which subsection (5) applies, the period specified must—
begin on 1 April, and
end on either the 31 March next following that day or on any subsequent 31 March specified in the plan.
Subsection (5) applies if—
there is a period during which an aerodrome security plan in force in relation to the aerodrome contains no policing measures (and, accordingly, the requirement in section 25B(1) does not apply in relation to the aerodrome), but
the plan is varied to include such measures.
The first police services agreement following the variation must—
begin on the day when the variation comes into effect (and, accordingly, the requirement in section 25B(1) again applies in relation to the aerodrome), and
end on either the 31 March next following that day or on any subsequent 31 March specified in the plan.
If there is a dispute about the policing of a relevant aerodrome which relates to a police services agreement which is not in force, the Secretary of State may direct that the agreement is to come into force at the beginning of a day other than that specified in subsection (2)(a), (3)(a) or (5)(a).

25D Review and variation of police services agreements
The relevant persons—
must keep a police services agreement under review, and
may vary it.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 6 – Amendment of Part 3 of the Aviation Security Act 1982 Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
185


25E Discharge of functions of relevant persons in relation to police services agreements
In determining the terms of a police services agreement, and in exercising their functions under section 25D, the relevant persons must, in particular, have regard to the matters specified in subsection (2).
Those matters are—
any aerodrome security plan which specifies that policing measures are to be taken in relation to the aerodrome during the whole or any part of the period for which the police services agreement will be in force,
any information given to the relevant persons by the security executive group for the aerodrome which is relevant to the police services agreement,
the extent, if any, to which the costs incurred by the police authority in connection with the policing provided for the aerodrome are, or are likely to be, met by any person other than the manager of the aerodrome, and
any guidance given by the Secretary of State which is relevant to the discharge by the relevant persons of their functions in relation to police services agreements.
A chief officer of police may authorise another person to exercise any of the officer's functions under this Part in relation to police services agreements.
In this section, “policing measures” has the same meaning as in section 25B.”

(1) Section 26 (exercise of police functions) is amended as follows.
In the heading for “at designated airports” substitute “ at relevant aerodromes ”.
In subsection (1) for “a designated airport” substitute “ a relevant aerodrome ”.
In subsection (2A) —
for “an aerodrome which is a designated airport” substitute “ a relevant aerodrome ”,
omit the word “and” at the end of paragraph (a),
in paragraph (b) for “security or policing purposes” substitute “ security purposes ”, and
after paragraph (b) insert “; and
any aerodrome security plan for the aerodrome.”
In subsection (2C) for “an aerodrome which is a designated airport” substitute “ a relevant aerodrome ”.
After subsection (2C) insert—
186	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 6 – Amendment of Part 3 of the Aviation Security Act 1982
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


“(2CA) Unless the aerodrome was a designated airport immediately before the commencement of section 80 of the Policing and Crime Act 2009, subsection (2C) does not apply in relation to any time before the end of the period of 3 months beginning with the day on which an aerodrome security plan is first required to be in force in relation to the aerodrome (by virtue of section 24AE(1)).”
For subsection (2E) substitute—
“(2E) For the purposes of subsection (2A)(b) a measure is taken in relation to the aerodrome for security purposes if it is taken for a purpose to which Part 2 applies or otherwise for the purpose of preventing crime or preserving the peace at the aerodrome.”

(1) Section 27 (prevention of theft) is amended as follows.
In the heading for “at designated airports” substitute “ at relevant aerodromes ”.
In subsection (2)(a) for “an aerodrome which is a designated airport” substitute “ a relevant aerodrome ”.

(1) Section 28 (byelaws) is amended as follows.
In the heading for “designated airports” substitute “ relevant aerodromes ”.
In subsection (1) for “a designated airport” substitute “ a relevant aerodrome ”.
In subsection (2) for “any aerodrome which is a designated airport” substitute “ any relevant aerodrome ”.

(1) Section 29 (control of road traffic) is amended as follows.
In the heading for “at designated airports” substitute “ at relevant aerodromes ”.
In subsection (1) for “a designated airport” substitute “ a relevant aerodrome ”.
In subsection (2) for “a designated airport” substitute “ a relevant aerodrome ”.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 6 – Amendment of Part 3 of the Aviation Security Act 1982 Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
187



For sections 29A to 29D substitute—

“29A Power to refer disputes to Secretary of State
A relevant person may refer a dispute about the policing of a relevant aerodrome to the Secretary of State.
For the purposes of this section and sections 29B to 29D, there is a dispute about the policing of a relevant aerodrome if—
there is a dispute between any of the relevant persons about the terms to be included in a police services agreement and, in consequence, there is, or there is likely to be, a breach of the requirement imposed by section 25B(1),
there is a dispute between any of the relevant persons about whether or how a police services agreement should be varied,
there is a dispute between any of the relevant persons about the construction or operation of a police services agreement which is or has been in force in relation to the aerodrome, or
there is a dispute between any of the relevant persons about the payments to be made, or the accommodation and facilities to be provided, under section 26(2C).
For the purposes of subsection (2)(c) or (d), it does not matter whether the aerodrome is a relevant aerodrome when the dispute arises.

29B Powers of Secretary of State in relation to disputes
This section applies where—
a dispute about the policing of a relevant aerodrome is referred to the Secretary of State under section 29A, or
although no such reference is made, the Secretary of State thinks that there is a dispute about the policing of a relevant aerodrome.
The Secretary of State may require any relevant person to take such steps as the Secretary of State thinks may assist to resolve the dispute.
The Secretary of State may require any relevant person to make payments in respect of any costs incurred by another person (whether or not a relevant person) in connection with the taking of the steps mentioned in subsection (2).
The payments that may be required under subsection (3) include payments in respect of any costs incurred by the Secretary of State (including any costs attributable to the work of officials of the Secretary of State).
If the Secretary of State decides not to exercise the power in subsection (2), or if the Secretary of State exercises that power but the dispute is not resolved, the Secretary of State may determine the dispute.
188	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 6 – Amendment of Part 3 of the Aviation Security Act 1982
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


29C Dispute resolution: procedure
This section applies where the Secretary of State is determining a dispute about the policing of a relevant aerodrome.
The Secretary of State must give the relevant persons an opportunity to make representations.
If the dispute falls within section 29A(2)(a) or (b), the Secretary of State must have regard to the matters mentioned in section 25E(2).
Subject to subsections (2) and (3), the Secretary of State may decide the procedure for determining the dispute.
In particular, the Secretary of State may require a relevant person to provide such information as the Secretary of State may specify to—
the Secretary of State, or
another relevant person.
Subsection (7) applies if, in determining a dispute about the policing of a relevant aerodrome, the Secretary of State—
provides information to a relevant person, or
requires a relevant person to provide information to another relevant person.
The Secretary of State may require the person to whom the information is provided not to disclose the information without the consent of the Secretary of State.

29D Dispute resolution: powers
This section applies where the Secretary of State has considered a dispute about the policing of a relevant aerodrome.
Where the dispute is within section 29A(2)(a), the Secretary of State—
must make a declaration as to the terms which are to have effect as the terms of a police services agreement between the relevant persons, and
may make an order as to costs.
Where a declaration is made under subsection (2)(a), references in this Part to a police services agreement are to have effect, so far as necessary, as references to the terms which the declaration provides are to have effect as the terms of a police services agreement.
Where the dispute is within section 29A(2)(b), the Secretary of State may—
make a declaration varying the police services agreement;
determine that the manager of the aerodrome is obliged to pay to the police authority for the relevant police area a specified sum or a sum to be assessed in a specified manner;
determine that the police authority for the relevant police area is obliged to pay to the manager of the aerodrome a specified sum or a sum to be assessed in a specified manner;
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 6 – Amendment of Part 3 of the Aviation Security Act 1982 Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
189


determine that the manager of the aerodrome is obliged to provide specified accommodation and facilities for use in connection with the policing provided for the aerodrome;
make an order as to costs.
Where the dispute is within section 29A(2)(c), the Secretary of State may—
make a declaration as to how any term of the police services agreement is to be construed;
make a declaration as to how any term of the agreement is to be, or ought to have been, operated;
make a declaration varying the agreement;
determine that the manager of the aerodrome is obliged to pay to the police authority for the relevant police area a specified sum or a sum to be assessed in a specified manner;
determine that the police authority for the relevant police area is obliged to pay to the manager of the aerodrome a specified sum or a sum to be assessed in a specified manner;
determine that the manager of the aerodrome is obliged to provide specified accommodation and facilities for use in connection with the policing provided for the aerodrome;
make an order as to costs.
Where the dispute is within section 29A(2)(d), the Secretary of State may—
determine that the manager of the aerodrome is obliged to pay to the police authority for the relevant police area a specified sum or a sum to be assessed in a specified manner;
determine that the police authority for the relevant police area is obliged to pay to the manager of the aerodrome a specified sum or a sum to be assessed in a specified manner;
determine that the manager of the aerodrome is obliged to provide specified accommodation and facilities for use in connection with the policing provided for the aerodrome;
make an order as to costs.
In this section, “costs” means—
the legal or other costs incurred by the Secretary of State (including costs attributable to the work of officials of the Secretary of State), and
the legal or other costs incurred by any of the relevant persons.

29E Dispute resolution: appeals and enforcement etc.
A relevant person may appeal to the High Court against—
any requirement imposed on the person under section 29B(3), or
any declaration, determination or order of the Secretary of State under section 29D.
Any requirement imposed under section 29B(3) or 29C(7), and any declaration, determination or order made under section 29D may, with the permission of the High Court, be enforced as if it were a judgment of the
190	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 6 – Amendment of Part 3 of the Aviation Security Act 1982
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


High Court (and may, in particular, be enforced by the use of powers in relation to contempt of court).
In the application of this section to Scotland, references to the High Court are to be read as references to the Court of Session.”

Omit section 30 (supplementary orders).

(1) Section 31 (interpretation etc.) is amended as follows.
In subsection (1)—
after the definition of aerodrome constabulary insert—
“ “aerodrome security plan”, in relation to any aerodrome, has the same meaning as in Part 2A;”,
omit the definition of “designated airport”,
before the definition of “immigration officer” insert—
‘ “dispute about the policing of a relevant aerodrome” has the meaning given by section 29A(2);”,
in the definition of “police services agreement” for “section 29D(7)” substitute “ section 29D(3) ”,
after the definition of “police services agreement” insert—
“ “relevant aerodrome” has the meaning given by section 25AA;”,
in the definition of “relevant persons”, for “section 25B(10)” substitute “ section 25B(4) ”, and
after the definitions of “relevant police area” and “relevant constable” insert—
“ “security executive group” and “security measures” have the same meaning as in Part 2A;”.
After subsection (1) insert—
“(1A) If an aerodrome ceases to be a relevant aerodrome, but subsequently becomes such an aerodrome again, this Part applies in relation to the aerodrome with the following modifications—
section 25B(2) applies as if the reference to the first aerodrome security plan were a reference to the first aerodrome security plan after the time when the aerodrome becomes a relevant aerodrome again,
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 6 – Amendment of Part 3 of the Aviation Security Act 1982 Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
191


section 25C applies as if the reference in subsection (2) to the first police services agreement were a reference to the first police services agreement after the time when the aerodrome becomes a relevant aerodrome again, and
section 26(2CA) applies as if the reference to the time when an aerodrome security plan is first required to be in force were a reference to the time when an aerodrome security plan is first required to be in force by virtue of the aerodrome becoming a relevant aerodrome again.”
For subsection (2) substitute—
“(2) In the application of this Part to Scotland—
references to the chief officer of police for the relevant police area shall be construed as references to the chief constable of the police force for that area, and
references to the police authority for the relevant police area shall, where a joint police board is constituted for that area in accordance with an amalgamation scheme made under the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 (c. 77), be construed as references to that joint police board.”
In subsection (3)(a) for “the references in section 25(1) of this Act and” substitute “ the reference in ”.

In section 39 (extension of Act outside United Kingdom), in subsection (3), after “provisions of” (in the words in brackets) insert “ Part 2A or ”.



Part 2

Transitional and saving provision

Transitional provision for designated airports
(1) This paragraph applies in relation to an aerodrome if, immediately before commencement, the aerodrome was a designated airport.
In relation to any time before a police services agreement is required to be in force in relation to the aerodrome by virtue of the amendments made by paragraph 5 of this Schedule, section 25B(2) to (6) and (8) to (10) of the 1982 Act (as it had effect immediately before commencement) continues to apply in relation to the aerodrome as if it continued to be a designated airport.
192	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 6 – Amendment of Part 3 of the Aviation Security Act 1982
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


For the purposes of any police services agreement which is required to be in force by virtue of sub-paragraph (2), other than one which was entered into before commencement, section 25A of the 1982 Act (as it had effect immediately before commencement) continues to apply in relation to the aerodrome as if it continued to be a designated airport.
In the following provisions of this paragraph, a police services agreement which is required to be in force in relation to an aerodrome by virtue of sub-paragraph (2) is referred to as a designated airport police services agreement.
A designated airport police services agreement ceases to be in force immediately before a police services agreement is required to be in force in relation to the aerodrome by virtue of the amendments made by paragraph 5 of this Schedule (unless the designated airport police services agreement has previously ceased to be in force).
Except as provided by sub-paragraph (5), nothing in Part 1 of this Schedule affects the operation of a designated airport police services agreement or the application of the following provisions of the 1982 Act in relation to such an agreement—
section 26(2B);
section 29A(1), (2)(a) and (3) and sections 29B to 29D.
So far as is necessary for the purposes of this paragraph, section 31 of the 1982 Act (as it had effect immediately before commencement) continues to have effect.
In this paragraph—
“commencement” means the commencement of section 80;
“the 1982 Act” means the Aviation Security Act 1982 (c. 36).


Repeal of section 30 of the 1982 Act
(1) The repeal of section 30 of the 1982 Act by paragraph 11 of this Schedule does not affect—
the validity of an order made under that section (“a section 30 order”) before commencement, or
the operation of subsections (4) and (5) of that section in relation to such an order.
In relation to any time on or after commencement, any reference in a provision of a section 30 order to a designated airport is (if that provision is capable of having continuing effect) to be read as a reference to a relevant aerodrome.
In this paragraph “commencement” and “the 1982 Act” have the same meanings as in paragraph 14.

Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
193






SCHEDULE 7	Section 112

Minor and consequential amendments


Part 1

Police collaboration

Police Act 1996 (c. 16)
The Police Act 1996 is amended as follows.

In section 9A (general functions of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis) after subsection (1) insert—
“(1A) Subsection (1) is subject to any provision included in a police force collaboration agreement by virtue of section 23(4).”

In section 10 (general functions of chief constables) after subsection (1) insert—
“(1A) Subsection (1) is subject to any provision included in a police force collaboration agreement by virtue of section 23(4).”

In section 15(2) (direction and control of civilian employees) after “, subject to” insert “ any provision included in a police force collaboration agreement by virtue of section 23(4) and to ”.

In section 18 (supply of goods and services) after subsection (2) insert—
194	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


“(3) A police authority may not enter into an agreement with another police authority under section 1 of the 1970 Act in respect of a matter which could be the subject of a police authority collaboration agreement.”

In section 27(2) (special constables) after “Subject to” insert “ provision included in a police force collaboration agreement by virtue of section 23(4), ”.

In section 30 (jurisdiction)—
in subsection (3A) for “section 23 or 24” substitute “ section 24 ”, and
after subsection (3A) insert—
“(3B) Where a member of the British Transport Police Force is for the time being under the direction and control of the chief officer of another police force by virtue of a police force collaboration agreement under section 23, the member shall have all the powers and privileges of a member of that other force.
(3C) In subsection (3B), “police force” and “chief officer” have the meanings given by section 23I.”


Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003 (c. 20)
The Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003 is amended as follows.

In section 24 (constables of the British Transport Police Force) after subsection (4) insert—
“(5) Subsection (2) is subject to any provision included in a police force collaboration agreement by virtue of section 23(4) of the Police Act 1996.”

Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
195


In section 27 (employees of the British Transport Police Authority) after subsection (2) insert—
“(3) Subsection (2) is subject to any provision included in a police force collaboration agreement by virtue of section 23(4) of the Police Act 1996.”


Energy Act 2004 (c. 20)
In section 55 of the Energy Act 2004 (members of the Civil Nuclear Constabulary) after subsection (4) insert—
“(5) Subsection (2) is subject to any provision included in a police force collaboration agreement by virtue of section 23(4) of the Police Act 1996.”



Part 2

Police authorisations in respect of communications data
The Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (c. 23) is amended as follows.

F9213	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F9214	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In section 49(1)(c) (protected information coming into person's possession by virtue of authorisation or notice) after “section 22(3)” insert “ “, (3B) or (3F)” ”.
196	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


In section 58(1)(g) (persons subject to duty of disclosure to Interception of Communications Commissioner) after “section 22(3)” insert “ “, (3B) or (3F)” ”.

In section 68(7)(g) (persons subject to duty of disclosure to Tribunal) after “section 22(3)” insert “ , (3B) or (3F)” ”.



Part 3

Sexual offences and sex establishments

Children and Young Persons Act 1969 (c. 54)
(1) Section 32 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1969 (detention of absentees) is amended as follows.
In subsection (1A)—
after paragraph (a) insert—
“(aa) from a place of safety to which he has been taken under paragraph 9(3) of the Schedule to the Street Offences Act 1959; or”, and
at the end of paragraph (b)(ii) insert—
“(iia) to which he has been remanded under paragraph 10 of the Schedule to the Street Offences Act 1959; or”.
In subsection (1C)—
after paragraph (a) insert—
“(aa)	the person who made the arrangements under paragraph 9(3) of the Schedule to the Street Offences Act 1959;”,
in paragraph (b) for “that Act” substitute “ the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 ”, and
omit the word “or” at the end of paragraph (c) and insert—
“(ca)	the authority designated under paragraph 10(5) of the Schedule to the Street Offences Act 1959; or”.
In subsection (2A) for “(1A)(a) or (b)(i) or (ii)” substitute “ (1A)(a), (aa) or (b)(i),
(ii) or (iia) ”.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
197


The amendments made by this paragraph extend to England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland only.


Bail Act 1976 (c. 63)
In section 4 of the Bail Act 1976 (general right to bail of accused persons), in subsection (3) omit the word “or” at the end of paragraph (a) and after paragraph (b) insert “, or
the Schedule to the Street Offences Act 1959 (breach of orders under section 1(2A) of that Act).”


Child Abduction Act 1984 (c. 37)
In the Schedule to the Child Abduction Act 1984 (modifications of section 1 in certain cases) in paragraph 2—
omit the word “or” at the end of sub-paragraph (1)(a) and insert—
“(aa)	detained in a place of safety under paragraph 9(3) of the Schedule to the Street Offences Act 1959; or”
, and
at the end of sub-paragraph (1)(b) insert “; or
(ba) remanded to local authority accommodation under paragraph 10 of the Schedule to the Street Offences Act 1959.”


Children Act 1989 (c. 41)
In section 21 of the Children Act 1989 (provision for accommodation for children in detention or on remand etc.), in subsection (2), omit the word “or” at the end of paragraph (c)(ii) and insert—
“(iia) remanded to accommodation provided by or on behalf of a local authority by virtue of paragraph 10 of the Schedule to the Street Offences Act 1959 (breach of orders under section 1(2A) of that Act);”.
198	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 (c. 6)
F9322	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Licensing Act 2003 (c. 17)
In Part 2 of Schedule 1 to the Licensing Act 2003 (activities which are not regulated entertainment) after paragraph 11 insert—

“Sexual entertainment venues
11A  (1) The provision of relevant entertainment—
at premises for which a licence for a sexual entertainment venue is required (or the requirement has been waived) by virtue of Schedule 3 to the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982, and
of a kind, and in a way, by virtue of which the premises qualify as such a venue,
is not to be regarded as the provision of regulated entertainment for the purposes of this Act.
The provision of relevant entertainment—
at premises which are subject to a licence for a sexual entertainment venue but are not such a venue merely because of the operation of paragraph 2A(3)(b) of Schedule 3 to the Act of 1982, and
of a kind, and in a way, by virtue of which the premises would qualify as such a venue but for the operation of that paragraph,
is not to be regarded as the provision of regulated entertainment for the purposes of this Act.
The provision of entertainment consisting of the performance of live music or the playing of recorded music is not to be regarded as the provision of regulated entertainment for the purposes of this Act to the extent that it is an integral part of such provision of relevant entertainment as falls within sub-paragraph (1) or (2).
The provision of entertainment facilities is not to be regarded as the provision of regulated entertainment for the purposes of this Act to the extent that it is for the purposes of such provision of entertainment as falls within sub-paragraph (1), (2) or (3).
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
199


In this paragraph—
“premises” has the meaning given by paragraph 2A(14) of Schedule 3 to the Act of 1982;
“relevant entertainment” has the meaning given by paragraph 2A(2) of that Schedule to that Act;
“sexual entertainment venue” has the meaning given by paragraph 2A(1) of that Schedule to that Act.”


Sexual Offences Act 2003 (c. 42)
In section 54 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (meaning of “gain”, “prostitute” and “prostitution”)—
in subsection (1) for “sections 52 and 53” substitute “ sections 52, 53 and 53A ”,
in subsection (2) for “those sections” substitute “ sections 51A, 52, 53 and 53A ”,
after subsection (2) insert—
“(3) In	section	53A	“payment”	has	the	meaning	given	by section 51(3).”, and
in the heading for “sections 52 and 53” substitute “ sections 51A to 53A ”.

(1) Schedule 5 to that Act (other offences in respect of which power to make sexual offences prevention order applies) is amended as follows.
After paragraph 60 insert—
“60ZA An offence under section 53 or 54 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (contravention of notice relating to encrypted information or tipping off in connection with such a notice).”
After paragraph 106 insert—
“106A An offence under section 53 or 54 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (contravention of notice relating to encrypted information or tipping off in connection with such a notice).”
After paragraph 168 insert—
“168ZA An offence under section 53 or 54 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (contravention of notice relating to encrypted information or tipping off in connection with such a notice).”
200	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Sexual Offences (Northern Ireland) Order 2008 (S.I. 1769 (N.I. 2))
In Article 58 of the Sexual Offences (Northern Ireland) Order 2008—
in paragraph (3) omit “In paragraph (2),”,
omit paragraph (6), and
in paragraph (7) for “61” substitute “ 60 ”.



Part 4

Alcohol misuse other than mandatory licensing conditions
In the Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30), in paragraph 6 of Schedule 4 and paragraph 5 of Schedule 5—
after “subsection (1)” insert “ or (1AA) ”, and
for “subsections (1) and (4) (but not the reference in subsection (5) (arrest))” substitute “ subsections (1), (1AA) and (4) (but not the reference in subsection (1AB) (removal)) ”.

(1) In the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 2003 (c. 6), paragraph 6 of Schedule 2A is amended as follows.
In sub-paragraph (1)—
after “subsection (1)” insert “ or (1AA) ”, and
for “subsections (1) and (4) (but not the reference in subsection (5) (arrest))” substitute “ subsections (1), (1AA) and (4) (but not the reference in subsection (1AB) (removal)) ”.
In sub-paragraph (2) for “section 1(1)” substitute “ section 1(1AA) ”.

Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Part 5

Mandatory licensing conditions relating to alcohol
The Licensing Act 2003 (c. 17) is amended as follows.
201


In section 24(2)(f) (form of premises licence) for “has effect” substitute “ is issued ”.

In section 25A(6) (grant of premises licence: supply of alcohol from community premises) for “(4)” substitute “(5)”.

In section 35(7) (determination of application to vary premises licence) for “19, 20 and 21” substitute “ 19 to 21 ”.

In section 41D(5) (variation of premises licence: supply of alcohol from community premises) for “(4)” substitute “(5)”.

In section 52(5) (determination of application for review of premises licence) for “19, 20 and 21” substitute “ 19 to 21 ”.

In section 52A(3) (review: supply of alcohol from community premises) for “20 and 21” substitute “ 19(4) and 19A to 21 ”.
202	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


In section 53C(5) (summary reviews of premises licences) for “19, 20 and 21” substitute “ 19 to 21 ”.

(1) Section 57 (duty to keep and produce licence) is amended as follows.
In the heading after “licence” insert “ etc. ”.
In subsection (2) for “is” substitute “ and a list of any relevant mandatory conditions applicable to the licence are ”.
In subsection (5)—
after “it)” insert “ or a list of relevant mandatory conditions ”, and
after “copy)” insert “ or the list ”.
In subsection (7) after “of a premises licence” insert “ or a list of relevant mandatory conditions ”.
After subsection (10) insert—
“(11) In this section “relevant mandatory conditions”, in relation to a premises licence, means conditions applicable to the licence by virtue of section 19(4) or 19A.”

In section 72(2)(b) and (4)(a)(ii) (determination of application for club premises certificate) after “to (5)” insert “ , 73A ”.

In section 78(2)(e) (form of club premises certificate) for “has effect” substitute “ is issued ”.

In section 85(7) (determination of application to vary club premises certificate)—
for “and 74” substitute “ to 74 ”, and
for the words from “supply” to “premises” substitute “ alcohol ”.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
203


In section 88(5) (determination of application for review of club premises certificate)—
for “and 74” substitute “ to 74 ”, and
for the words from “supply” to “premises” substitute “ alcohol ”.

(1) Section 94 (duty to keep and produce certificate) is amended as follows.
In the heading after “certificate” insert “ etc. ”.
In subsection (2) for “is” substitute “ and a list of any relevant mandatory conditions applicable to the certificate are ”.
In subsection (7) after “copy)” insert “ or any list of relevant mandatory conditions ”.
In subsection (9) after “of a club premises certificate” insert “ or a list of relevant mandatory conditions ”.
After subsection (12) insert—
“(13) In this section “relevant mandatory conditions”, in relation to a club premises certificate, means conditions applicable to the certificate by virtue of section 73A or 73B.”

In section 167(7) (review of premises licence following closure order) for “19, 20 and 21” substitute “ 19 to 21 ”.

(1) Section 197 (regulations and orders) is amended as follows.
After subsection (3)(a) (exceptions to negative procedure) insert—
“(aa)	an order under section 19A or 73B (orders in relation to mandatory licensing conditions),”.
In subsection (4) (affirmative procedure for orders) for “subsection (3)(b)” substitute “ subsection (3)(aa), (b), ”.
204	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Part 6

Proceeds of crime: confiscation

Legal Aid, Advice and Assistance (Northern Ireland) Order 1981 (S.I. 1981/228 (N.I. 8))
(1) Part 1 of Schedule 1 to the Legal Aid, Advice and Assistance (Northern Ireland) Order 1981 (proceedings for which legal aid may be given under Article 9) is amended as follows.
In paragraph 2A(1) (certain proceedings in Crown Court) after paragraph (c) insert— “(ca)	proceedings which relate to a direction under section 215D;”.
In paragraph 3 (proceedings in a court of summary jurisdiction)—
in sub-paragraph (j) after “sections” insert “195M,”, and
after that sub-paragraph insert—
“(ja)	proceedings for the discharge or variation of an order under section 195M of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002;
(jb)	proceedings which relate to a direction under section 215D of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002;”.


Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act 1985 (c. 66)
F9446	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F9447	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F9448	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F9449	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
205



F9450	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F9451	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F9452	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Insolvency Act 1986 (c. 45)
The Insolvency Act 1986 is amended as follows.

(1) Section 306A (property subject to restraint order) is amended as follows.
In subsection (1)—
in paragraph (b) for “section 50, 128 or 198” substitute “section 50, 67A, 128, 131A, 198 or 215A”, and
after paragraph (c) insert
“, and
(d) immediately after the discharge of the restraint order the property is not detained under or by virtue of section 44A, 47J, 122A, 127J, 193A or 195J of that Act.”
For subsection (2) substitute—
“(2) The property vests in the trustee as part of the bankrupt's estate.”
206	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


After section 306A insert—

“306AA Property released from detention
This section applies where—
property is excluded from the bankrupt's estate by virtue of section 417(2)(b) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (property detained under certain provisions),
no order is in force in respect of the property under section 41, 50, 120, 128, 190 or 198 of that Act, and
the property is released.
The property vests in the trustee as part of the bankrupt's estate.”

In section 306B(1)(a) (property in respect of which receivership or administration order is made) for “section 417(2)(b), (c) or (d)” substitute “section 417(2)(c)”.

After section 306B insert—

“306BA Property in respect of which realisation order made
This section applies where—
property is excluded from the bankrupt's estate by virtue of section 417(2)(d) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (property in respect of which an order has been made authorising realisation of the property by an appropriate officer),
a confiscation order is made under section 6, 92 or 156 of that Act,
the amount payable under the confiscation order is fully paid, and
any of the property remains in the hands of the appropriate officer.
The property vests in the trustee as part of the bankrupt's estate.”

(1) Section 306C (property subject to certain orders where confiscation order discharged or quashed) is amended as follows.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
207


In subsection (1)(a) for the words from “in respect” to “force” substitute “excluded from bankrupt's estate”.
For subsection (2) substitute—
“(2) Any such property vests in the trustee as part of the bankrupt's estate if it is in the hands of—
a receiver appointed under Part 2 or 4 of that Act,
an administrator appointed under Part 3 of that Act,
an appropriate officer (within the meaning of section 41A, 120A or 190A of that Act).”


Insolvency (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989/2405 (N.I. 19))
The Insolvency (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 is amended as follows.

(1) Article 279A (property subject to restraint order) is amended as follows.
In paragraph (1)—
in sub-paragraph (b) for “section 50, 128 or 198” substitute “section 50, 67A, 128, 131A, 198 or 215A”, and
after sub-paragraph (c) insert “, and
(d)	“(d) immediately after the discharge of the restraint order the property is not detained under or by virtue of section 44A, 47J, 122A, 127J, 193A or 195J of that Act.”
For paragraph (2) substitute—
“(2) The property vests in the trustee as part of the bankrupt's estate.”

After Article 279A insert—

Property released from detention
“279AA(1) This Article applies where—
208	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


property is excluded from the bankrupt's estate by virtue of section 423(2)(b) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (property detained under certain provisions),
no order is in force in respect of the property under section 41, 50, 120, 128, 190 or 198 of that Act, and
the property is released.
(2) The property vests in the trustee as part of the bankrupt's estate.”

In Article 279B(1)(a) (property in respect of which receivership or administration order is made) for “section 423(2)(b), (c) or (d)” substitute “section 423(2)(c)”.

After Article 279B insert—

Property in respect of which realisation order made
“279BA(1) This Article applies where—
property is excluded from the bankrupt's estate by virtue of section 423(2)(d) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (property in respect of which an order has been made authorising realisation of the property by an appropriate officer),
a confiscation order is made under section 6, 92 or 156 of that Act,
the amount payable under the confiscation order is fully paid, and
any of the property remains in the hands of the appropriate officer.
(2) The property vests in the trustee as part of the bankrupt's estate.”

(1) Article 279C (property subject to certain orders where confiscation order discharged or quashed) is amended as follows.
In paragraph (1)(a) for the words from “in respect” to “force” substitute “excluded from the bankrupt's estate”.
For paragraph (2) substitute—
“(2) Any such property vests in the trustee as part of the bankrupt's estate if it is in the hands of—
a receiver appointed under Part 2 or 4 of that Act,
an administrator appointed under Part 3 of that Act,
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
209


an appropriate officer (within the meaning of section 41A, 120A or 190A of that Act).”


Access to Justice Act 1999 (c. 22)
F9565	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29)
The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 is amended as follows.

In section 69(1) (exercise of powers of court and receiver) for “67” substitute “67D”.

In section 85 (proceedings: England and Wales) for subsection (7) substitute—
“(7) Any power to extend the time for giving notice of application for leave to appeal, or for applying for leave to appeal, must be ignored for the purposes of subsection (6).”

In section 87(2) (definition of confiscation order subject to appeal: England and Wales) omit the words from “; and for” to the end.
210	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


After section 87 insert—

“87A No further possibility of appeal
The following rule applies for the purposes of construing any provision of this Part which refers to there being no further possibility of—
an appeal against a decision of a court, or
an appeal on which an order of a court could be varied or quashed.
Any power to extend the time for giving notice of application for leave to appeal, or for applying for leave to appeal, must be ignored.”

In section 132(1) (exercise of powers of court and administrator) for “131” substitute “131D”.

In section 153(2) (definition of confiscation order subject to appeal: Scotland) omit the words from “; and for” to the end.

After section 153 insert—

“153A No further possibility of appeal
The following rule applies for the purposes of construing any provision of this Part which refers to there being no further possibility of—
an appeal against (or review of) a decision of a court, or
an appeal on which an order of a court could be varied or quashed.
Any power—
to allow an appeal (or review) out of time, or
to extend the time for applying for leave to appeal, must be ignored.”
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
211



In section 217(1) (exercise of powers of court and receiver) for “215” substitute “215D”.

In section 233 (proceedings: Northern Ireland) for subsection (7) substitute—
“(7) Any power to extend the time for giving notice of application for leave to appeal, or for applying for leave to appeal, must be ignored for the purposes of subsection (6).”

In section 235(2) (definition of confiscation order subject to appeal: Northern Ireland) omit the words from “; and for” to the end.

After section 235 insert—

“235A No further possibility of appeal
The following rule applies for the purposes of construing any provision of this Part which refers to there being no further possibility of—
an appeal against a decision of a court, or
an appeal on which an order of a court could be varied or quashed.
Any power to extend the time for giving notice of application for leave to appeal, or for applying for leave to appeal, must be ignored.”

In section 308 (recoverable property: exceptions) after subsection (8) insert—
“(8A) Property is not recoverable while it is detained under or by virtue of section 44A, 47J, 47K, 47M, 47P, 122A, 127J, 127K, 127M, 127P, 193A, 195J, 195K, 195M or 195P.”
212	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


In section 417 (property excluded from estate of person adjudged bankrupt in England and Wales) for subsection (2) substitute—
“(2) The following property is excluded from the person's estate for the purposes of Part 9 of the 1986 Act—
property for the time being subject to a restraint order which was made under section 41, 120 or 190 before the order adjudging the person bankrupt;
property for the time being detained under or by virtue of section 44A, 47J, 47K, 47M, 47P, 122A, 127J, 127K, 127M, 127P, 193A, 195J, 195K, 195M or 195P;
property in respect of which an order under section 50, 128(3) or 198 is in force;
property in respect of which an order under section 67A, 131A or 215A is in force.”

(1) Section 418 (restriction of powers where person adjudged bankrupt in England and Wales) is amended as follows.
In subsection (2)—
in paragraph (a) for “67” substitute “67B, the powers conferred on an appropriate officer by section 47C”,
in paragraph (b) after “Schedule 3” insert “, the powers conferred on an appropriate officer by section 127C”, and
in paragraph (c) for “215” substitute “215B, the powers conferred on an appropriate officer by section 195C”.
In subsection (3) after paragraph (e) insert—
“(f) in a case where a confiscation order has been made under section 6, 92 or 156 of this Act, any sums remaining in the hands of an appropriate officer after the amount required to be paid under the confiscation order has been fully paid under section 67D(2)(c), 131D(2)(c) or 215D(2)(c).”

(1) Section 419 (tainted gifts by person adjudged bankrupt in England and Wales) is amended as follows.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
213


In subsection (2)—
after paragraph (a) insert—
“(aa)	such property is detained under or by virtue of section 44A, 47J, 47K, 47M, 47P, 122A, 127J, 127K, 127M, 127P, 193A,
195J, 195K, 195M or 195P,”, and
after paragraph (b) insert “, or
there is in force in respect of such property an order under section 67A, 131A or 215A.”
In subsection (3) for “subsection (2)(a) or (b)” substitute “subsection (2)(a), (b) or (c)”.

In section 420 (property excluded from the debtor‘s estate where sequestration in Scotland) for subsection (2) substitute—
“(2) The following property is excluded from the debtor's estate for the purposes of the 1985 Act—
property for the time being subject to a restraint order which was made under section 41, 120 or 190 before the award of sequestration;
property for the time being detained under or by virtue of section 44A, 47J, 47K, 47M, 47P, 122A, 127J, 127K, 127M, 127P, 193A, 195J, 195K, 195M or 195P;
property in respect of which an order under section 50, 128(3) or 198 is in force;
property in respect of which an order under section 67A, 131A or 215A is in force.”

(1) Section 421 (restriction of powers where award of sequestration) is amended as follows.
In subsection (2)—
in paragraph (a) for “67” substitute “67B, the powers conferred on an appropriate officer by section 47C”,
in paragraph (b) after “Schedule 3” insert “, the powers conferred on an appropriate officer by section 127C”, and
in paragraph (c) for “215” substitute “215B, the powers conferred on an appropriate officer by section 195C”.
In subsection (3) after paragraph (e) insert—
“(f)	in a case where a confiscation order has been made under section 6, 92 or 156 of this Act, any sums remaining in the hands of an
214	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


appropriate officer after the amount required to be paid under the confiscation order has been fully paid under section 67D(2)(c), 131D(2)(c) or 215D(2)(c).”

(1) Section 422 (tainted gifts by person whose estate is sequestrated in Scotland) is amended as follows.
In subsection (2)—
after paragraph (a) insert—
“(aa)	such property is detained under or by virtue of section 44A, 47J, 47K, 47M, 47P, 122A, 127J, 127K, 127M, 127P, 193A,
195J, 195K, 195M or 195P,”, and
after paragraph (b) insert “, or
there is in force in respect of such property an order under section 67A, 131A or 215A.”
In subsection (3) for “subsection (2)(a) or (b)” substitute “subsection (2)(a), (b) or (c)”.

In section 423 (property excluded from estate of person adjudged bankrupt in Northern Ireland) for subsection (2) substitute—
“(2) The following property is excluded from the person's estate for the purposes of Part 9 of the 1989 Order—
property for the time being subject to a restraint order which was made under section 41, 120 or 190 before the order adjudging the person bankrupt;
property for the time being detained under or by virtue of section 44A, 47J, 47K, 47M, 47P, 122A, 127J, 127K, 127M, 127P, 193A, 195J, 195K, 195M or 195P;
property in respect of which an order under section 50, 128(3) or 198 is in force;
property in respect of which an order under section 67A, 131A or 215A is in force.”

Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
215


(1) Section 424 (restriction of powers where person adjudged bankrupt in Northern Ireland) is amended as follows.
In subsection (2)—
in paragraph (a) for “67” substitute “67B, the powers conferred on an appropriate officer by section 47C”,
in paragraph (b) after “Schedule 3” insert “, the powers conferred on an appropriate officer by section 127C”, and
in paragraph (c) for “215” substitute “215B, the powers conferred on an appropriate officer by section 195C”.
In subsection (3) after paragraph (e) insert—
“(f) in a case where a confiscation order has been made under section 6, 92 or 156 of this Act, any sums remaining in the hands of an appropriate officer after the amount required to be paid under the confiscation order has been fully paid under section 67D(2)(c), 131D(2)(c) or 215D(2)(c).”

(1) Section 425 (tainted gifts by person who is adjudged bankrupt in Northern Ireland) is amended as follows.
In subsection (2)—
after paragraph (a) insert—
“(aa)	such property is detained under or by virtue of section 44A, 47J, 47K, 47M, 47P, 122A, 127J, 127K, 127M, 127P, 193A,
195J, 195K, 195M or 195P,”, and
after paragraph (b) insert “, or
there is in force in respect of such property an order under section 67A, 131A or 215A.”
In subsection (3) for “subsection (2)(a) or (b)” substitute “subsection (2)(a), (b) or (c)”.

(1) Section 426 (winding up under the Insolvency Act 1986) is amended as follows.
216	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


property for the time being detained under or by virtue of section 44A, 47J, 47K, 47M, 47P, 122A, 127J, 127K, 127M, 127P, 193A, 195J, 195K, 195M or 195P;
property in respect of which an order under section 50, 128(3) or 198 is in force;
property in respect of which an order under section 67A, 131A or 215A is in force.”
(3) In subsection (5)—
in paragraph (a) for “67” substitute “67B, the powers conferred on an appropriate officer by section 47C”,
in paragraph (b) after “Schedule 3” insert “, the powers conferred on an appropriate officer by section 127C”, and
in paragraph (c) for “215” substitute “215B, the powers conferred on an appropriate officer by section 195C”.

(1) Section 427 (tainted gifts by company: winding up in England and Wales or Scotland) is amended as follows.
In subsection (3)—
after paragraph (a) insert—
“(aa)	such property is detained under or by virtue of section 44A, 47J, 47K, 47M, 47P, 122A, 127J, 127K, 127M, 127P, 193A,
195J, 195K, 195M or 195P,”, and
after paragraph (b) insert “, or
there is in force in respect of such property an order under section 67A, 131A or 215A.”
In subsection (4) for “subsection (3)(a) or (b)” substitute “subsection (3)(a), (b) or (c)”.

(1) Section 428 (winding up under the Insolvency (Northern Ireland) Order 1989) is amended as follows.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
217


property for the time being detained under or by virtue of section 44A, 47J, 47K, 47M, 47P, 122A, 127J, 127K, 127M, 127P, 193A, 195J, 195K, 195M or 195P;
property in respect of which an order under section 50, 128(3) or 198 is in force;
property in respect of which an order under section 67A, 131A or 215A is in force.”
(3) In subsection (5)—
in paragraph (a) for “67” substitute “67B, the powers conferred on an appropriate officer by section 47C”,
in paragraph (b) after “Schedule 3” insert “, the powers conferred on an appropriate officer by section 127C”, and
in paragraph (c) for “215” substitute “215B, the powers conferred on an appropriate officer by section 195C”.

(1) Section 429 (tainted gifts by company: winding up in Northern Ireland) is amended as follows.
In subsection (3)—
after paragraph (a) insert—
“(aa)	such property is detained under or by virtue of section 44A, 47J, 47K, 47M, 47P, 122A, 127J, 127K, 127M, 127P, 193A,
195J, 195K, 195M or 195P,”, and
after paragraph (b) insert “, or
there is in force in respect of such property an order under section 67A, 131A or 215A.”
In subsection (4) for “subsection (3)(a) or (b)” substitute “subsection (3)(a), (b) or (c)”.

(1) Section 430 (restriction of powers where company holds property subject to floating charge) is amended as follows.
For subsection (2) substitute—
“(2) If a company holds property which is subject to a floating charge, and a receiver has been appointed by or on the application of the holder of the charge, the functions of the receiver are not exercisable in relation to the following property—
property for the time being subject to a restraint order which was made under section 41, 120 or 190 before the relevant time;
218	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


property for the time being detained under or by virtue of section 44A, 47J, 47K, 47M, 47P, 122A, 127J, 127K, 127M, 127P, 193A, 195J, 195K, 195M or 195P;
property in respect of which an order under section 50, 128(3) or 198 is in force;
property in respect of which an order under section 67A, 131A or 215A is in force.”
In subsection (5)—
in paragraph (a) for “67” substitute “67B, the powers conferred on an appropriate officer by section 47C”,
in paragraph (b) after “Schedule 3” insert “, the powers conferred on an appropriate officer by section 127C”, and
in paragraph (c) for “215” substitute “215B, the powers conferred on an appropriate officer by section 195C”.

(1) Section 432 (insolvency practitioners) is amended as follows.
After subsection (6) insert—
“(6A) Subsection (7) also applies if—
property is detained under or by virtue of section 44A, 47J, 47K, 47M, 47P, 122A, 127J, 127K, 127M, 127P, 193A, 195J, 195K,
195M or 195P,
a person acting as an insolvency practitioner incurs expenses which are not ones in respect of the detained property, and
the expenses are ones which (but for the effect of the detention of the property) might have been met by taking possession of and realising the property.”
For subsection (7) substitute—
“(7) Whether or not the insolvency practitioner has seized or disposed of any property, the insolvency practitioner is entitled to payment of the expenses under—
section 54(2), 55(3) or 67D(2) if the restraint order was made under section 41 or (as the case may be) the property was detained under or by virtue of section 44A, 47J, 47K, 47M or 47P,
section 130(3), 131(3) or 131D(2) if the restraint order was made under section 120 or (as the case may be) the property was detained under or by virtue of section 122A, 127J, 127K, 127M or 127P, and
section 202(2), 203(3) or 215D(2) if the restraint order was made under section 190 or (as the case may be) the property was detained under or by virtue of section 193A, 195J, 195K, 195M or 195P.”
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
219



In section 453A(5) (offences in relation to financial investigators) for paragraph (a) substitute—
“(a)	sections 47C to 47F or 195C to 195F (powers to seize and search for realisable property);”.

(1) Section 459 (orders and regulations) is amended as follows.
In subsection (4)(a) (orders not subject to negative procedure: Secretary of State etc.)
—
after “section” insert “41A(5), 47S(4),”, and
after “75(7) or (8),” insert “190A(5), 195S(4),”.
In subsection (6)(a) (orders subject to affirmative procedure: Secretary of State etc.)
—
after “section” insert “41A(5), 47S(4),”, and
after “75(7) or (8),” insert “190A(5), 195S(4),”.


Access to Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 2003 (S.I. 2003/435 (N.I. 10))
(1) Schedule 2 to the Access to Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 2003 (civil legal services: excluded services) is amended as follows.
In paragraph 2(d) (proceedings in a court of summary jurisdiction in which representation may be funded)—
in paragraph (xii) after “section” insert “195M,”, and
after paragraph (xiii) insert—
“(xiv) for the discharge or variation of an order under section 195M of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, or
(xv) which relate to a direction under section 215D of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002,”.
In paragraph 3 (certain Crown Court proceedings in which representation may be funded) after paragraph (c) insert—
“(ca)	proceedings which relate to a direction under section 215D;”.
220	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Part 7

Proceeds of crime: forfeiture of detained cash

Legal Aid, Advice and Assistance (Northern Ireland) Order 1981 (S.I. 1981/228 (N.I. 8))
In paragraph 3(j) of Part 1 of Schedule 1 to the Legal Aid, Advice and Assistance (Northern Ireland) Order 1981 (proceedings in a court of summary jurisdiction in respect of which legal aid may be given under Article 9) after “295, 297,” insert “ 297E, 297F, ”.


Access to Justice Act 1999 (c. 22)
F9698	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29)
The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 is amended as follows.

In section 7 (recoverable amount for the purpose of confiscation orders: England and Wales) in subsection (4) for the words from “any property” to the end substitute “the following must be ignored—
any property in respect of which a recovery order is in force under section 266,
any property which has been forfeited in pursuance of a forfeiture notice under section 297A, and
any property in respect of which a forfeiture order is in force under section 298(2).”
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
221



(1) Section 82 (definition of “free property”) is amended as follows.
At the beginning insert—
“(1) Property is free unless it falls within subsection (2) or (3).”
The existing text becomes subsection (2).
In that subsection for “Property is free unless” substitute “ Property falls within this subsection if ”.
At the end insert—
“(3) Property falls within this subsection if—
it has been forfeited in pursuance of a forfeiture notice under section 297A;
it is detained under section 297C or 297D.”

In section 93 (recoverable amount for the purpose of confiscation orders: Scotland) in subsection (4) for the words from “any property” to the end substitute “the following must be ignored—
any property in respect of which a recovery order is in force under section 266,
any property which has been forfeited in pursuance of a forfeiture notice under section 297A, and
any property in respect of which a forfeiture order is in force under section 298(2).”

(1) Section 148 (definition of “free property”) is amended as follows.
At the beginning insert—
“(1) Property is free unless it falls within subsection (2) or (3).”
The existing text becomes subsection (2).
In that subsection for “Property is free unless” substitute “ Property falls within this subsection if ”.
At the end insert—
“(3) Property falls within this subsection if—
222	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


it has been forfeited in pursuance of a forfeiture notice under section 297A;
it is detained under section 297C or 297D.”

In section 157 (recoverable amount for the purpose of confiscation orders: Northern Ireland) in subsection (4) for the words from “any property” to the end substitute “the following must be ignored—
any property in respect of which a recovery order is in force under section 266,
any property which has been forfeited in pursuance of a forfeiture notice under section 297A, and
any property in respect of which a forfeiture order is in force under section 298(2).”

(1) Section 230 (definition of “free property”) is amended as follows.
At the beginning insert—
“(1) Property is free unless it falls within subsection (2) or (3).”
The existing text becomes subsection (2).
In that subsection for “Property is free unless” substitute “ Property falls within this subsection if ”.
At the end insert—
“(3) Property falls within this subsection if—
it has been forfeited in pursuance of a forfeiture notice under section 297A;
it is detained under section 297C or 297D.”

In section 278 (limit on recovery by recovery order) after subsection (6) insert— “(6A) If—
recoverable property is forfeited in pursuance of a forfeiture notice under section 297A, and
the enforcement authority subsequently seeks a recovery order in respect of related property,
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
223


the forfeiture notice is to be treated for the purposes of this section as if it were a recovery order obtained by the enforcement authority in respect of the forfeited property.”

In section 300(1) (application of cash forfeited by court under section 298) for “this Chapter” substitute “ section 298 ”.

(1) Section 301 (victims and other owners: application for release of cash) is amended as follows.
In subsection (4)(c) for the words from “the conditions” to “that section” substitute “ the release condition is met ”.
After subsection (4) insert—
“(5) The release condition is met—
in relation to cash detained under section 295, if the conditions in that section for the detention of the cash are no longer met,
in relation to cash detained under section 297C or 297D, if the cash is not recoverable property and is not intended by a person for use in unlawful conduct, and
in relation to cash detained under 298, if the court or sheriff decides not to make an order under that section in relation to the cash.”

(1) Section 302 (compensation) is amended as follows.
For subsection (1) substitute—
“(1) If cash detained under this Chapter was seized in England, Wales or Northern Ireland the person to whom the cash belongs or from whom it was seized may make an application to a magistrates' court for compensation if—
the cash is not forfeited in pursuance of a forfeiture notice, and
no forfeiture order is made in respect of the cash.
(1A) If cash detained under this Chapter was seized in Scotland the person to whom the cash belongs or from whom it was seized may make an application to the sheriff for compensation if no forfeiture order is made in respect of the cash.”
After subsection (7B) insert—
224	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


“(7C) If any cash is detained under this Chapter and part only of the cash is forfeited in pursuance of a forfeiture notice, this section has effect in relation to the other part.”

In section 341(3A)(a) and (b) (definition of detained cash investigation) for “section 295” substitute “ that Chapter ”.

In paragraph 3(3) of Schedule 10 (capital gains tax) after “under section” insert “ 297C or ”.


Access to Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 2003 (S.I. 2003/435 (N.I. 10))
In paragraph 2(d)(xii) of Schedule 2 to the Access to Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 2003 (civil legal services: proceedings in a court of summary jurisdiction in which representation may be funded) after “295, 297,” insert “ 297E, 297F, ”.


UK Borders Act 2007 (c. 30)
In section 24(2)(c) of the UK Borders Act 2007 (application of Chapter 3 of Part 5 of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 in relation to immigration officers) for “section 290” substitute “ sections 290 and 297A ”.
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
225



Part 8

Proceeds of crime: detained cash investigations
In section 18 of the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982 (c. 27) (enforcement of UK judgments in other parts of UK), in subsection (2)—
in paragraph (f)—
omit “or a detained cash investigation”, and
for “meanings” substitute “ meaning ”, and
after paragraph (f) insert—
“(g)  an order made, or a warrant issued, under Chapter 3 of Part 8 of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 for the purposes of a detained cash investigation within the meaning given by section 341 of that Act;”.

In section 64 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) (meaning of “appropriate judicial authority”), in subsection (3)(aa), omit “or a detained cash investigation”.





Part 9

Extradition
In section 185(5) of the Extradition Act 2003 (c. 41) (limit on fees and expenses) after “amount” insert “ allowed ”.
226	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Part 10

Criminal records
In section 119 of the Police Act 1997 (c. 50) (sources of information) for subsection (1A) substitute—
“(1A) The Secretary of State may require the Independent Safeguarding Authority to make available specified information for the purpose of enabling the Secretary of State to carry out functions under this Part in relation to—
any application for a certificate or for registration; or
the determination of whether a person should continue to be a registered person.”


PROSPECTIVE


Part 11

Border controls
(1) Section 141 of Criminal Justice Act 1988 (c. 33) (offensive weapons) is amended as follows.
Omit subsection (4) (prohibition on importation).
In subsections (5) and (8) omit—
paragraph (b), and
the “or” immediately before that paragraph.
In subsection (11A), as inserted by the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006 (c. 38), omit—
paragraph (b), and
the “or” immediately before that paragraph.
In subsection (11A), as inserted by the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Act 2007 (asp 17), omit “Subject to subsection (11C),”.
In subsection (11D), as inserted by the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006—
in paragraph (a) omit “or from the prohibition in subsection (4) above”, and
in paragraph (b) omit “, or for an offence under section 50(2) or (3) of the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979,”.
Omit subsections (11C) to (11E) as inserted by the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Act 2007.
In section 289(8) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29) (recovery of cash in summary proceedings: intimate searches) after “1979 (c. 2))” insert “ but see
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
227





Part 12

Football spectators
In section 33 of the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15) (disclosure of information by SOCA), at the end of subsection (2)(e) insert “or sections 104 to 106 of the Policing and Crime Act 2009”.



Part 13

Redundant provisions etc

Proof of intention to supply a controlled drug
(1) The Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (c. 38) is amended as follows.
In section 5 (restriction of possession of controlled drugs) omit subsections (4A) to (4C).
In section 31 (general provisions as to regulations)—
in subsection (2) omit “, except as provided by subsection (2A),”, and
omit subsections (2A) and (4A).
In section 38 (special provisions as to Northern Ireland) omit subsection (1A).

Staff custody officers
(1) The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60) is amended as follows.
In section 30CA (bail under section 30A: variation of conditions by police), in subsection (5) omit the following—
in paragraph (a)—
“, or a person designated as a staff custody officer under section 38 of the Police Reform Act 2002,”, and
“or officer”, and
in paragraph (b), “or officer”.
In section 36 (custody officers at police stations)—
for subsection (3) substitute—
“(3) No officer may be appointed a custody officer unless the officer is of at least the rank of sergeant.”,
in subsection (5) for “an individual” substitute “ an officer ”,
228	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


in subsection (7)—
in paragraph (a), omit “or a staff custody officer” and for “such a person” substitute “ such an officer ”, and
in paragraph (b), for “such person” substitute “ such officer ”,
in subsection (8) for “a person” substitute “ an officer ”, and
omit subsection (11).
In section 39 (responsibilities in relation to persons detained)—
in subsection (6)(a) omit “(or, if the custody officer is a staff custody officer, any police officer or any police employee)”, and
omit subsection (7).
In section 55 (intimate searches), in the definition of “appropriate officer” in subsection (17), omit paragraph (c) and the “or” immediately before it.
(1) The Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S. I. 1989/1341 (N. I. 12)) is amended as follows.
In Article 37 (custody officers at police stations)—
for paragraph (3) substitute—
“(3) No police officer may be appointed a custody officer unless the officer is of at least the rank of sergeant.”,
in paragraph (5) for “an individual” substitute “ an officer ”,
in paragraph (7)—
in sub-paragraph (a) omit “or a staff custody officer” and for “such a person” substitute “ such an officer ”, and
in sub-paragraph (b) for “such person” substitute “ such officer ”,
in paragraph (8) for “a person” substitute “ an officer ”, and
omit paragraph (11).
In Article 40 (responsibilities in relation to persons detained)—
in paragraph (6)(a) omit “(or, if the custody officer is a staff custody officer, any police officer or any member of the police support staff)”, and
omit paragraph (7).
(1) The Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) is amended as follows.
In section 38 (police powers for police authority employees) omit the following—
subsection (2)(e),
subsection (6)(e), and
subsection (10).
In Schedule 4 (powers exercisable by police civilians)—
omit Part 4A, and
F98(b)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 7 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
229


(1) The Police (Northern Ireland) Act 2003 (c. 6) is amended as follows.
In section 30 (police powers for designated police support staff), omit the following—
subsection (1)(d),
subsection (6)(d), and
subsection (11).
In Schedule 2 (powers exercisable by designated persons) omit Part 3A.

Secretary of State's approval of devices for taking fingerprints and samples
(1) The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60) is amended as follows.
In section 61 (fingerprinting in England and Wales) omit subsection (8A).
In section 63 (non-intimate samples in England and Wales) omit subsection (9A) (inserted by the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)).
(1) The Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S. I. 1989/1341 (N. I. 12)) is amended as follows.
In Article 61 (fingerprinting in Northern Ireland) omit paragraph (8B).
In Article 63 (non-intimate samples in Northern Ireland) omit paragraph (10A).

Additional time limits for prosecuting persons under 18
Omit section 22A of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 (c. 23).

Access to driver licensing records
Omit section 105(2)(b) of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) (access to particulars of disqualified drivers).
Omit section 36 of the Vehicles (Crime) Act 2001 (c. 3) (access to motor insurance information).
Omit Article 81 of the Road Traffic (Northern Ireland) Order 2007 (S. I. 2007/916 (N. I. 10)) (disclosure of information about insurance status of vehicles).

Minor amendment
In section 40B(7) of the Police Act 1996 (c. 16) (report about direction given by Secretary of State), for “subsection (7)” substitute “ subsection (6) ”.

Local child curfew schemes
(1) The Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (c. 37) is amended as follows.
Omit sections 14 and 15 (which make provision for local child curfew schemes and for the enforcement of curfew notices).
In section 16 (removal of truants to designated premises), in subsection (5), in the definition of “public place”, for “section 14 above” substitute “ Part 2 of the Public Order Act 1986 ”.
230	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 8 – Repeals and revocations
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


SCHEDULE 8	Section 112

Repeals and revocations


Part 1

Appointment of senior police officers


Reference	Extent of repeal
Police Act 1996	Section 54(3A). Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	Section 84.

Part 2

Sexual offences


Short title and chapter	Extent of repeal or revocation
Street Offences Act 1959 (c. 57)	Section 2.
Children and Young Persons Act In section 32(1C), the word “or” at the end of 1969 (c. 54)	paragraph (c).
Bail Act 1976 (c. 63)	In section 4(3), the word “or” at the end of paragraph (a).
Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 (c. 43) In Schedule 7, paragraph 30.
Child Abduction Act 1984 (c. 37)	In the Schedule, the word “or” at the end of paragraph
2(1)(a).
Sexual Offences Act 1985 (c. 44)	The whole Act.
Road	Traffic	(Consequential In Schedule 3, paragraph 29. Provisions) Act 1988 (c. 54)
Children Act 1989 (c. 41)	In section 21(2), the word “or” at the end of paragraph (c)(ii).
Sexual Offences Act 2003 (c. 42)
Section 115(6).
In Schedule 1, paragraphs 3 and 4.


The repeal in section 32(1C) of the Children and Young Persons Act 1969 extends to England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland only.
The repeal of section 115(6) of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 extends to England and Wales and Northern Ireland only.

Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Schedule 8 – Repeals and revocations Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
231


Sexual Offences (Northern Ireland) Order 2008 (S.I. 1769 (N.I. 2))
In Article 58—
in paragraph (3), “In paragraph (2),”, and
paragraph (6).


The repeal in section 32(1C) of the Children and Young Persons Act 1969 extends to England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland only.
The repeal of section 115(6) of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 extends to England and Wales and Northern Ireland only.


Part 3

Alcohol misuse


Reference	Extent of repeal
Confiscation of Alcohol (Young Persons) Act 1997 (c. 33)
In section 1—
in subsection (1), “and to state his name and address”,
subsection (1A), and
in subsection (6), “and (1A)”.
Licensing Act 2003 (c. 17)	Section 155(1)(b) and (c).


Part 4

Proceeds of crime: confiscation


Reference	Extent of repeal or revocation
Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act 1985 In section 31A(1), the word “and” at the end of (c. 66)	paragraph (b).
Insolvency Act 1986 (c. 45)	In section 306A(1), the word “and” at the end of
paragraph (b).
Insolvency (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989/2405 (N.I. 19))
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29)
In Article 279A(1), the word “and” at the end of sub- paragraph (b).
Section 45.
In section 87(2), the words from “; and for” to the end. Section 126.
232	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 8 – Repeals and revocations
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes















Access to Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 2003 (S.I. 2003/435 (N.I. 10))
Serious Crime Act 2007 (c. 27)
In section 153(2), the words from “; and for” to the end. Section 194.
In section 235(2), the words from “; and for” to the end.
In section 419(2), the word “or” at the end of paragraph (a).
In section 422(2), the word “or” at the end of paragraph (a).
In section 427(3), the word “or” at the end of paragraph (a).
In section 429(3), the word “or” at the end of paragraph (a).
In Schedule 2, the word “or” at the end of paragraph 2(d) (xii).
Section 78.
In Schedule 8, paragraphs 150, 151 and 154.




Part 5

Proceeds of crime: detained cash investigations


Reference	Extent of repeal
Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982 (c. 27)
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001
(c. 16)
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
In section 18(2)(f), “or a detained cash investigation”. In section 64(3)(aa), “or a detained cash investigation”.
In section 343(3), “or a detained cash investigation”. In section 344(b), “or a detained cash investigation”. In section 350(5)(b), “or a detained cash investigation”. In section 351(8), “or a detained cash investigation”.
In section 356—
in the title, “and detained cash”,
in subsection (1), “or detained cash investigations”, and
subsections (11) and (12).
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Schedule 8 – Repeals and revocations Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
233


Serious Crime Act 2007 (c. 27)
Section 80(5) and (6).
In Schedule 8, paragraph 107(3).
In Schedule 10, paragraphs 3 to 6, 9 and 26 to 28.


Part 6

Extradition



Reference	Extent of repeal
Extradition Act 2003 (c. 41)
Sections 143 and 144.
Section 151.


Part 7

Security planning at airports



Reference	Extent of repeal
Aviation Security Act 1982 (c. 36)
Section 25. Section 25A.
In section 26(2A), the word “and” at the end of paragraph (a).
Section 30.
In section 31(1), the definition of designated airport.




Part 8

Safeguarding vulnerable groups and criminal records

234	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 8 – Repeals and revocations
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Reference	Extent of repeal
Police Act 1997 (c. 50)








Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001
(c. 16)
In section 112(1)(a) “in the prescribed manner and form”.
In section 113A(1)(a) “in the prescribed manner and form”.
In section 113B(1)(a) “in the prescribed manner and form”.
In section 114(1)(a) “in the prescribed form”. In section 116(1)(a) “in the prescribed form”. Section 134(2)(b).
Criminal Justice Act 2003 (c. 44)	In Schedule 35, paragraph 2.
Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15)
F99
. . .
In Schedule 14, paragraphs 4(a) and 8(a).

F99
. . .



Safeguarding Vulnerable Groups (Northern Ireland) Order 2007 (S.I. 2007/1351 (N.I. 11))
In Article 33—
in paragraphs (2) and (3), sub-paragraph (b) and the “, and” immediately before it, and
paragraphs (4) and (5).


Note: the repeals made by this Part of this Schedule in the Police Act 1997 extend to England and Wales and Northern Ireland only.




Part 9

Border control powers in relation to cash


Reference	Extent of repeal
Finance (No. 2) Act 1992 (c. 48)	In section 4—
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Schedule 8 – Repeals and revocations Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
235


in subsection (2), the “or” after “member States;” at the end of paragraph (b), and
in subsection (5), the “and” after “Economic Community;”.


PROSPECTIVE


Part 10

Offensive weapons

Reference	Extent of repeal
Criminal Justice Act 1988 (c. 33)
Section 141(4).
In section 141(5) and (8)—
paragraph (b), and
the “or” immediately before that paragraph.
In section 141, in subsection (11A) as inserted by the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006—
paragraph (b), and
the “or” immediately before that paragraph.
In section 141, in subsection (11A) as inserted by the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Act 2007, “Subject to subsection (11C),”.
In section 141, in subsection (11D) as inserted by the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006—
in paragraph (a) “or from the prohibition in subsection (4) above”, and
in paragraph (b) “, or for an offence under section 50(2) or (3) of the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979,”.
In section 141, subsections (11C) to (11E) as inserted by the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Act 2007.




Part 11

Football spectators


Reference	Extent of repeal or revocation
236	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 8 – Repeals and revocations
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

Football Spectators Act 1989 (c. 37)


Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006 (asp 10)
Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006 (Consequential Provisions and Modifications) Order 2007 (S.I. 2007/1098)
In section 14E(2), “in England and Wales”.
In section 19(2B)(b), “if the match is outside the United Kingdom”.
In section 53(2)(a), “in Scotland”. Articles 1(5) and 5.




Part 12

Misuse of Drugs Act 1971: warrants

Reference	Extent of repeal
Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (c. 38)	In section 23—
in subsection (3), “acting for the police area in which the premises are situated”, and
subsection (5).





Part 13

Redundant provisions

Reference	Extent of repeal or revocation
Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (c. 38)






Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60)
In section 5, subsections (4A) to (4C). In section 31—
in subsection (2), “, except as provided by subsection (2A),“, and
subsections (2A) and (4A). Section 38(1A).
In section 30CA(5)—
in paragraph (a), “, or a person designated as a staff custody officer under section 38 of the
Police Reform Act 2002,” and “or officer”, and
in paragraph (b), “or officer”.
In section 36—
in subsection (7)(a), “or a staff custody officer”, and
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Schedule 8 – Repeals and revocations Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
237
















Prosecution of Offences Act 1985
subsection (11).
In section 39—
in subsection (6)(a), “(or, if the custody officer is a staff custody officer, any police officer or any police employee)”, and
subsection (7).
In section 55(17), in the definition of “appropriate officer”, paragraph (c) and the “or” immediately before it.
Section 61(8A).
Section 63(9A) (inserted by the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001).
Section 22A.
(c. 23)	In section 22B, in subsection (1) (and the title) “or 22A(5)”.
Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52)	Section 105(2)(b).
Children Act 1989 (c. 41)	In section 47, in subsection (1)—
paragraph (a)(iii) (and the “or” immediately before it), and
the sentence at the end of that subsection.
Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S. I. 1989/1341 (N. I. 12))









Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (c. 37)





Criminal Justice and Court Services Act 2000 (c. 43)
Vehicles (Crime) Act 2001 (c. 3)

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001
In Article 37—
in paragraph (7)(a), “or a staff custody officer”, and
paragraph (11).
In Article 40—
in paragraph (6)(a), “(or, if the custody officer is a staff custody officer, any police officer or any member of the police support staff)”, and
paragraph (7). Article 61(8B). Article 63(10A). Section 11(3)(c). Sections 14 and 15.
In section 18(1), the definitions of “curfew notice” and “local child curfew scheme”.
Section 44.
Section 71(5).

Section 36.
Section 45(3).
Sections 48 and 49.
(c. 16)	Section 78(7).
238	Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)
Schedule 8 – Repeals and revocations
Document Generated: 2024-05-06
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Policing and Crime Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 06 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)






Police (Northern Ireland) Act 2003 (c. 6)



Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15)





Drugs Act 2005 (c. 17)
Section 80(4).
In section 38—
subsection (2)(e),
subsection (6)(e), and
subsection (10).
In Schedule 4—
paragraph 4B, and
Part 4A.
In section 30—
subsection (1)(d),
subsection (6)(d), and
subsection (11). In Schedule 2, Part 3A. Section 120.
Section 121(2) to (4), (5)(b), (6) and (7).
Section 123(3).
In Schedule 4, paragraphs 170 to 172.
In Schedule 9, paragraph 10.
Section 2. Section 5(2)(b).
Gambling Act 2005 (c. 19)	In Schedule 16, paragraph 17.
Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48)
In Schedule 1, paragraph 78.
In Schedule 5, paragraph 5(11).
Road Safety Act 2006 (c. 49)	In Schedule 3, paragraph 13(2)(b).
Police and Criminal Evidence (Amendment) (Northern Ireland) Order 2007 (S. I. 2007/288 (N. I. 2))
Policing (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Northern Ireland) Order 2007 (S. I. 2007/912 (N. I. 6))
Road Traffic (Northern Ireland) Order 2007 (S. I. 2007/916 (N.I. 10))
Article 30(7).
Article 33(4).
Article 6(1).
In Schedule 4, paragraphs 1(2) to (4), (5)(b) and (6) and
2 to 5.
Article 81.


Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26) Document Generated: 2024-05-06
239



24/03/2025  Critical incident management - Guidance overview
https://www.college.police.uk/guidance/critical-incident-management/critical-incident-management- guidance-overview


Page

Critical incident management - Guidance overview


This page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published
23 October 2013
Critical incident management 1 min read
Critical incident management (CIM) has its origins in the response to the public inquiry which followed the investigation into the murder of Stephen Lawrence in 1993.
The overriding tenet is risk management. However, a number of principles underpin CIM. It is rarely one factor alone or the actions or inactions of just one person that cause a critical incident.
Different types of incidents can become critical. Often they are regarded as high profile, serious or homicide related, but this is not always the case.
The police service has a duty to respond to every incident in the appropriate way, first time every time and at every level. A proactive response prevents a significant loss of confidence in the police.

Tags

Critical incidents
24/03/2025  Critical incident management linked reference material
https://www.college.police.uk/app/critical-incident-management/critical-incident-management-linked- reference-material


Page

Critical incident management linked reference material


This page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published
18 September 2014 Updated
20 January 2020
Written by College of Policing Critical incident management 1 min read
Linked reference material for APP on critical incident management.
 Joint Doctrine (JESIP)
 2010-11 British Crime Survey
 Case study: The death of Mary Fox
 Case study: The murder of Aamir Siddiqi  Characteristics of critical incidents
 College of Policing Foundations for senior leaders (FSL)  College of Policing Leading powerful partnerships
 College of Policing Senior leadership development programme (SLP)  College of Policing Strategic command course (SCC)
 Core leadership development programme (CLDP)  Gov.uk website
 Independent Police Complaints Commission (2013) Statutory guidance to the police service on the handling of complaints
 Independent Police Complaints Commission findings from investigation into GMP contact with David Askew
 Independent Police Complaints Commission Fiona Pilkington investigation report  Macpherson, W. (1999) The Stephen Lawrence Inquiry
 Ministry of Justice (2015) The Code of Practice for Victims of Crime
 NPIA (2007) Strategic Debrief – Operation Sumac (available to users logged on to College Learn)  Review into the Damilola Taylor Murder Investigation
 Sir Ronnie Flannagan’s Report into Operation Fincham  Support at a Time of Loss
Back to Critical incident management overview

Tags

Critical incidents


Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes






Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001
2001 CHAPTER 16

An Act to make provision for combatting crime and disorder; to make provision about the disclosure of information relating to criminal matters and about powers of search and seizure; to amend the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 and the Terrorism Act 2000; to make provision about the police, the National Criminal Intelligence Service and the National Crime Squad; to make provision about the powers of the courts in relation to criminal matters; and for connected purposes.	[11th May 2001]
Be it enacted by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:—




Part 1

Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder


Chapter 1

On the Spot Penalties for Disorderly Behaviour

2	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 1 – On the Spot Penalties for Disorderly Behaviour
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Offences to which this Chapter applies

Offences leading to penalties on the spot
For the purposes of this Chapter “penalty offence” means an offence committed under any of the provisions mentioned in the first column of the following Table and described, in general terms, in the second column:

Offence creating provision	Description of offence
Section 12 of the Licensing Act 1872 (c.94)
Section 80 of the Explosives Act 1875 (c.17)
F1
. . .
[F2Section 2(1) of the Parks Regulation (Amendment) Act 1926 so far as it creates an offence against the Parks Regulation Act 1872 relating to any
of the following provisions of the Royal Parks and Other Open Spaces Regulations 1997 (S.I. 1997/1639)—
Being drunk in a highway, other public place or licensed premises
Throwing fireworks in a thoroughfare

F1
. . .
Failing to comply with, or contravening, those Regulations by—

regulation 3(3)	dropping or leaving litter or refuse except in a receptacle provided for the purpose

regulation 3(4)	using a pedal cycle, a roller blade etc except on a Park road or in a designated area

regulation 3(6)	failing to remove immediately any faeces deposited by an animal of which that person is in charge]

Section 55 of the British Transport Commission Act 1949 (c.xxix)
Section 56 of the British Transport Commission Act 1949 (c.xxix)
[F3Section 169A of the Licensing Act 1964 (c. 26)
[F4Section 169C(1)of the Licensing Act 1964 (c. 26)
Trespassing on a railway

Throwing stones etc. at trains or other things on railways
Sale of alcohol to a person under 18]

Buying or attempting to buy alcohol by a person under 18]
Section [F5 169C(2)	Buying or attempting to buy alcohol for
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	3
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 1 – On the Spot Penalties for Disorderly Behaviour Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F6
. . . ] of the Licensing Act 1964 (c.26)
[F8Section 169E of the Licensing Act 1964 (c. 26)
[F9Section 169F of the Licensing Act 1964 (c. 26)
[F10Section 172(3) of the Licensing Act 1964 (c. 26)
Section 91 of the Criminal Justice Act 1967 (c.80)
Section 5(2) of the Criminal Law Act 1967 (c.58)
[F11Section 1 of the Theft Act 1968 (c. 60)
[F12Section 1(1) of the Criminal Damage Act 1971 (c. 48)
[F13Section 5(2) of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 so far as relating to the following-
cannabinol,
cannabinol derivatives (within the meaning of Part 4 of Schedule 2 to that Act),
cannabis or cannabis resin (within the meaning of that Act),
any stereoisomeric form of a substance specified in any of paragraphs (a) to (c),
any ester or ether of a substance specified in paragraph (a) or (b),
any salt of a substance specified in paragraphs (a) to (e),
any preparation or other product containing a substance or product specified in any of paragraphs
(a) to (f), not being a preparation falling within paragraph 6 of Part 1 of Schedule 2 to that Act.
[F14Section 5(2) of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 so far as relating to the following—
khat (within the meaning given by Part 4 of Schedule 2 to that Act), or
any preparation or other product containing khat.
[F15Section 43(1)(b) of the Telecommunications Act 1984 (c.12)]
F7
. . . a person under 18
Consumption of alcohol by a person under 18 or allowing such consumption]
Delivery of alcohol to a person under 18 or allowing such delivery]
Selling alcohol to a drunken person]

Disorderly behaviour while drunk in a public place
Wasting police time or giving false report
Theft]

Destroying or damaging property] Possession of cannabis etc]



















Possession of khat or any preparation or other product containing khat]





[F15Using public telecommunications system for sending message known to be false in order to cause annoyance]
4	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 1 – On the Spot Penalties for Disorderly Behaviour
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


[F16Section 5 of the Public Order Act 1986 (c.64)
[F17Section 87 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 (c. 43)
Behaviour likely to cause harassment, alarm or distress]
Depositing and leaving litter]
Section 12 of this Act	Consumption of alcohol in designated public place
[F18Section 127(2) of the Communications Act 2003

[F19Section 11 of the Fireworks Act 2003 (c. 22)


[F20Section 49 of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004 (c. 21)
[F21Section 149(4) of the Licensing Act 2003
Using public electronic communications network in order to cause annoyance, inconvenience or needless anxiety]
Contravention of a prohibition or failure to comply with a requirement imposed by or under fireworks regulations or making false statements]
Knowingly giving a false alarm of fire]

Buying or attempting to buy alcohol for consumption on licensed premises, etc. by child]


The Secretary of State may by order amend an entry in the Table or add or remove an entry.
An order under subsection (2) may make such amendment of any provision of this Chapter as the Secretary of State considers appropriate in consequence of any change in the Table made by the order.
F22(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F22(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	5
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 1 – On the Spot Penalties for Disorderly Behaviour Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



F8	S. 1(1) table: entry inserted (1.11.2004) by The Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (Amendment) and Police Reform Act 2002 (Modification) Order 2004 (S.I. 2004/2540), arts. 1(4), 2(4)
F9	S. 1(1) table: entry inserted (1.11.2004) by The Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (Amendment) and Police Reform Act 2002 (Modification) Order 2004 (S.I. 2004/2540), arts. 1(4), 2(4)
F10 S. 1(1) table: entry inserted (4.4.2005) by The Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (Amendment) Order 2005 (S.I. 2005/1090), art. 2(3)
F11	S. 1(1) table: entry inserted (1.11.2004) by The Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (Amendment) and Police Reform Act 2002 (Modification) Order 2004 (S.I. 2004/2540), arts. 1(4), 2(5)
F12 S. 1(1) table: entry inserted (1.11.2004) by The Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (Amendment) and Police Reform Act 2002 (Modification) Order 2004 (S.I. 2004/2540), arts. 1(4), 2(5)
F13 Words in s. 1(1) inserted (28.1.2009) by The Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (Amendment) Order 2009 (S.I. 2009/110), arts. 1(2), 2
F14 Words in s. 1(1) table inserted (24.6.2014) by The Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (Amendment) Order 2014 (S.I. 2014/1365), arts. 1(2), 2
F15 S. 1(1) table: entry repealed (25.7.2003 for specified purposes, 29.12.2003 for further specified purposes) by Communications Act 2003 (c. 21), ss. 406(1)(6), 408, 411, Sch. 19(1) (with Sch. 18); S.I.
2003/1900, arts. 1(2), 2(1), 3(1), Sch. 1 (with art. 3(2) (as amended (8.12.2003) by S.I. 2003/3142, art.
1(3))); S.I. 2003/3142, art. 3(2) (with art. 11)
F16 S. 1(1) table: entry inserted (22.7.2002) by The Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (Amendment) Order 2002 (S.I. 2002/1934), art. 2
F17 S. 1(1) table: entry inserted (1.11.2004) by The Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (Amendment) and Police Reform Act 2002 (Modification) Order 2004 (S.I. 2004/2540), arts. 1(4), 2(6)
F18 S. 1(1) table: entry in table inserted (25.7.2003 for specified purposes, 29.12.2003 for further specified purposes) by Communications Act 2003 (c. 21), ss. 406(1)(6), 408, 411, Sch. 17 para. 169 (with
Sch. 18); S.I. 2003/1900, arts. 1(2), 2(1), 3(1), Sch. 1 (with art. 3(2) (as amended (8.12.2003) by S.I. 2003/3142, art. 1(3))); S.I. 2003/3142, art. 3(2) (with art. 11)
F19 S. 1(1) table: entry inserted (11.10.2004) by The Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (Amendment) and Police Reform Act 2002 (Modification) Order 2004 (S.I. 2004/2540), arts. 1(3), 2(7)
F20 S. 1(1) table: entry added (1.10.2004 for E. and 10.11.2004 for W.) by Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004 (c. 21), ss. 53, Sch. 1 para. 97(3); S.I. 2004/2304, art. 2 (subject to art. 3); S.I. 2004/2917, art. 2
F21  S. 1(1) table: entry inserted (24.11.2005) by Licensing Act 2003 (c. 17), ss. 198, 201, Sch. 6 para. 120
(with ss. 2(3), 15(2), 195); S.I. 2005/3056, art. 2(2)
F22 S. 1(4)(5) omitted (8.4.2013) by virtue of Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 (c. 10), s. 151(1), Sch. 23 para. 2; S.I. 2013/453, art. 4(e)

Commencement Information
I1	S. 1 wholly in force at 12.8.2002; s. 1 not in force at Royal Assent see s. 138; s. 1 in force for certain purposes at 1.3.2002 by S.I. 2002/344, art. 2; s. 1 in force at 12.8.2002 in so far as not already in force by S.I. 2002/2050, art. 2


Penalty notices and penalties

Penalty notices
A constable who has reason to believe that a person aged [F2318] or over has committed a penalty offence may give him a penalty notice in respect of the offence.
[F24(1A) If the offence mentioned in subsection (1) is a relevant penalty offence, the constable may give the person a penalty notice with an education option.]
F25(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F26(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 1 – On the Spot Penalties for Disorderly Behaviour
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



In this Chapter [F27—
“approved educational course” means an educational course run as part of an educational course scheme established by—
in the case of a notice given by a constable of the British Transport Police Force, the Chief Constable of that force, and
in any other case, the chief officer of police for the area in which the notice is given;
“educational course scheme” means a scheme established by a chief officer of police under section 2A;]
“penalty notice” means a notice offering the opportunity, by paying a penalty in accordance with this Chapter, to discharge any liability to be convicted of the offence to which the notice relates [F28;
“penalty notice with an education option” means a penalty notice that also offers the opportunity to discharge any liability to be convicted of the offence to which the notice relates by—
completing an approved educational course, and
paying the course fee;]
[F29(4A) In this section, “relevant penalty offence” means a penalty offence in relation to which there is an approved educational course.
(4B) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision about the revocation of penalty notices.]
F30(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F31(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F31(7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F31(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F31(9) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	7
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 1 – On the Spot Penalties for Disorderly Behaviour Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




[F322A	Educational course schemes
A chief officer of police may establish an educational course scheme under this section in relation to one or more kinds of penalty offence committed in the chief officer's area.
An educational course scheme must include arrangements—
for educational courses relating to the penalty offences to which the scheme relates to be provided to persons who are given penalty notices with an education option, and
for a course fee set by the chief officer of police—
to be paid by a person who attends an educational course, and
to be refunded in such circumstances (if any) as the chief officer considers appropriate.
The purpose of an educational course mentioned in subsection (2) must be to reduce the likelihood of those who take the course committing the penalty offence, or penalty offences, to which the course relates.
An educational course may be provided by any person who, and have any content that, the chief officer of police considers appropriate given its purpose.
The Secretary of State may by regulations—
provide that the fee mentioned in subsection (2)(b) may not be—
less than an amount specified in the regulations, or
more than an amount so specified;
make provision for and in connection with the disclosure, for the purpose of running an educational course scheme, of relevant personal information between—
a person who is involved in the provision of an educational course under the scheme,
the chief officer of police who established the scheme, and
any other person specified or described in the regulations;
make provision about the use of relevant personal information for that purpose;
place restrictions on the disclosure or use of relevant personal information.
In subsection (5) “relevant personal information” means any information that relates to, and identifies, a person who has been given a penalty notice with an education option.
In this section's application in relation to the Chief Constable of the British Transport Police Force, subsection (1) has effect as if the reference to one or more kinds of penalty offence committed in a chief officer of police's area were a reference to one or more kinds of penalty offence—
committed at, or in relation to, any of the places mentioned in section 31(1)(a) to (f) of the Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003 (places where a constable of the British Transport Police Force has the powers of a constable), or
8	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 1 – On the Spot Penalties for Disorderly Behaviour
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



otherwise relating to a railway.
In subsection (7) “railway” means—
a railway within the meaning given by section 67(1) of the Transport and Works Act 1992 (interpretation), or
a tramway within the meaning given by that section.]


Amount of penalty and form of penalty notice
The penalty payable in respect of a penalty offence is such amount as the Secretary of State may specify by order.
F33(1A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
But the Secretary of State may not specify an amount which is more than a quarter of the amount of the maximum fine for which a person is liable on [F34summary] conviction of the offence [F35plus a half of the relevant surcharge].
[F36(2A) The “relevant surcharge”, in relation to a person of a given age, is the amount payable by way of surcharge under [F37section 42 of the Sentencing Code] by a person of that age who is fined the maximum amount for the offence.]
A penalty notice must—
F38(a)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
state the alleged offence;
give such particulars of the circumstances alleged to constitute the offence as are necessary to provide reasonable information about it;
specify the suspended enforcement period (as to which see section 5) and explain its effect;
state the amount of the penalty;
state the [F39designated officer for a local justice area] to whom, and the address at which, the penalty may be paid; and
inform the person to whom it is given of his right to ask to be tried for the alleged offence and explain how that right may be exercised.
[F40(3A) The Secretary of State may by regulations require information in addition to that mentioned in subsection (3) to be included in, or to be provided with, a penalty notice with an education option.]
F41(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F42(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F42(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	9
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 1 – On the Spot Penalties for Disorderly Behaviour Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Effect of penalty notice
This section applies if a penalty notice is given to a person (“A”) under section 2.
If A asks to be tried for the alleged offence, proceedings may be brought against him.
Such a request must be made by a notice given by A—
in the manner specified in the penalty notice; and
before the end of the period of suspended enforcement (as to which see section 5).
A request which is made in accordance with subsection (3) is referred to in this Chapter as a “request to be tried”.
[F43In the case of a penalty notice that is not a penalty notice with an education option, if], by the end of the suspended enforcement period—
the penalty has not been paid in accordance with this Chapter, and
A has not made a request to be tried,
a sum equal to one and a half times the amount of the penalty may be registered under section 8 for enforcement against A as a fine.
[F44(6) In the case of a penalty notice with an education option, a sum equal to one and a half times the amount of the penalty may be registered under section 8 for enforcement against A as a fine if subsection (7) or (8) applies.
This subsection applies if, by the end of the suspended enforcement period, A does not—
ask to attend an approved educational course relating to the offence to which the notice relates,
10	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 1 – On the Spot Penalties for Disorderly Behaviour
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



pay the penalty, or
request to be tried.
This subsection applies if—
A has asked, by the end of the suspended enforcement period, to attend an approved educational course of the kind mentioned in subsection (7)(a), and
A does not, in accordance with regulations made under subsection (9)—
pay the course fee,
start such a course, or
complete such a course.
The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision—
as to the time by which A is required to do each of the things mentioned in subsection (8)(b)(i) to (iii) (including provision allowing those times to be specified by a chief officer of police for the purposes of an educational course scheme established by that officer);
allowing A to request an extension of the time to do the things mentioned in subsection (8)(b)(i) to (iii) (including provision as to who should determine such a request and on what basis);
as to the procedure to be followed in relation to requests for extensions of time (including provision allowing the procedure to be determined by a chief officer of police for the purposes of an educational course scheme established by that officer);
as to the consequences of a request for an extension of time being granted (including provision specifying circumstances in which a chief officer of police may require a course fee to be paid again in order to avoid a sum being registered for enforcement as a fine under section 8);
as to the consequences of A failing to attend a course that A has arranged to attend (including provision as to who should determine what those consequences are and on what basis);
specifying circumstances in which A is, for the purposes of this Chapter, to be regarded as having completed, or having not completed, an approved educational course (including provision as to who should determine whether those circumstances have arisen and how that should be determined).
Regulations made under subsection (9)(b), (e) or (f) may permit a person to delegate the function of making a determination.]


General restriction on proceedings
Proceedings for the offence to which a penalty notice relates may not be brought [F45during] the period of 21 days beginning with the date on which the notice was given (“the suspended enforcement period”).
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	11
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 1 – On the Spot Penalties for Disorderly Behaviour Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


If the penalty is paid before the end of the suspended enforcement period, no proceedings may be brought for the offence.
[F46(2A) Proceedings for an offence to which a penalty notice with an education option relates may not be brought against a person who has, by the end of the suspended enforcement period, asked to attend an approved educational course relating to the offence, unless section 4(8) applies.
(2B) If the person to whom a penalty notice with an education option is given—
completes, in accordance with regulations made under section 4(9), an approved educational course relating to the offence to which the notice relates, and
pays the course fee in accordance with those regulations, no proceedings may be brought for the offence.]
Subsection (1) does not apply if the person to whom the penalty notice was given has made a request to be tried.


Secretary of State’s guidance
The Secretary of State may issue guidance—
about the exercise of the discretion given to constables by this Chapter;
about the issuing of penalty notices;
[F47(ba)	about educational course schemes;]
with a view to encouraging good practice in connection with the operation of provisions of this Chapter.


Procedure

Payment of penalty
If a person to whom a penalty notice is given decides to pay the penalty, he must pay it to the [F48designated officer] specified in the notice.
Payment of the penalty may be made by properly addressing, pre-paying and posting a letter containing the amount of the penalty (in cash or otherwise).
Subsection (4) applies if a person—
12	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 1 – On the Spot Penalties for Disorderly Behaviour
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



claims to have made payment by that method, and
shows that his letter was posted.
Unless the contrary is proved, payment is to be regarded as made at the time at which the letter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post.
Subsection (2) is not to be read as preventing the payment of a penalty by other means.
A letter is properly addressed for the purposes of subsection (2) if it is addressed in accordance with the requirements specified in the penalty notice.


Registration certificates
The chief officer of police may, in respect of any registrable sum, issue a certificate (a “registration certificate”) stating that the sum is registrable for enforcement against the defaulter as a fine.
If that officer issues a registration certificate, he must cause it to be sent to the [F49designated officer for the local justice] area in which the defaulter appears to that officer to reside.
A registration certificate must—
give particulars of the offence to which the penalty notice relates, and
state the name and last known address of the defaulter and the amount of the registrable sum.
(4) “Registrable sum” means a sum that may be registered under this section as a result of section 4(5) [F50or (6)].
(5) “Defaulter” means the person against whom that sum may be registered.


Registration of sums payable in default
If the [F51designated officer for a local justice] area receives a registration certificate, he must register the registrable sum for enforcement as a fine in that area by entering it in the register of a magistrates’ court acting for that area.
But if it appears to him that the defaulter does not reside in that area—
subsection (1) does not apply to him; but
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	13
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 1 – On the Spot Penalties for Disorderly Behaviour Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


he must cause the certificate to be sent to the person appearing to him to be the
[F52designated officer for the local justice area in which the defaulter resides] .
A [F53designated officer] registering a sum under this section for enforcement as a fine, must give the defaulter notice of the registration.
The notice must—
specify the amount of the sum registered, and
give the information with respect to the offence, and the authority for registration, which was included in the registration certificate under section 8.
If a sum is registered in a magistrates’ court as a result of this section, any enactment referring (in whatever terms) to a fine imposed, or other sum adjudged to be paid, on conviction by such a court applies as if the registered sum were a fine imposed by that court on the conviction of the defaulter on the date on which the sum was registered.


Enforcement of fines
In this section—
“fine” means a sum which is enforceable as a fine as a result of section 9; and
“proceedings” means proceedings for enforcing a fine.
Subsection (3) applies if, in any proceedings, the defaulter claims that he was not the person to whom the penalty notice concerned was issued.
The court may adjourn the proceedings for a period of not more than 28 days for the purpose of allowing that claim to be investigated.
On the resumption of proceedings that have been adjourned under subsection (3), the court must accept the defaulter’s claim unless it is shown, on a balance of probabilities, that he was the recipient of the penalty notice.
The court may set aside a fine in the interests of justice.
[F54Subject to any regulations made under subsection (7), if] the court does set a fine aside it must—
give such directions for further consideration of the case as it considers appropriate; or
direct that no further action is to be taken in respect of the allegation that gave rise to the penalty notice concerned.
[F55(7) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision as to the directions that the court may, or must, give or the orders it may, or must, make if it sets aside a fine relating to a sum registered under section 8 on the basis that section 4(8) applies.]
14	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 1 – On the Spot Penalties for Disorderly Behaviour
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




[F56Orders and regulations


10A	Orders and regulations under Chapter 1
Any power of the Secretary of State to make an order or regulations under this Chapter is exercisable by statutory instrument.
Any power of the Secretary of State to make an order or regulations under this Chapter includes—
power to make different provision for different cases, circumstances or areas, and
power to make incidental, supplementary, consequential, transitional or transitory provision or savings.
The Secretary of State may not make an order under section 1(2) unless a draft of the statutory instrument containing the order (whether alone or with other provisions) has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.
A statutory instrument that contains an order or regulations made under this Chapter and is not subject to any requirement that a draft of the instrument be laid before, and approved by a resolution of, both Houses of Parliament, is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.]

Interpretation

Interpretation of Chapter 1
In this Chapter—
[F57“approved educational course” has the meaning given in section 2(4);] “chief officer of police” includes the Chief Constable of the British Transport
Police;
“defaulter” has the meaning given in section 8(5);
[F58“educational course scheme” has the meaning given in section 2(4);] “penalty notice” has the meaning given in section 2(4);
[F59“penalty notice with an education option” has the meaning given in section 2(4);]
“penalty offence” has the meaning given in section 1(1);
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	15
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 2 – Provisions for combatting alcohol-related disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



“registrable sum” has the meaning given in section 8(4).



Chapter 2

Provisions for combatting alcohol-related disorder

Alcohol consumption in designated public places

F6012	Alcohol consumption in designated public places
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


F6013	Designated public places
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 2 – Provisions for combatting alcohol-related disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



F6014	Places which are not designated public places
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


F6015	Effect of sections 12 to 14 on byelaws
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


F6016	Interpretation of sections 12 to 15
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Closure of certain licensed premises

Closure of certain licensed premises due to disorder or disturbance
F61. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Amendments consequential on section 17
F62. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	17
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 2 – Provisions for combatting alcohol-related disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Closure of unlicensed premises

Closure notices
Where a constable is satisfied that any premises are being, or within the last 24 hours have been, used for the [F63unauthorised sale of alcohol] for consumption on, or in the vicinity of, the premises, he may serve under subsection (3) a notice in respect of the premises.
Where a local authority is satisfied that any premises in the area of the authority are being, or within the last 24 hours have been, used for the [F63unauthorised sale of alcohol] for consumption on, or in the vicinity of, the premises, the authority may serve under subsection (3) a notice in respect of the premises.
A notice under subsection (1) or (2) (“a closure notice”) shall be served by the constable or local authority concerned on a person having control of, or responsibility for, the activities carried on at the premises.
A closure notice shall also be served by the constable or local authority concerned on any person occupying another part of any building or other structure of which the premises form part if the constable or (as the case may be) the local authority concerned reasonably believes, at the time of serving notice under subsection (3), that the person’s access to the other part of the building or other structure would be impeded if an order under section 21 providing for the closure of the premises were made.
A closure notice may also be served by a constable or the local authority concerned on—
any other person having control of, or responsibility for, the activities carried on at the premises;
any person who has an interest in the premises.
A closure notice shall—
specify the alleged use of the premises and the grounds on which the constable or (as the case may be) the local authority concerned is satisfied as mentioned in subsection (1) or (as the case may be) subsection (2);
state the effect of section 20; and
specify the steps which may be taken to ensure that the alleged use of the premises ceases or (as the case may be) does not recur.
A closure notice served by a constable or local authority may be cancelled by a notice of cancellation served by a constable or (as the case may be) the local authority concerned.
Any such notice of cancellation shall have effect as soon as it is served by a constable or (as the case may be) the authority concerned on at least one person on whom the closure notice was served.
The constable or (as the case may be) the local authority concerned shall also serve the notice of cancellation on any other person on whom the closure notice was served.
For the purposes of subsections (3) and (5) a person having control of, or responsibility for, the activities carried on at the premises includes a person who—
derives or seeks to derive profit from the carrying on of the activities;
manages the activities;
18	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 2 – Provisions for combatting alcohol-related disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



employs any person to manage the activities; or
is involved in the conduct of the activities.


Applications for closure orders
Where a closure notice has been served under section 19(3), a constable or (as the case may be) the local authority concerned may make a complaint to a justice of the peace F64. . . for an order under section 21 (a “closure order”).
A complaint under subsection (1) shall be made not less than seven days, and not more than six months, after the service of the closure notice under section 19(3).
No complaint shall be made under subsection (1) if the constable or (as the case may be) the local authority is satisfied that—
the use of the premises for the [F65unauthorised sale of alcohol] for consumption on, or in the vicinity of, the premises has ceased; and
there is no reasonable likelihood that the premises will be so used in the future.
Where a complaint has been made to a justice of the peace under subsection (1), the justice may issue a summons to answer to the complaint.
The summons shall be directed to—
the person on whom the closure notice was served under section 19(3); and
any other person on whom the closure notice was served under section 19(5) (a).
Where a summons is served in accordance with subsections (4) and (5), a notice stating the date, time and place at which the complaint will be heard shall be served on all persons on whom the closure notice was served under section 19(4) and (5)(b).
The procedure on a complaint for a closure order shall (except as otherwise provided) be in accordance with the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980 (c. 43).


Closure orders
On hearing a complaint made under section 20(1), the court may make such order as it considers appropriate if it is satisfied that—
the closure notice was served under section 19(3); and
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	19
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 2 – Provisions for combatting alcohol-related disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


the premises continue to be used for the [F66unauthorised sale of alcohol] for consumption on, or in the vicinity of, the premises or there is a reasonable likelihood that the premises will be so used in the future.
An order under this section may, in particular, require—
the premises in respect of which the closure notice was served to be closed immediately to the public and to remain closed until a constable or (as the case may be) the local authority concerned makes a certificate under section 22(1);
the use of the premises for the [F67unauthorised sale of alcohol] for consumption on, or in the vicinity of, the premises to be discontinued immediately;
any defendant to pay into court such sum as the court determines and that the sum will not be released by the court to that person until the other requirements of the order are met.
An order of the kind mentioned in subsection (2)(a) may, in particular, include such conditions as the court considers appropriate relating to—
the admission of persons onto the premises;
the access by persons to another part of any building or other structure of which the premises form part.
The complainant shall, as soon as practicable after the making of an order under this section, give notice of the order by fixing a copy of it in a conspicuous position on the premises in respect of which it was made.
A sum which has been ordered to be paid into court under this section shall be paid to the [F68designated officer] for the court.


Termination of closure orders by constable or local authority
Where a closure order has been made, a constable or (as the case may be) the local authority concerned may make a certificate to the effect that the constable or (as the case may be) the authority is satisfied that the need for the order has ceased.
Where such a certificate has been made, the closure order shall cease to have effect.
Where a closure order containing provision of the kind mentioned in section 21(2)(c) ceases to have effect by virtue of the making of a certificate under subsection (1), any sum paid into court by a defendant under the order shall be released by the court.
Subject to this, a closure order may include such provision as the court considers appropriate for dealing with any consequences which would arise if the order were to cease to have effect by virtue of the making of a certificate under subsection (1).
20	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 2 – Provisions for combatting alcohol-related disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



The constable or (as the case may be) the local authority concerned shall, as soon as practicable after the making of a certificate under subsection (1)—
serve a copy of it on the person against whom the closure order has been made and the [F69designated officer] for the court which made the order; and
fix a copy of it in a conspicuous position on the premises in respect of which the order was made.
The constable or (as the case may be) the local authority concerned shall also serve a copy of the certificate on any person who requests such a copy.


Discharge of closure orders by the court
Where a closure order has been made—
any person on whom the closure notice concerned was served under section 19; or
any person who has an interest in the premises in respect of which the closure order was made but on whom no closure notice was served,
may make a complaint to a justice of the peace F70. . . for an order that the closure order be discharged.
The court may not make an order under subsection (1) unless it is satisfied that the need for the closure order has ceased.
Where a complaint has been made to a justice of the peace under subsection (1), the justice may issue a summons directed to such constable as he considers appropriate or (as the case may be) the local authority concerned requiring that person to appear before the magistrates’ court to answer to the complaint.
Where a summons is served in accordance with subsection (3), a notice stating the date, time and place at which the complaint will be heard shall be served on all persons on whom the closure notice concerned was served under section 19 (other than the complainant).
The procedure on a complaint for an order under this section shall (except as otherwise provided) be in accordance with the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980 (c. 43).


Appeals
An appeal against a closure order, an order under section 23(1) or a decision not to make an order under section 23(1) may be brought to the Crown Court at any time
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	21
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 2 – Provisions for combatting alcohol-related disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


before the end of the period of 21 days beginning with the day on which the order or (as the case may be) the decision was made.
An appeal under this section against a closure order may be brought by—
any person on whom the closure notice concerned was served under section 19; or
any person who has an interest in the premises in respect of which the closure order was made but on whom no closure notice was so served.
On an appeal under this section the Crown Court may make such order as it considers appropriate.

Enforcement of closure orders
Where a closure order has been made, a constable or an authorised person may (if necessary using reasonable force)—
at any reasonable time enter the premises concerned; and
having so entered the premises, do anything reasonably necessary for the purpose of securing compliance with the order.
A constable or an authorised person seeking to enter any premises in exercise of his powers under subsection (1) shall, if required by or on behalf of the owner or occupier or person in charge of the premises, produce evidence of his identity, and of his authority, before entering the premises.
Any person who intentionally obstructs a constable or an authorised person in the exercise of his powers under this section shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on summary conviction—
where the offence was committed in respect of a constable, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month or to a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale or to both;
where the offence was committed in respect of an authorised person, to a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale.
A person who, without reasonable excuse, permits premises to be open in contravention of a closure order shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or to [F71a fine] or to both.
A person who, without reasonable excuse, otherwise fails to comply with, or does an act in contravention of, a closure order shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or to a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale or to both.
In this section “an authorised person” means a person authorised for the purposes of this section by a local authority in respect of premises situated in the area of the authority.

22	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 2 – Provisions for combatting alcohol-related disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Offences by body corporate
Where an offence under section 25 committed by a body corporate is proved to have been committed with the consent or connivance of, or to be attributable to any neglect on the part of, a director, manager, secretary or other similar officer of the body corporate, he as well as the body corporate commits the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Where the affairs of a body corporate are managed by its members, subsection (1) applies in relation to the acts and defaults of a member in connection with his functions of management as if he were a director of the body corporate.

Service of notices
Any document required or authorised by virtue of sections 19 to 26 to be served on any person may be [F72served in accordance with Criminal Procedure Rules.]
[F73(1A) For the purposes of subsection (1)—
Criminal Procedure Rules (as they have effect from time to time) apply to the document to be served as if it were a document to be served in criminal proceedings before a magistrates’ court, and
any magistrates’ court may discharge functions conferred on a court by those Rules in relation to such service.]
F74(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F74(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F74(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F74(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F74(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F74(7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F74(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Sections 19 to 27: interpretation
In sections 19 to 27 and this section—
[F75“alcohol” has the same meaning as in the Licensing Act 2003;] “closure notice” means a notice under section 19(1) or (2); “closure order” means an order under section 21;
F76. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	23
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 2 – Provisions for combatting alcohol-related disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


“notice” means notice in writing;
“premises” includes any land or other place (whether enclosed or otherwise);
“sale” includes exposure for sale; and
[F77“unauthorised sale”, in relation to any alcohol, means any supply of the alcohol (within the meaning of section 14 of the Licensing Act 2003) which—
is a licensable activity within the meaning of that Act, but
is made otherwise than under and in accordance with an authorisation (within the meaning of section 136 of that Act).]
In sections 19 to 27 “local authority” means—
in relation to England—
a county council;
a district council;
a London borough council;
the Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as a local authority;
the Council of the Isles of Scilly;
in relation to Wales, a county council or a county borough council.
References in sections 19 to 27 to a person who has an interest in the premises are references to any person who is the owner, leaseholder or occupier of the premises.


Other provisions for combatting alcohol-related disorder

Confiscation of alcohol containers from young persons
In section 1(1) of the Confiscation of Alcohol (Young Persons) Act 1997 (c. 33) (things to be surrendered to a constable) after “intoxicating liquor”, where it appears for the third time, there shall be inserted “ or a container for such liquor (other than a sealed container) ”.

Sale of intoxicating liquor to a person under eighteen
F78. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Enforcement of certain offences relating to under-age drinking
F79. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Drunkenness or disorder on licensed premises
F80. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .



Chapter 3

Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder

Travel restrictions on drug trafficking offenders

Power to make travel restriction orders
This section applies where—
a person (“the offender”) has been convicted by any court of a post- commencement drug trafficking offence;
the court has determined that it would be appropriate to impose a sentence of imprisonment for that offence; and
the term of imprisonment which the court considers appropriate is a term of four years or more.
It shall be the duty of the court, on sentencing the offender—
to consider whether it would be appropriate for the sentence for the offence to include the making of a travel restriction order in relation to the offender;
if the court determines that it is so appropriate, to make such travel restriction order in relation to the offender as the court thinks suitable in all the circumstances (including any other convictions of the offender for post- commencement drug trafficking offences in respect of which the court is also passing sentence); and
if the court determines that it is not so appropriate, to state its reasons for not making a travel restriction order.
A travel restriction order is an order that prohibits the offender from leaving the United Kingdom at any time in the period which—
begins with the offender’s release from custody; and
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	25
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


continues after that time for such period of not less than two years as may be specified in the order.
A travel restriction order may contain a direction to the offender to deliver up, or cause to be delivered up, to the court any [F81UK passport] held by him; and where such a direction is given, the court shall send [F82any passport] delivered up in pursuance of the direction to the Secretary of State at such address as the Secretary of State may determine.
Where the offender’s [F83passport] is held by the Secretary of State by reason of the making of any direction contained in a travel restriction order, the Secretary of State (without prejudice to any other power or duty of his to retain the [F83passport])—
may retain it for so long as the prohibition imposed by the order applies to the offender, and is not for the time being suspended; and
shall not return the [F83passport] after the prohibition has ceased to apply, or when it is suspended, except where the [F83passport] has not expired and an application for its return is made to him by the offender.
In this section “post-commencement”—
except in relation to an offence that is a drug trafficking offence by virtue of an order under section 34(1)(c), means committed after the coming into force of this section; and
in relation to an offence that is a drug trafficking offence by virtue of such an order, means committed after the coming into force of that order.
References in this section to the offender’s release from custody are references to his first release from custody after the imposition of the travel restriction order which is neither—
a release on bail; nor
a temporary release for a fixed period.
[F84(8) In this section “UK passport” means a United Kingdom passport within the meaning of the Immigration Act 1971 (see section 33(1)).]


Meaning of “drug trafficking offence”
In section 33 “drug trafficking offence” means any of the following offences (including one committed by aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring)—
an offence under section 4(2) or (3) of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (c. 38) (production and supply of controlled drugs);
an offence under section 20 of that Act (assisting in or inducing commission outside United Kingdom of an offence punishable under a corresponding law);
26	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



any such other offence under that Act as may be designated by order made by the Secretary of State;
an offence under—
section 50(2) or (3) of the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979 (c. 2) (improper importation),
section 68(2) of that Act (exportation), or
section 170 of that Act (fraudulent evasion),
in connection with a prohibition or restriction on importation or exportation having effect by virtue of section 3 of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (c. 38);
an offence under section 1 of the Criminal Law Act 1977 (c. 45) or Article 9 of the Criminal Attempts and Conspiracy (Northern Ireland) Order 1983 (S.I. 1983 1120 (N.I. 13)), or in Scotland at common law, of conspiracy to commit any of the offences in paragraphs (a) to (d) above;
an offence under section 1 of the Criminal Attempts Act 1981 (c. 47) or Article 3 of the Criminal Attempts and Conspiracy (Northern Ireland) Order 1983, or in Scotland at common law, of attempting to commit any of those offences; and
an offence under section 19 of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (c. 38) or at common law of inciting another person to commit any of those offences.
The power to make an order under subsection (1)(c) shall be exercisable by statutory instrument; and no such order shall be made unless a draft of it has been laid before Parliament and approved by a resolution of each House.
An order under subsection (1)(c) may provide, in relation to any offence designated by such an order, that it is to be treated as so designated only—
for such purposes, and
in cases where it was committed in such manner or in such circumstances, as may be described in the order.


Revocation and suspension of a travel restriction order
Subject to the following provisions of this section, the court by which a travel restriction order has been made in relation to any person under section 33 may—
on an application made by that person at any time which is—
after the end of the minimum period, and
is not within three months after the making of any previous application for the revocation of the prohibition,
revoke the prohibition imposed by the order with effect from such date as the court may determine; or
on an application made by that person at any time after the making of the order, suspend the prohibition imposed by the order for such period as the court may determine.
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	27
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


A court to which an application for the revocation of the prohibition imposed on any person by a travel restriction order is made shall not revoke that prohibition unless it considers that it is appropriate to do so in all the circumstances of the case and having regard, in particular, to—
that person’s character;
his conduct since the making of the order; and
the offences of which he was convicted on the occasion on which the order was made.
A court shall not suspend the prohibition imposed on any person by a travel restriction order for any period unless it is satisfied that there are exceptional circumstances, in that person’s case, that justify the suspension on compassionate grounds of that prohibition for that period.
In making any determination on an application for the suspension of the prohibition imposed on any person by a travel restriction order, a court (in addition to considering the matters mentioned in subsection (3)) shall have regard to—
that person’s character;
his conduct since the making of the order;
the offences of which he was convicted on the occasion on which the order was made; and
any other circumstances of the case that the court considers relevant.
Where the prohibition imposed on any person by a travel restriction order is suspended, it shall be the duty of that person—
to be in the United Kingdom when the period of the suspension ends; and
if the order contains a direction under section 33(4), to surrender, before the end of that period, any [F85passport] returned or issued to that person, in respect of the suspension, by the Secretary of State;
and a [F85passport] that is required to be surrendered under paragraph (b) shall be surrendered to the Secretary of State in such manner or by being sent to such address as the Secretary of State may direct at the time when he returns or issues it.
Where the prohibition imposed on any person by a travel restriction order is suspended for any period under this section, the end of the period of the prohibition imposed by the order shall be treated (except for the purposes of subsection (7)) as postponed (or, if there has been one or more previous suspensions, further postponed) by the length of the period of suspension.
In this section “the minimum period”—
in the case of a travel restriction order imposing a prohibition for a period of four years or less, means the period of two years beginning at the time when the period of the prohibition began;
in the case of a travel restriction order imposing a prohibition of more than four years but less than ten years, means the period of four years beginning at that time; and
in any other case, means the period of five years beginning at that time.

28	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Offences of contravening orders
A person who leaves the United Kingdom at a time when he is prohibited from leaving it by a travel restriction order is guilty of an offence and liable—
on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum, or to both;
on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to a fine, or to both.
A person who is not in the United Kingdom at the end of a period during which a prohibition imposed on him by a travel restriction order has been suspended shall be guilty of an offence and liable—
on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum, or to both;
on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to a fine, or to both.
A person who fails to comply with—
a direction contained in a travel restriction order to deliver up a [F86passport]
to a court, or to cause such a [F86passport] to be delivered up, or
any duty imposed on him by section 35(5)(b) to surrender a [F86passport] to the Secretary of State,
shall be guilty of an offence and liable, on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale, or to both.
This section has effect subject to section 37(3).


Saving for powers to remove a person from the United Kingdom
A travel restriction order made in relation to any person shall not prevent the exercise in relation to that person of any prescribed removal power.
A travel restriction order made in relation to any person shall remain in force, notwithstanding the exercise of any prescribed removal power in relation to that person, except in so far as either—
the Secretary of State by order otherwise provides; or
the travel restriction order is suspended or revoked under section 35.
No person shall be guilty of an offence under section 36 in respect of any act or omission required of him by an obligation imposed in the exercise of a prescribed removal power.
In this section “a prescribed removal power” means any such power conferred by or under any enactment as—
consists in a power to order or direct the removal of a person from the United Kingdom; and
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	29
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


is designated for the purposes of this section by an order made by the Secretary of State.
An order under subsection (2)(a) or (4) shall be made by statutory instrument subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
An order under subsection (2)(a)—
may make different provision for different cases; and
may contain such incidental, supplemental, consequential and transitional provision as the Secretary of State thinks fit.
References in this section to a person’s removal from the United Kingdom include references to his deportation, extradition, repatriation, delivery up or other transfer to a place outside the United Kingdom.


Use of controlled drugs

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F87. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Intimidating, harming and threatening witnesses etc.

Intimidation of witnesses
A person commits an offence if—
he does an act which intimidates, and is intended to intimidate, another person (“the victim”);
he does the act—
knowing or believing that the victim is or may be a witness in any relevant proceedings; and
intending, by his act, to cause the course of justice to be obstructed, perverted or interfered with;
and
the act is done after the commencement of those proceedings.
For the purposes of subsection (1) it is immaterial—
whether or not the act that is done is done in the presence of the victim;
30	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



whether that act is done to the victim himself or to another person; and
whether or not the intention to cause the course of justice to be obstructed, perverted or interfered with is the predominating intention of the person doing the act in question.
If, in proceedings against a person for an offence under this section, it is proved—
that he did any act that intimidated, and was intended to intimidate, another person, and
that he did that act knowing or believing that that other person was or might be a witness in any relevant proceedings that had already commenced,
he shall be presumed, unless the contrary is shown, to have done the act with the intention of causing the course of justice to be obstructed, perverted or interfered with.
A person guilty of an offence under this section shall be liable—
on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to a fine, or to both;
on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum, or to both.
References in this section to a witness, in relation to any proceedings, include references to a person who provides, or is able to provide, any information or any document or other thing which might be used as evidence in those proceedings or which (whether or not admissible as evidence in those proceedings)—
might tend to confirm evidence which will be or might be admitted in those proceedings;
might be referred to in evidence given in those proceedings by another witness; or
might be used as the basis for any cross examination in the course of those proceedings.
References in this section to doing an act include references to issuing any threat (whether against a person or his finances or property or otherwise), or making any other statement.
This section is in addition to, and not in derogation of, any offence subsisting at common law.

Harming witnesses etc.
A person commits an offence if, in circumstances falling within subsection (2)—
he does an act which harms, and is intended to harm, another person; or
intending to cause another person to fear harm, he threatens to do an act which would harm that other person.
The circumstances fall within this subsection if—
the person doing or threatening to do the act does so knowing or believing that some person (whether or not the person harmed or threatened or the person against whom harm is threatened) has been a witness in relevant proceedings; and
he does or threatens to do that act because of that knowledge or belief.
If, in proceedings against a person for an offence under this section, it is proved that, within the relevant period—
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	31
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


he did an act which harmed, and was intended to harm, another person, or
intending to cause another person to fear harm, he threatened to do an act which would harm that other person,
and that he did the act, or (as the case may be) threatened to do the act, with the knowledge or belief required by paragraph (a) of subsection (2), he shall be presumed, unless the contrary is shown, to have done the act, or (as the case may be) threatened to do the act, because of that knowledge or belief.
For the purposes of this section it is immaterial—
whether or not the act that is done or threatened, or the threat that is made, is or would be done or is made in the presence of the person who is or would be harmed or of the person who is threatened;
whether or not the motive mentioned in subsection (2)(b) is the predominating motive for the act or threat; and
whether the harm that is done or threatened is physical or financial or is harm to a person or to his property.
A person guilty of an offence under this section shall be liable—
on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to a fine, or to both;
on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum, or to both.
In this section “the relevant period”, in relation to an act done, or threat made, with the knowledge or belief that a person has been a witness in any relevant proceedings, means the period that begins with the commencement of those proceedings and ends one year after they are finally concluded.
References in this section to a witness, in relation to any proceedings, include references to a person who has provided any information or any document or other thing which was or might have been used as evidence in those proceedings or which (whether or not it was admissible as evidence in those proceedings)—
tended to confirm or might have tended to confirm any evidence which was or could have been given in those proceedings;
was or might have been referred to in evidence given in those proceedings by another witness; or
was or might have been used as the basis for any cross examination in the course of those proceedings.
This section is in addition to, and not in derogation of, any offence subsisting at common law.

Relevant proceedings
A reference in section 39 or 40 to relevant proceedings is a reference to any proceedings in or before the Court of Appeal, the High Court, the Crown Court or any county court or magistrates’ court which—
are not proceedings for an offence; and
were commenced after the coming into force of that section.
32	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



For the purposes of any reference in section 39 or 40 or this section to the commencement of any proceedings relevant proceedings are commenced (subject to subsection (5)) at the earliest time at which one of the following occurs—
an information is laid or application, claim form, complaint, petition, summons or other process made or issued for the purpose of commencing the proceedings;
any other step is taken by means of which the subject matter of the proceedings is brought for the first time (whether as part of the proceedings or in anticipation of them) before the court.
For the purposes of any reference in section 39 or 40 to the time when any proceedings are finally concluded, relevant proceedings are finally concluded (subject to subsection (4))—
if proceedings for an appeal against, or an application for a review of, those proceedings or of any decision taken in those proceedings are brought or is made, at the time when proceedings on that appeal or application are finally concluded;
if the proceedings are withdrawn or discontinued, at the time when they are withdrawn or discontinued; and
in any other case, when the court in or before which the proceedings are brought finally disposes of all the matters arising in those proceedings.
Relevant proceedings shall not be taken to be finally concluded by virtue of subsection (3)(a) where—
the matters to which the appeal or application relate are such that the proceedings in respect of which it is brought or made continue or resume after the making of any determination on that appeal or application; or
a determination made on that appeal or application requires those proceedings to continue or to be resumed.
Where, after having appeared to be finally concluded, any relevant proceedings continue by reason of—
the giving of permission to bring an appeal after a fixed time for appealing has expired,
the lifting of any stay in the proceedings,
the setting aside, without an appeal, of any judgment or order, or
the revival of any discontinued proceedings,
sections 39 and 40 and this section shall have effect as if the proceedings had concluded when they appeared to, but as if the giving of permission, the lifting of the stay, the setting aside of the judgment or order or, as the case may be, the revival of the discontinued proceedings were the commencement of new relevant proceedings.

Further provision about intimidation etc.

Police directions stopping the harassment etc of a person in his home
Subject to the following provisions of this section, a constable who is at the scene may give a direction under this section to any person if—
that person is present outside or in the vicinity of any premises that are used by any individual (“the resident”) as his dwelling;
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	33
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


that constable believes, on reasonable grounds, that that person is present there for the purpose (by his presence or otherwise) of representing to the resident or another individual (whether or not one who uses the premises as his dwelling), or of persuading the resident or such another individual—
that he should not do something that he is entitled or required to do; or
that he should do something that he is not under any obligation to do;
and
that constable also believes, on reasonable grounds, that the presence of that person (either alone or together with that of any other persons who are also present)—
amounts to, or is likely to result in, the harassment of the resident; or
is likely to cause alarm or distress to the resident.
A direction under this section is a direction requiring the person to whom it is given to do all such things as the constable giving it may specify as the things he considers necessary to prevent one or both of the following—
the harassment of the resident; or
the causing of any alarm or distress to the resident.
A direction under this section may be given orally; and where a constable is entitled to give a direction under this section to each of several persons outside, or in the vicinity of, any premises, he may give that direction to those persons by notifying them of his requirements either individually or all together.
[F88(4) The requirements that may be imposed by a direction under this section include—
a requirement to leave the vicinity of the premises in question, and
a requirement to leave that vicinity and not to return to it within such period as the constable may specify, not being longer than 3 months;
and (in either case) the requirement to leave the vicinity may be to do so immediately or after a specified period of time.]
A direction under this section may make exceptions to any requirement imposed by the direction, and may make any such exception subject to such conditions as the constable giving the direction thinks fit; and those conditions may include—
conditions as to the distance from the premises in question at which, or otherwise as to the location where, persons who do not leave their vicinity must remain; and
conditions as to the number or identity of the persons who are authorised by the exception to remain in the vicinity of those premises.
The power of a constable to give a direction under this section shall not include—
any power to give a direction at any time when there is a more senior-ranking police officer at the scene; or
any power to direct a person to refrain from conduct that is lawful under section 220 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 (c. 52) (right peacefully to picket a work place);
but it shall include power to vary or withdraw a direction previously given under this section.
Any person who knowingly [F89fails to comply with a requirement in a direction given to him under this section (other than a requirement under subsection (4)(b))] shall be guilty of an offence and liable, on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term
34	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



not exceeding three months or to a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale, or to both.
[F90(7A) Any person to whom a constable has given a direction including a requirement under subsection (4)(b) commits an offence if he—
returns to the vicinity of the premises in question within the period specified in the direction beginning with the date on which the direction is given; and
does so for the purpose described in subsection (1)(b).
(7B) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (7A) shall be liable, on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 51 weeks or to a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale, or to both.
(7C) In relation to an offence committed before the commencement of section 281(5) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (alteration of penalties for summary offences), the reference in subsection (7B) to 51 weeks is to be read as a reference to 6 months.]
F91. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
In this section “dwelling” has the same meaning as in Part 1 of the Public Order Act 1986 (c. 64).


[F9242A Offence of harassment etc. of a person in his home
A person commits an offence if—
that person is present outside or in the vicinity of any premises that are used by any individual (“the resident”) as his dwelling;
that person is present there for the purpose (by his presence or otherwise) of representing to the resident or another individual (whether or not one who uses the premises as his dwelling), or of persuading the resident or such another individual—
that he should not do something that he is entitled or required to do; or
that he should do something that he is not under any obligation to do;
that person—
intends his presence to amount to the harassment of, or to cause alarm or distress to, the resident; or
knows or ought to know that his presence is likely to result in the harassment of, or to cause alarm or distress to, the resident; and
the presence of that person—
amounts to the harassment of, or causes alarm or distress to, any person falling within subsection (2); or
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	35
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


is likely to result in the harassment of, or to cause alarm or distress to, any such person.
A person falls within this subsection if he is—
the resident,
a person in the resident's dwelling, or
a person in another dwelling in the vicinity of the resident's dwelling.
The references in subsection (1)(c) and (d) to a person's presence are references to his presence either alone or together with that of any other persons who are also present.
For the purposes of this section a person (A) ought to know that his presence is likely to result in the harassment of, or to cause alarm or distress to, a resident if a reasonable person in possession of the same information would think that A's presence was likely to have that effect.
A person guilty of an offence under this section shall be liable, on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 51 weeks or to a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale, or to both.
In relation to an offence committed before the commencement of section 281(5) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (alteration of penalties for summary offences), the reference in subsection (5) to 51 weeks is to be read as a reference to 6 months.
In this section “dwelling” has the same meaning as in Part 1 of the Public Order Act 1986.]


Malicious communications
In subsection (1) of section 1 of the Malicious Communications Act 1988 (c. 27) (offence of sending letters and other articles with intent to cause distress or anxiety)—
in paragraph (a), for “letter or other article” there shall be substituted “ letter, electronic communication or article of any description ”; and
in paragraph (b), for the word “other article” there shall be substituted “ article or electronic communication ”.
In subsection (2) of that section (defence of making a threat in the belief that it was a proper way of reinforcing a demand and that there were reasonable grounds for making that demand)—
in paragraph (a), for “which he believed he had reasonable grounds for making” there shall be substituted “ made by him on reasonable grounds ”; and
in paragraph (b), after “believed” there shall be inserted “ , and had reasonable grounds for believing, ”.
After that subsection there shall be inserted—
“(2A) In this section “electronic communication” includes—
36	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



any oral or other communication by means of a telecommunication system (within the meaning of the Telecommunications Act 1984 (c. 12)); and
any communication (however sent) that is in electronic form.”
In subsection (3) of that section (definition of “send”)—
after “delivering” there shall be inserted “ or transmitting ”; and
for “or delivered” there shall be substituted “ , delivered or transmitted ”.
In subsection (5) of that section (penalty for offence), for “a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale” there shall be substituted “ imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale, or to both ”.
Subsection (5) does not affect the penalty for an offence committed before the day on which this Act is passed.

Collective harrassment
In section 7 of the Protection from Harassment Act 1997 (c. 40) (interpretation of sections 1 to 5), there shall be inserted the following subsection—
“(3A) A person’s conduct on any occasion shall be taken, if aided, abetted, counselled or procured by another—
to be conduct on that occasion of the other (as well as conduct of the person whose conduct it is); and
to be conduct in relation to which the other’s knowledge and purpose, and what he ought to have known, are the same as they were in relation to what was contemplated or reasonably foreseeable at the time of the aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring.”
This section has effect in relation to any aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring that takes place after the coming into force of this section.

F9345	Addresses of directors and secretaries of companies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Advertisements relating to prostitution

Placing of advertisement relating to prostitution
A person commits an offence if—
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	37
Part 1 – Provisions for Combatting Crime and Disorder
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


he places on, or in the immediate vicinity of, a public telephone an advertisement relating to prostitution, and
he does so with the intention that the advertisement should come to the attention of any other person or persons.
For the purposes of this section, an advertisement is an advertisement relating to prostitution if it—
is for the services of a prostitute, whether male or female; or
indicates that premises are premises at which such services are offered.
In any proceedings for an offence under this section, any advertisement which a reasonable person would consider to be an advertisement relating to prostitution shall be presumed to be such an advertisement unless it is shown not to be.
A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale, or both.
In this section—
“public telephone” means—
any telephone which is located in a public place and made available for use by the public, or a section of the public, and
where such a telephone is located in or on, or attached to, a kiosk, booth, acoustic hood, shelter or other structure, that structure; and
“public place” means any place to which the public have or are permitted to have access, whether on payment or otherwise, other than—
any place to which children under the age of 16 years are not permitted to have access, whether by law or otherwise, and
any premises which are wholly or mainly used for residential purposes.
F94. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Application of section 46 by order to public structures
The Secretary of State may, by order, provide for section 46 to apply in relation to any public structure of a description specified in the order as it applies in relation to a public telephone.
In this section—
“public structure” means any structure that—
is provided as an amenity for the use of the public or a section of the public, and
is located in a public place; and
“public place” and “public telephone” have the same meaning as in section 46.
F95. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



The power to make an order under this section is exercisable by statutory instrument.
No order may be made under this section unless a draft of the order has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.


Local child curfew schemes

F9648	Extension to older children
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


F9749	Power for police to make schemes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .



Part 2

Powers of seizure


Additional powers of seizure

Additional powers of seizure from premises
Where—
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	39
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


a person who is lawfully on any premises finds anything on those premises that he has reasonable grounds for believing may be or may contain something for which he is authorised to search on those premises,
a power of seizure to which this section applies or the power conferred by subsection (2) would entitle him, if he found it, to seize whatever it is that he has grounds for believing that thing to be or to contain, and
in all the circumstances, it is not reasonably practicable for it to be determined, on those premises—
whether what he has found is something that he is entitled to seize, or
the extent to which what he has found contains something that he is entitled to seize,
that person’s powers of seizure shall include power under this section to seize so much of what he has found as it is necessary to remove from the premises to enable that to be determined.
Where—
a person who is lawfully on any premises finds anything on those premises (“the seizable property”) which he would be entitled to seize but for its being comprised in something else that he has (apart from this subsection) no power to seize,
the power under which that person would have power to seize the seizable property is a power to which this section applies, and
in all the circumstances it is not reasonably practicable for the seizable property to be separated, on those premises, from that in which it is comprised,
that person’s powers of seizure shall include power under this section to seize both the seizable property and that from which it is not reasonably practicable to separate it.
The factors to be taken into account in considering, for the purposes of this section, whether or not it is reasonably practicable on particular premises for something to be determined, or for something to be separated from something else, shall be confined to the following—
how long it would take to carry out the determination or separation on those premises;
the number of persons that would be required to carry out that determination or separation on those premises within a reasonable period;
whether the determination or separation would (or would if carried out on those premises) involve damage to property;
the apparatus or equipment that it would be necessary or appropriate to use for the carrying out of the determination or separation; and
in the case of separation, whether the separation—
would be likely, or
if carried out by the only means that are reasonably practicable on those premises, would be likely,
to prejudice the use of some or all of the separated seizable property for a purpose for which something seized under the power in question is capable of being used.
Section 19(6) of the 1984 Act and Article 21(6) of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989 1341 (N.I. 12)) (powers of seizure not to include power to seize anything that a person has reasonable grounds for believing is legally privileged) shall not apply to the power of seizure conferred by subsection (2).
40	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



This section applies to each of the powers of seizure specified in Part 1 of Schedule 1.
Without prejudice to any power conferred by this section to take a copy of any document, nothing in this section, so far as it has effect by reference to the power to take copies of documents under section 28(2)(b) [F98or 28A(2)(b)] of the Competition Act 1998 (c. 41), shall be taken to confer any power to seize any document.
[F99(7) Without prejudice to any power conferred by this section to take a copy of any document, nothing in this section, so far as it has effect by reference to the power to take copies of, or extracts from, information under section 75(2)(h) of the Digital Markets, Competition and Consumers Act 2024, is to be taken to confer any power to seize any information.]


Additional powers of seizure from the person
Where—
a person carrying out a lawful search of any person finds something that he has reasonable grounds for believing may be or may contain something for which he is authorised to search,
a power of seizure to which this section applies or the power conferred by subsection (2) would entitle him, if he found it, to seize whatever it is that he has grounds for believing that thing to be or to contain, and
in all the circumstances it is not reasonably practicable for it to be determined, at the time and place of the search—
whether what he has found is something that he is entitled to seize, or
the extent to which what he has found contains something that he is entitled to seize,
that person’s powers of seizure shall include power under this section to seize so much of what he has found as it is necessary to remove from that place to enable that to be determined.
Where—
a person carrying out a lawful search of any person finds something (“the seizable property”) which he would be entitled to seize but for its being comprised in something else that he has (apart from this subsection) no power to seize,
the power under which that person would have power to seize the seizable property is a power to which this section applies, and
in all the circumstances it is not reasonably practicable for the seizable property to be separated, at the time and place of the search, from that in which it is comprised,
that person’s powers of seizure shall include power under this section to seize both the seizable property and that from which it is not reasonably practicable to separate it.
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	41
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


The factors to be taken into account in considering, for the purposes of this section, whether or not it is reasonably practicable, at the time and place of a search, for something to be determined, or for something to be separated from something else, shall be confined to the following—
how long it would take to carry out the determination or separation at that time and place;
the number of persons that would be required to carry out that determination or separation at that time and place within a reasonable period;
whether the determination or separation would (or would if carried out at that time and place) involve damage to property;
the apparatus or equipment that it would be necessary or appropriate to use for the carrying out of the determination or separation; and
in the case of separation, whether the separation—
would be likely, or
if carried out by the only means that are reasonably practicable at that time and place, would be likely,
to prejudice the use of some or all of the separated seizable property for a purpose for which something seized under the power in question is capable of being used.
Section 19(6) of the 1984 Act and Article 21(6) of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989 1341 (N.I. 12)) (powers of seizure not to include power to seize anything a person has reasonable grounds for believing is legally privileged) shall not apply to the power of seizure conferred by subsection (2).
This section applies to each of the powers of seizure specified in Part 2 of Schedule 1.

Notice of exercise of power under s. 50 or 51
(1) Where a person exercises a power of seizure conferred by section 50, it shall (subject to subsections (2) and (3)) be his duty, on doing so, to give to the occupier of the premises a written notice—
specifying what has been seized in reliance on the powers conferred by that section;
specifying the grounds on which those powers have been exercised;
setting out the effect of sections 59 to 61;
specifying the name and address of the person to whom notice of an application under section 59(2) to the appropriate judicial authority in respect of any of the seized property must be given; and
specifying the name and address of the person to whom an application may be made to be allowed to attend the initial examination required by any arrangements made for the purposes of section 53(2).
Where it appears to the person exercising on any premises a power of seizure conferred by section 50—
that the occupier of the premises is not present on the premises at the time of the exercise of the power, but
that there is some other person present on the premises who is in charge of the premises,
42	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



subsection (1) of this section shall have effect as if it required the notice under that subsection to be given to that other person.
Where it appears to the person exercising a power of seizure conferred by section 50 that there is no one present on the premises to whom he may give a notice for the purposes of complying with subsection (1) of this section, he shall, before leaving the premises, instead of complying with that subsection, attach a notice such as is mentioned in that subsection in a prominent place to the premises.
Where a person exercises a power of seizure conferred by section 51 it shall be his duty, on doing so, to give a written notice to the person from whom the seizure is made—
specifying what has been seized in reliance on the powers conferred by that section;
specifying the grounds on which those powers have been exercised;
setting out the effect of sections 59 to 61;
specifying the name and address of the person to whom notice of any application under section 59(2) to the appropriate judicial authority in respect of any of the seized property must be given; and
specifying the name and address of the person to whom an application may be made to be allowed to attend the initial examination required by any arrangements made for the purposes of section 53(2).
The Secretary of State may by regulations made by statutory instrument, after consultation with the Scottish Ministers [F100and the Department of Justice in Northern Ireland] , provide that a person who exercises a power of seizure conferred by section 50 shall be required to give a notice such as is mentioned in subsection (1) of this section to any person, or send it to any place, described in the regulations.
Regulations under subsection (5) may make different provision for different cases.
A statutory instrument containing regulations under subsection (5) shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.


Return or retention of seized property

Examination and return of property seized under s. 50 or 51
This section applies where anything has been seized under a power conferred by section 50 or 51.
It shall be the duty of the person for the time being in possession of the seized property in consequence of the exercise of that power to secure that there are arrangements in force which (subject to section 61) ensure—
that an initial examination of the property is carried out as soon as reasonably practicable after the seizure;
that that examination is confined to whatever is necessary for determining how much of the property falls within subsection (3);
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	43
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


that anything which is found, on that examination, not to fall within subsection (3) is separated from the rest of the seized property and is returned as soon as reasonably practicable after the examination of all the seized property has been completed; and
that, until the initial examination of all the seized property has been completed and anything which does not fall within subsection (3) has been returned, the seized property is kept separate from anything seized under any other power.
The seized property falls within this subsection to the extent only—
that it is property for which the person seizing it had power to search when he made the seizure but is not property the return of which is required by section 54;
that it is property the retention of which is authorised by section 56; or
that it is something which, in all the circumstances, it will not be reasonably practicable, following the examination, to separate from property falling within paragraph (a) or (b).
In determining for the purposes of this section the earliest practicable time for the carrying out of an initial examination of the seized property, due regard shall be had to the desirability of allowing the person from whom it was seized, or a person with an interest in that property, an opportunity of being present or (if he chooses) of being represented at the examination.
In this section, references to whether or not it is reasonably practicable to separate part of the seized property from the rest of it are references to whether or not it is reasonably practicable to do so without prejudicing the use of the rest of that property, or a part of it, for purposes for which (disregarding the part to be separated) the use of the whole or of a part of the rest of the property, if retained, would be lawful.

Obligation to return items subject to legal privilege
If, at any time after a seizure of anything has been made in exercise of a power of seizure to which this section applies—
it appears to the person for the time being having possession of the seized property in consequence of the seizure that the property—
is an item subject to legal privilege, or
has such an item comprised in it,
and
in a case where the item is comprised in something else which has been lawfully seized, it is not comprised in property falling within subsection (2),
it shall be the duty of that person to secure that the item is returned as soon as reasonably practicable after the seizure.
Property in which an item subject to legal privilege is comprised falls within this subsection if—
the whole or a part of the rest of the property is property falling within subsection (3) or property the retention of which is authorised by section 56; and
in all the circumstances, it is not reasonably practicable for that item to be separated from the rest of that property (or, as the case may be, from that part of it) without prejudicing the use of the rest of that property, or that part of
44	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



it, for purposes for which (disregarding that item) its use, if retained, would be lawful.
Property falls within this subsection to the extent that it is property for which the person seizing it had power to search when he made the seizure, but is not property which is required to be returned under this section or section 55.
This section applies—
to the powers of seizure conferred by sections 50 and 51;
to each of the powers of seizure specified in Parts 1 and 2 of Schedule 1; and
to any power of seizure (not falling within paragraph (a) or (b)) conferred on a constable by or under any enactment, including an enactment passed after this Act.

Obligation to return excluded and special procedure material
If, at any time after a seizure of anything has been made in exercise of a power to which this section applies—
it appears to the person for the time being having possession of the seized property in consequence of the seizure that the property—
is excluded material or special procedure material, or
has any excluded material or any special procedure material comprised in it,
its retention is not authorised by section 56, and
in a case where the material is comprised in something else which has been lawfully seized, it is not comprised in property falling within subsection (2) or (3),
it shall be the duty of that person to secure that the item is returned as soon as reasonably practicable after the seizure.
Property in which any excluded material or special procedure material is comprised falls within this subsection if—
the whole or a part of the rest of the property is property for which the person seizing it had power to search when he made the seizure but is not property the return of which is required by this section or section 54; and
in all the circumstances, it is not reasonably practicable for that material to be separated from the rest of that property (or, as the case may be, from that part of it) without prejudicing the use of the rest of that property, or that part of it, for purposes for which (disregarding that material) its use, if retained, would be lawful.
Property in which any excluded material or special procedure material is comprised falls within this subsection if—
the whole or a part of the rest of the property is property the retention of which is authorised by section 56; and
in all the circumstances, it is not reasonably practicable for that material to be separated from the rest of that property (or, as the case may be, from that part of it) without prejudicing the use of the rest of that property, or that part of it, for purposes for which (disregarding that material) its use, if retained, would be lawful.
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	45
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


This section applies (subject to subsection (5)) to each of the powers of seizure specified in Part 3 of Schedule 1.
In its application to the powers of seizure conferred by— (a)
section 56(5) of the Drug Trafficking Act 1994 (c. 37), F101. . .
Article 51(5) of the Proceeds of Crime (Northern Ireland) Order 1996 (S.I. 1996 1299 (N.I. 6)),[F102 and
section 352(4) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002,]
this section shall have effect with the omission of every reference to special procedure material.
In this section, except in its application to—
the power of seizure conferred by section 8(2) of the 1984 Act,
the power of seizure conferred by Article 10(2) of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989 1341 (N.I. 12)),
each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 3 of Schedule 5 to the Terrorism Act 2000 (c. 11), and
the power of seizure conferred by paragraphs 15 and 19 of Schedule 5 to that Act of 2000, so far only as the power in question is conferred by reference to paragraph 1 of that Schedule,
“special procedure material” means special procedure material consisting of documents or records other than documents.
[F103(7) In relation to the powers of seizure mentioned in subsection (8), this section (and section 59(3)(c)) have effect as if—
references to excluded material or special procedure material were to confidential material within the meaning of Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the National Security Act 2023, but not including items subject to legal privilege, and
subsection (6) of this section did not apply.
(8) The powers of seizure referred to in subsection (7) are the powers conferred by—
paragraph 2 of Schedule 2 to the National Security Act 2023, and
paragraph 12 of that Schedule, so far as conferred by reference to paragraph 2 of that Schedule.]

46	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Property seized by constables etc.
The retention of—
property seized on any premises by a constable who was lawfully on the premises,
property seized on any premises by a relevant person who was on the premises accompanied by a constable, and
property seized by a constable carrying out a lawful search of any person, is authorised by this section if the property falls within subsection (2) or (3).
Property falls within this subsection to the extent that there are reasonable grounds for believing—
that it is property obtained in consequence of the commission of an offence; and
that it is necessary for it to be retained in order to prevent its being concealed, lost, damaged, altered or destroyed.
Property falls within this subsection to the extent that there are reasonable grounds for believing—
that it is evidence in relation to any offence; and
that it is necessary for it to be retained in order to prevent its being concealed, lost, altered or destroyed.
Nothing in this section authorises the retention (except in pursuance of section 54(2)) of anything at any time when its return is required by section 54.
[F104(4A) Subsection (1)(a) includes property seized on any premises—
by a person authorised under section 16(2) of the 1984 Act to accompany a constable executing a warrant, or
by a person accompanying a constable under section 2(6) of the Criminal Justice Act 1987 in the execution of a warrant under section 2(4) of that Act.]
In subsection (1)(b) the reference to a relevant person’s being on any premises accompanied by a constable is a reference only to a person who was so on the premises under the authority of—
a warrant under section 448 of the Companies Act 1985 (c. 6) authorising him to exercise together with a constable the powers conferred by subsection (3) of that section;
F105(b)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F106(c)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F106(d)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F106(e)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	47
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




This section has effect in relation to the following provisions (which are about the retention of items which have been seized and are referred to in this section as “the relevant provisions”)—
section 22 of the 1984 Act;
Article 24 of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989 1341 (N.I. 12));
F107. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F108(d)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F109(e)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(f)	section 448(6) of the Companies Act 1985 (c. 6);
F110(g)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F109(h)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F111(i)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F109(j)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F112paragraph 7(4) of Schedule 3B to] the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990 (c. 37);
section 5(4) of the Knives Act 1997 (c. 21);
F113(m)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F114sections 28(7) and 28A(8)] of the Competition Act 1998 (c. 41);
[F115sections 122E and 176A] of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (c. 8);
paragraph 7(2) of Schedule 3 to the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (c. 36).
F116(pa)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F117(q)	paragraph 5(4) of Schedule 5 to the Human Tissue Act 2004.] [F118(r)	paragraph 12(3) of Schedule 2 to the Animal Welfare Act 2006.]
[F119(s)	paragraphs 28(7) and 29(8) of Schedule 5 to the Consumer Rights Act 2015] [F120(t)	paragraph 10 of Schedule 15 to the Data Protection Act 2018;]
[F121(u)	paragraph 8 of Schedule 12 to the Online Safety Act 2023;]
[F122(v)	section 75(6) of the Digital Markets, Competition and Consumers Act 2024.]
The relevant provisions shall apply in relation to any property seized in exercise of a power conferred by section 50 or 51 as if the property had been seized under the power of seizure by reference to which the power under that section was exercised in relation to that property.
Nothing in any of sections 53 to 56 authorises the retention of any property at any time when its retention would not (apart from the provisions of this Part) be authorised by the relevant provisions.
Nothing in any of the relevant provisions authorises the retention of anything after an obligation to return it has arisen under this Part.
48	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Textual Amendments
F107 S. 57(1)(c) repealed (1.12.2007) by Finance Act 2007 (c. 11), ss. 84, 92, 114, Sch. 22 para. 13(1)(a),
Sch. 27 Pt. 5(1); S.I. 2007/3166, art. 3(a)
F108 S. 57(1)(d) omitted (1.10.2015) by virtue of Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5), Sch. 6 para.
62(a); S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i) (with art. 8)
F109 S. 57(1)(e)(h)(j) repealed (1.12.2001) by S.I. 2001/3649, arts. 1, 364(b)
F110 S. 57(1)(g) omitted (1.10.2015) by virtue of Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5), Sch. 6 para.
62(a); S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i) (with art. 8)
F111 S. 57(1)(i) omitted (1.10.2009) by virtue of The Companies Act 2006 (Consequential Amendments, Transitional Provisions and Savings) Order 2009 (S.I. 2009/1941), art. 1(2), Sch. 1 para. 189(3) (with art. 10)
F112 Words in s. 57(1)(k) substituted (1.10.2009) by Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 2008 (c. 22),
s. 68(2), Sch. 7 para. 19; S.I. 2009/2232, art. 2(y)
F113 S. 57(1)(m) omitted (25.5.2018) by virtue of Data Protection Act 2018 (c. 12), s. 212(1), Sch. 19 para.
71(a) (with ss. 117, 209, 210); S.I. 2018/625, reg. 2(1)(g)
F114 Words in s. 57(1)(n) substituted (1.1.2025) by Digital Markets, Competition and Consumers Act 2024 (c. 13), ss. 123(3), 339(1); S.I. 2024/1226, regs. 1(2), 2(1)(2) (with Sch. paras. 2, 20)
F115 Words in s. 57(1)(o) substituted (3.7.2016) by The Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Market Abuse) Regulations 2016 (S.I. 2016/680), regs. 1, 13(2)
F116 S. 57(1)(pa) omitted (1.10.2015) by virtue of Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5), Sch. 6 para. 62(a); S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i) (with art. 8)
F117 S. 57(1)(q) inserted (1.3.2006 for certain purposes and 7.4.2006 for certain further purposes and 1.9.2006 otherwise) by Human Tissue Act 2004 (c. 30), ss. 56, 60, Sch. 6 para. 5(2) (with s. 58);
S.I. 2006/404, arts. 2, 3, Sch. (subject to art. 4 and with transitional provisions in arts. 5, 6); S.I. 2006/1997, art. 3 (subject to arts. 4, 7, 8 ) (as amended by S.I. 2006/2169, art. 2)
F118 S. 57(1)(r) inserted (27.3.2007 for W. and 6.4.2007 for E. and otherwise prosp.) by Animal Welfare Act 2006 (c. 45), ss. 64, 68, Sch. 3 para. 14(1) (with ss. 1(2), 58(1), 59, 60); S.I. 2007/1030, art. 2(1) (l); S.I. 2007/499, art. 2(2)(l)
F119 S. 57(1)(s) inserted (1.10.2015) by Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5), Sch. 6 para. 62(b);
S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i)
F120 S. 57(1)(t) inserted (25.5.2018) by Data Protection Act 2018 (c. 12), s. 212(1), Sch. 19 para. 71(b)
(with ss. 117, 209, 210); S.I. 2018/625, reg. 2(1)(g)
F121 S. 57(1)(u) inserted (10.1.2024) by Online Safety Act 2023 (c. 50), ss. 108(2), 240(1); S.I. 2023/1420,
reg. 2(z10)
F122 S. 57(1)(v) inserted (1.1.2025) by Digital Markets, Competition and Consumers Act 2024 (c. 13), ss.
77(3), 339(1) (with s. 81); S.I. 2024/1226, regs. 1(2), 2(1)(2)


Person to whom seized property is to be returned
Where—
anything has been seized in exercise of any power of seizure, and
there is an obligation under this Part for the whole or any part of the seized property to be returned,
the obligation to return it shall (subject to the following provisions of this section) be an obligation to return it to the person from whom it was seized.
Where—
any person is obliged under this Part to return anything that has been seized to the person from whom it was seized, and
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	49
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


the person under that obligation is satisfied that some other person has a better right to that thing than the person from whom it was seized,
his duty to return it shall, instead, be a duty to return it to that other person or, as the case may be, to the person appearing to him to have the best right to the thing in question.
Where different persons claim to be entitled to the return of anything that is required to be returned under this Part, that thing may be retained for as long as is reasonably necessary for the determination in accordance with subsection (2) of the person to whom it must be returned.
References in this Part to the person from whom something has been seized, in relation to a case in which the power of seizure was exercisable by reason of that thing’s having been found on any premises, are references to the occupier of the premises at the time of the seizure.
References in this section to the occupier of any premises at the time of a seizure, in relation to a case in which—
a notice in connection with the entry or search of the premises in question, or with the seizure, was given to a person appearing in the occupier’s absence to be in charge of the premises, and
it is practicable, for the purpose of returning something that has been seized, to identify that person but not to identify the occupier of the premises,
are references to that person.

Remedies and safeguards

Application to the appropriate judicial authority
This section applies where anything has been seized in exercise, or purported exercise, of a relevant power of seizure.
Any person with a relevant interest in the seized property may apply to the appropriate judicial authority, on one or more of the grounds mentioned in subsection (3), for the return of the whole or a part of the seized property.
Those grounds are—
that there was no power to make the seizure;
that the seized property is or contains an item subject to legal privilege that is not comprised in property falling within section 54(2);
that the seized property is or contains any excluded material or special procedure material which—
has been seized under a power to which section 55 applies;
is not comprised in property falling within section 55(2) or (3); and
is not property the retention of which is authorised by section 56;
that the seized property is or contains something seized under section 50 or 51 which does not fall within section 53(3);
and subsections (5) and (6) of section 55 shall apply for the purposes of paragraph (c) as they apply for the purposes of that section.
Subject to subsection (6), the appropriate judicial authority, on an application under subsection (2), shall—
50	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



if satisfied as to any of the matters mentioned in subsection (3), order the return of so much of the seized property as is property in relation to which the authority is so satisfied; and
to the extent that that authority is not so satisfied, dismiss the application.
The appropriate judicial authority—
on an application under subsection (2),
on an application made by the person for the time being having possession of anything in consequence of its seizure under a relevant power of seizure, or
on an application made—
by a person with a relevant interest in anything seized under section 50 or 51, and
on the grounds that the requirements of section 53(2) have not been or are not being complied with,
may give such directions as the authority thinks fit as to the examination, retention, separation or return of the whole or any part of the seized property.
On any application under this section, the appropriate judicial authority may authorise the retention of any property which—
has been seized in exercise, or purported exercise, of a relevant power of seizure, and
would otherwise fall to be returned,
if that authority is satisfied that the retention of the property is justified on grounds falling within subsection (7).
Those grounds are that (if the property were returned) it would immediately become appropriate—
to issue, on the application of the person who is in possession of the property at the time of the application under this section, a warrant in pursuance of which, or of the exercise of which, it would be lawful to seize the property; or
to make an order under—
paragraph 4 of Schedule 1 to the 1984 Act,
paragraph 4 of Schedule 1 to the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989 1341 (N.I. 12)),
section 20BA of the Taxes Management Act 1970 (c. 9), F123...
paragraph 5 of Schedule 5 to the Terrorism Act 2000 (c. 11), [F124or
paragraph 3 of Schedule 2 to the National Security Act 2023,]
under which the property would fall to be delivered up or produced to the person mentioned in paragraph (a).
Where any property which has been seized in exercise, or purported exercise, of a relevant power of seizure has parts (“part A” and “part B”) comprised in it such that—
it would be inappropriate, if the property were returned, to take any action such as is mentioned in subsection (7) in relation to part A,
it would (or would but for the facts mentioned in paragraph (a)) be appropriate, if the property were returned, to take such action in relation to part B, and
in all the circumstances, it is not reasonably practicable to separate part A from part B without prejudicing the use of part B for purposes for which it is lawful to use property seized under the power in question,
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	51
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


the facts mentioned in paragraph (a) shall not be taken into account by the appropriate judicial authority in deciding whether the retention of the property is justified on grounds falling within subsection (7).
If a person fails to comply with any order or direction made or given by a judge of the Crown Court in exercise of any jurisdiction under this section—
the authority may deal with him as if he had committed a contempt of the Crown Court; and
any enactment relating to contempt of the Crown Court shall have effect in relation to the failure as if it were such a contempt.
The relevant powers of seizure for the purposes of this section are—
the powers of seizure conferred by sections 50 and 51;
each of the powers of seizure specified in Parts 1 and 2 of Schedule 1; and
any power of seizure (not falling within paragraph (a) or (b)) conferred on a constable by or under any enactment, including an enactment passed after this Act.
References in this section to a person with a relevant interest in seized property are references to—
the person from whom it was seized;
any person with an interest in the property; or
any person, not falling within paragraph (a) or (b), who had custody or control of the property immediately before the seizure.
For the purposes of subsection (11)(b), the persons who have an interest in seized property shall, in the case of property which is or contains an item subject to legal privilege, be taken to include the person in whose favour that privilege is conferred.
[F125(13) Criminal Procedure Rules may make provision about proceedings under this section on an application to a judge of the Crown Court in England and Wales.]


Cases where duty to secure arises
Where property has been seized in exercise, or purported exercise, of any power of seizure conferred by section 50 or 51, a duty to secure arises under section 61 in relation to the seized property if—
a person entitled to do so makes an application under section 59 for the return of the property;
in relation to England, Wales and Northern Ireland, at least one of the conditions set out in subsections (2) and (3) is satisfied;
52	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



in relation to Scotland, the condition set out in subsection (2) is satisfied; and
notice of the application is given to a relevant person.
The first condition is that the application is made on the grounds that the seized property is or contains an item subject to legal privilege that is not comprised in property falling within section 54(2).
The second condition is that—
the seized property was seized by a person who had, or purported to have, power under this Part to seize it by virtue only of one or more of the powers specified in subsection (6); and
the application—
is made on the ground that the seized property is or contains something which does not fall within section 53(3); and
states that the seized property is or contains special procedure material or excluded material.
In relation to property seized by a person who had, or purported to have, power under this Part to seize it by virtue only of one or more of the powers of seizure conferred by—
F126. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
section 56(5) of the Drug Trafficking Act 1994 (c. 37), F127. . .
Article 51(5) of the Proceeds of Crime (Northern Ireland) Order 1996 (S.I. 1996 1299 (N.I. 6)), [F128 or
section 352(4) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002,]
the second condition is satisfied only if the application states that the seized property is or contains excluded material
In relation to property seized by a person who had, or purported to have, power under this Part to seize it by virtue only of one or more of the powers of seizure specified in Part 3 of Schedule 1 but not by virtue of—
the power of seizure conferred by section 8(2) of the 1984 Act,
the power of seizure conferred by Article 10(2) of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989 1341 (N.I. 12)),
either of the powers of seizure conferred by paragraphs 1 and 3 of Schedule 5 to the Terrorism Act 2000 (c. 11), or
either of the powers of seizure conferred by paragraphs 15 and 19 of Schedule 5 to that Act of 2000 so far as they are conferred by reference to paragraph 1 of that Schedule,
the second condition is satisfied only if the application states that the seized property is or contains excluded material or special procedure material consisting of documents or records other than documents.
The powers mentioned in subsection (3) are—
the powers of seizure specified in Part 3 of Schedule 1;
the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of Parts 2 and 3 of the 1984 Act (except section 8(2) of that Act);
the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of Parts 3 and 4 of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (except Article 10(2) of that Order);
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	53
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of paragraph 11 of Schedule 5 to the Terrorism Act 2000; F129...
the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of paragraphs 15 and 19 of that Schedule so far as they are conferred by reference to paragraph 11 of that Schedule.
[F130(f)  the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of paragraph 9 of Schedule 2 to the National Security Act 2023; and
(g) the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of paragraph 12 of that Schedule so far as conferred by reference to paragraph 9 of that Schedule.]
[F131(6A) In relation to the powers of seizure mentioned in subsection (6B)—
subsection (3)(b)(ii) applies as if the reference to special procedure material or excluded material were to confidential material within the meaning of Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the National Security Act 2023, but not including items subject to legal privilege, and
subsection (5) of this section does not apply.
(6B) The powers of seizure referred to in subsection (6A) are the powers conferred by—
paragraph 2 of Schedule 2 to the National Security Act 2023, and
paragraph 12 of that Schedule, so far as conferred by reference to paragraph 2 of that Schedule.]
In this section “a relevant person” means any one of the following—
the person who made the seizure;
the person for the time being having possession, in consequence of the seizure, of the seized property;
the person named for the purposes of subsection (1)(d) or (4)(d) of section 52 in any notice given under that section with respect to the seizure.

54	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



The duty to secure
The duty to secure that arises under this section is a duty of the person for the time being having possession, in consequence of the seizure, of the seized property to secure that arrangements are in force that ensure that the seized property (without being returned) is not, at any time after the giving of the notice of the application under section 60(1), either—
examined or copied, or
put to any use to which its seizure would, apart from this subsection, entitle it to be put,
except with the consent of the applicant or in accordance with the directions of the appropriate judicial authority.
Subsection (1) shall not have effect in relation to any time after the withdrawal of the application to which the notice relates.
Nothing in any arrangements for the purposes of this section shall be taken to prevent the giving of a notice under section 49 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (c. 23) (notices for the disclosure of material protected by encryption etc.) in respect of any information contained in the seized material; but subsection (1) of this section shall apply to anything disclosed for the purpose of complying with such a notice as it applies to the seized material in which the information in question is contained.
Subsection (9) of section 59 shall apply in relation to any jurisdiction conferred on the appropriate judicial authority by this section as it applies in relation to the jurisdiction conferred by that section.

Use of inextricably linked property
This section applies to property, other than property which is for the time being required to be secured in pursuance of section 61, if—
it has been seized under any power conferred by section 50 or 51 or specified in Part 1 or 2 of Schedule 1, and
it is inextricably linked property.
Subject to subsection (3), it shall be the duty of the person for the time being having possession, in consequence of the seizure, of the inextricably linked property to ensure that arrangements are in force which secure that that property (without being returned) is not at any time, except with the consent of the person from whom it was seized, either—
examined or copied, or
put to any other use.
Subsection (2) does not require that arrangements under that subsection should prevent inextricably linked property from being put to any use falling within subsection (4).
A use falls within this subsection to the extent that it is use which is necessary for facilitating the use, in any investigation or proceedings, of property in which the inextricably linked property is comprised.
Property is inextricably linked property for the purposes of this section if it falls within any of subsections (6) to (8).
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	55
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Property falls within this subsection if—
it has been seized under a power conferred by section 50 or 51; and
but for subsection (3)(c) of section 53, arrangements under subsection (2) of that section in relation to the property would be required to ensure the return of the property as mentioned in subsection (2)(c) of that section.
Property falls within this subsection if—
it has been seized under a power to which section 54 applies; and
but for paragraph (b) of subsection (1) of that section, the person for the time being having possession of the property would be under a duty to secure its return as mentioned in that subsection.
Property falls within this subsection if—
it has been seized under a power of seizure to which section 55 applies; and
but for paragraph (c) of subsection (1) of that section, the person for the time being having possession of the property would be under a duty to secure its return as mentioned in that subsection.

Construction of Part 2

Copies
Subject to subsection (3)—
in this Part, “seize” includes “take a copy of”, and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly;
this Part shall apply as if any copy taken under any power to which any provision of this Part applies were the original of that of which it is a copy; and
for the purposes of this Part, except sections 50 and 51, the powers mentioned in subsection (2) (which are powers to obtain hard copies etc. of information which is stored in electronic form) shall be treated as powers of seizure, and references to seizure and to seized property shall be construed accordingly;
[F132(d) for the purposes of this Part, except sections 50 and 51, the powers in section 75(2)(d) and (f) of the Digital Markets, Competition and Consumers Act 2024 are to be treated as powers of seizure, and references to seizure and to seized property are to be construed accordingly.]
The powers mentioned in subsection (1)(c) are any powers which are conferred by—
section 19(4) or 20 of the 1984 Act;
Article 21(4) or 22 of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989 1341 (N.I. 12));
section 46(3) of the Firearms Act 1968 (c. 27);
F133. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F134. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
section 32(6)(b) of the Food Safety Act 1990 (c. 16);
Article 34(6)(b) of the Food Safety (Northern Ireland) Order 1991 (S.I. 1991 762 (N.I. 7));
[F135(ga)	section 23E(5)(b) (as read with section 23K(2)) of the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995;]
56	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



section 28(2)(f) [F136or (g) or 28A(2)(f) or (g)] of the Competition Act 1998 (c. 41); or
section 8(2)(c) of the Nuclear Safeguards Act 2000 (c. 5).
Subsection (1) does not apply to section 50(6) or 57.


Meaning of “appropriate judicial authority”
Subject to subsection (2), in this Part “appropriate judicial authority” means—
in relation to England and Wales and Northern Ireland, a judge of the Crown Court;
in relation to Scotland, a sheriff.
In this Part “appropriate judicial authority”, in relation to the seizure of items under any power mentioned in subsection (3) and in relation to items seized under any such power, means—
in relation to England and Wales and Northern Ireland, the High Court;
in relation to Scotland, the Court of Session.
Those powers are—
the powers of seizure conferred by—
section 448(3) of the Companies Act 1985 (c. 6);
F137(ii) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(iii) [F138sections 28(2) and 28A(2)] of the Competition Act 1998; F139. . .
[F140(iv) section 75(2) of the Digital Markets, Competition and Consumers Act 2024.]
[F141(aa) the power of seizure conferred by section 352(4) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, if the power is exercisable for the purposes of a civil recovery investigation F142... (within the meaning of Part 8 of that Act);]
any power of seizure conferred by section 50, so far as that power is exercisable by reference to any power mentioned in paragraph (a).

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	57
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Meaning of “legal privilege”
Subject to the following provisions of this section, references in this Part to an item subject to legal privilege shall be construed—
for the purposes of the application of this Part to England and Wales, in accordance with section 10 of the 1984 Act (meaning of “legal privilege”);
for the purposes of the application of this Part to Scotland, in accordance with section [F143412 of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002](interpretation); and
for the purposes of the application of this Part to Northern Ireland, in accordance with Article 12 of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989 1341 (N.I. 12)) (meaning of “legal privilege”).
In relation to property which has been seized in exercise, or purported exercise, of—
the [F144powers] of seizure conferred by section 28(2) [F145or 28A(2)] of the Competition Act 1998, or
so much of any power of seizure conferred by section 50 as is exercisable by reference to that power,
references in this Part to an item subject to legal privilege shall be read as references to a privileged communication within the meaning of section 30 of that Act.
F146. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F147(3A) In relation to property which has been seized in exercise, or purported exercise, of—
the power of seizure conferred by section 352(4) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, or
so much of any power of seizure conferred by section 50 as is exercisable by reference to that power,
references in this Part to an item subject to legal privilege shall be read as references to privileged material within the meaning of section 354(2) of that Act.]
[F148(3B) In relation to property which has been seized in exercise, or purported exercise, of—
58	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



the power of seizure conferred by section 75(2) of the Digital Markets,
Competition and Consumers Act 2024, or
so much of any power of seizure conferred by section 50 as is exercisable by reference to that power,
references in this Part to an item subject to legal privilege are to be read as references to a privileged communication within the meaning of section 81 (privileged communications) of that Act.]
An item which is, or is comprised in, property which has been seized in exercise, or purported exercise, of the power of seizure conferred by section 448(3) of the Companies Act 1985 (c. 6) shall be taken for the purposes of this Part to be an item subject to legal privilege if, and only if, the seizure of that item was in contravention of section 452(2) of that Act (privileged information).
F149(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F150(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
An item which is, or is comprised in, property which has been seized in exercise, or purported exercise, of the power of seizure conferred by [F151paragraphs 1 and 2 of Schedule 15 to the Data Protection Act 2018] shall be taken for the purposes of this Part to be an item subject to legal privilege if, and only if, the seizure of that item was in contravention of [F152paragraph 11 (matters exempt from inspection and seizure: privileged communications)] of that Schedule (privileged communications).
An item which is, or is comprised in, property which has been seized in exercise, or purported exercise, of the power of seizure conferred by paragraph 1 of Schedule 3 to the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (c. 36) shall be taken for the purposes of this Part to be an item subject to legal privilege if, and only if, the seizure of that item was in contravention of paragraph 9 of that Schedule (privileged communications).
F153(8A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F154(8B) An item which is, or is comprised in, property which has been seized in exercise or purported exercise of the power of seizure conferred by paragraph 27(1)(b) or 29(1) of Schedule 5 to the Consumer Rights Act 2015 shall be taken for the purposes of this Part to be an item subject to legal privilege if, and only if, the seizure of that item was in contravention of paragraph 27(6) or (as the case may be) 29(6) of that Schedule (privileged documents).]
[F155(8C) An item which is, or is comprised in, property which has been seized in exercise or purported exercise of the power of seizure conferred by paragraph 7(f), (j) or (k) of Schedule 12 to the Online Safety Act 2023 is to be taken for the purposes of this Part to be an item subject to legal privilege if, and only if, the seizure of that item was in contravention of paragraph 17(3) of that Schedule (privileged information or documents).]
An item which is, or is comprised in, property which has been seized in exercise, or purported exercise, of so much of any power of seizure conferred by section 50 as is exercisable by reference to a power of seizure conferred by—
section 448(3) of the Companies Act 1985,
Article 441(3) of the Companies (Northern Ireland) Order 1986,
F156(c)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
paragraph 1 of Schedule 9 to the Data Protection Act 1998, F157. . . F158...
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	59
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


paragraph 1 of Schedule 3 to the Freedom of Information Act 2000,F159...
[F160or]
F159(f)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F161(g)	paragraph 7(f), (j) or (k) of Schedule 12 to the Online Safety Act 2023.]
shall be taken for the purposes of this Part to be an item subject to legal privilege if, and only if, the item would have been taken for the purposes of this Part to be an item subject to legal privilege had it been seized under the power of seizure by reference to which the power conferred by section 50 was exercised.


Textual Amendments
F143 Words in s. 65(1)(b) substituted (24.2.2003) by Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29), ss. 456, 458, Sch. 11 para. 40(5)(a); S.I. 2003/120, art. 2 Sch. (subject to transitional provisions and savings in arts. 3-7 (as amended by S.I. 2003/333, art. 14))
F144 Word in s. 65(2)(a) substituted (1.1.2025) by Digital Markets, Competition and Consumers Act 2024 (c. 13), ss. 123(6)(a), 339(1); S.I. 2024/1226, regs. 1(2), 2(1)(2) (with Sch. paras. 2, 20)
F145 Words in s. 65(2)(a) inserted (1.1.2025) by Digital Markets, Competition and Consumers Act 2024 (c. 13), ss. 123(6)(b), 339(1); S.I. 2024/1226, regs. 1(2), 2(1)(2) (with Sch. paras. 2, 20)
F146 S. 65(3) repealed (1.12.2007) by Finance Act 2007 (c. 11), ss. 84, 92, 114, Sch. 22 para. 13(1)(c), Sch.
27 Pt. 5(1); S.I. 2007/3166, art. 3(a)
F147 S. 65(3A) inserted (24.2.2003) by Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29), ss. 456, 458, Sch. 11 para. 40(5)(b); S.I. 2003/120, art. 2, Sch. (subject to transitional provisions and savings in arts. 3-7 (as amended by S.I. 2003/333, art. 14))
F148 S. 65(3B) inserted (1.1.2025) by Digital Markets, Competition and Consumers Act 2024 (c. 13), ss.
77(6), 339(1) (with s. 81); S.I. 2024/1226, regs. 1(2), 2(1)(2)
F149 S. 65(5) omitted (1.10.2009) by virtue of The Companies Act 2006 (Consequential Amendments, Transitional Provisions and Savings) Order 2009 (S.I. 2009/1941), art. 1(2), Sch. 1 para. 189(5) (with art. 10)
F150 S. 65(6) omitted (1.10.2015) by virtue of Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5), Sch. 6 para.
63(2); S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i) (with art. 8)
F151 Words in s. 65(7) substituted (25.5.2018) by Data Protection Act 2018 (c. 12), s. 212(1), Sch. 19 para.
72(a) (with ss. 117, 209, 210); S.I. 2018/625, reg. 2(1)(g)
F152 Words in s. 65(7) substituted (25.5.2018) by Data Protection Act 2018 (c. 12), s. 212(1), Sch. 19 para.
72(b) (with ss. 117, 209, 210); S.I. 2018/625, reg. 2(1)(g)
F153 S. 65(8A) omitted (1.10.2015) by virtue of Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5), Sch. 6 para.
63(2); S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i) (with art. 8)
F154 S. 65(8B) inserted (1.10.2015) by Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5), Sch. 6 para. 63(3);
S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i)
F155 S. 65(8C) inserted (10.1.2024) by Online Safety Act 2023 (c. 50), ss. 108(3)(a), 240(1); S.I.
2023/1420, reg. 2(z10)
F156 S. 65(9)(c) omitted (1.10.2015) by virtue of Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5), Sch. 6 para.
63(4)(a); S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i) (with art. 8)
F157 Word in s. 65(9)(d) repealed (8.1.2007) by The Enterprise Act 2002 (Amendment) Regulations 2006 (S.I. 2006/3363), reg. 26(2)
F158 Word in s. 65(9)(d) omitted (10.1.2024) by virtue of Online Safety Act 2023 (c. 50), ss. 108(3)(b)(i), 240(1); S.I. 2023/1420, reg. 2(z10)
F159 S. 65(9)(f) and word omitted (1.10.2015) by virtue of Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5),
Sch. 6 para. 63(4)(c); S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i) (with art. 8)
F160 Word in s. 65(9)(e) inserted (10.1.2024) by Online Safety Act 2023 (c. 50), ss. 108(3)(b)(ii), 240(1);
S.I. 2023/1420, reg. 2(z10)
60	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




General interpretation of Part 2
In this Part—
“appropriate judicial authority” has the meaning given by section 64; “documents” includes information recorded in any form;
“item subject to legal privilege” shall be construed in accordance with section 65;
[F162“marine installation” has the meaning given by section 262 of the Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009;]
“premises” includes any vehicle, stall or moveable structure (including an offshore installation [F163 or other marine installation]) and any other place whatever, whether or not occupied as land;
“offshore installation” has the same meaning as in the Mineral Workings (Offshore Installations) Act 1971 (c. 61);
“return”, in relation to seized property, shall be construed in accordance with section 58, and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly;
“seize”, and cognate expressions, shall be construed in accordance with section 63(1) and subsection (5) below;
“seized property”, in relation to any exercise of a power of seizure, means (subject to subsection (5)) anything seized in exercise of that power; and
“vehicle” includes any vessel, aircraft or hovercraft.
In this Part references, in relation to a time when seized property is in any person’s possession in consequence of a seizure (“the relevant time”), to something for which the person making the seizure had power to search shall be construed—
where the seizure was made on the occasion of a search carried out on the authority of a warrant, as including anything of the description of things the presence or suspected presence of which provided grounds for the issue of the warrant;
where the property was seized in the course of a search on the occasion of which it would have been lawful for the person carrying out the search to seize anything which on that occasion was believed by him to be, or appeared to him to be, of a particular description, as including—
anything which at the relevant time is believed by the person in possession of the seized property, or (as the case may be) appears to him, to be of that description; and
anything which is in fact of that description;
where the property was seized in the course of a search on the occasion of which it would have been lawful for the person carrying out the search to seize anything which there were on that occasion reasonable grounds for believing was of a particular description, as including—
anything which there are at the relevant time reasonable grounds for believing is of that description; and
anything which is in fact of that description;
where the property was seized in the course of a search to which neither paragraph (b) nor paragraph (c) applies, as including anything which is of a
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	61
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


description of things which, on the occasion of the search, it would have been lawful for the person carrying it out to seize otherwise than under section 50 and 51; and
where the property was seized on the occasion of a search authorised under section 82 of the Terrorism Act 2000 (c. 11) (seizure of items suspected to have been, or to be intended to be, used in commission of certain offences), as including anything—
which is or has been, or is or was intended to be, used in the commission of an offence such as is mentioned in subsection (3)(a) or (b) of that section; or
which at the relevant time the person who is in possession of the seized property reasonably suspects is something falling within sub- paragraph (i).
F164(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
References in subsection (2) to a search include references to any activities authorised by virtue of any of the following—
F165(a)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(b)	section 29(1) of the Fair Trading Act 1973 (c. 41) (power to enter premises and to inspect and seize goods and documents);
F166(c)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F167(d)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F168(e)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F169(f)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F170(g)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(h)	section [F17129(4)] of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 (c. 43) (powers of search etc.);
F172(i)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(j)	section 32(5) of the Food Safety Act 1990 (c. 16) (power to inspect records relating to a food business);
[F173(ja)	paragraph 5 of Schedule 3B to the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990.]
F174(k)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(l)	Article 33(6) of the Food Safety (Northern Ireland) Order 1991 (S.I. 1991 762 (N.I. 7));
F175(m)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F176(ma)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F177(n) paragraph 2 of Schedule 5 to the Human Tissue Act 2004 (entry and inspection of licensed premises).]
[F178(o) regulation [F17922(4)] of the General Product Safety Regulations 2005 (powers of entry and search etc)]
[F180(p) sections 26(1), 27(1), 28(1) and 29(1) of the Animal Welfare Act 2006 (inspection in connection with licences, inspection in connection with registration, inspection of farm premises and inspection relating to [F181EU] obligations).]
F182(q)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F183(r)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F184(s)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



[F185(t)	Part 4 of Schedule 5 to the Consumer Rights Act 2015]
References in this Part to a power of seizure include references to each of the powers to take possession of items under—
F186(a)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
section 448(3) of the Companies Act 1985 (c. 6);
F186(c)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F187(d)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F186(e)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
section 2(5) of the Criminal Justice Act 1987 (c. 38);
F188(g)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F189sections 28(2)(c) and 28A(2)(c)] of the Competition Act 1998 (c. 41); and
[F190sections 122D(3) and 176(5)] of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (c. 8);
[F191(j)	section 75(2)(j) of the Digital Markets, Competition and Consumers Act 2024;]
and references in this Part to seizure and to seized property shall be construed accordingly.
In this Part, so far as it applies to England and Wales—
references to excluded material shall be construed in accordance with section 11 of the 1984 Act (meaning of “excluded material”); and
references to special procedure material shall be construed in accordance with section 14 of that Act (meaning of “special procedure material”).
In this Part, so far as it applies to Northern Ireland—
references to excluded material shall be construed in accordance with Article 13 of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989 1341 (N.I. 12)) (meaning of “excluded material”); and
references to special procedure material shall be construed in accordance with Article 16 of that Order (meaning of “special procedure material”).
References in this Part to any item or material being comprised in other property include references to its being mixed with that other property.
In this Part “enactment” includes an enactment contained in Northern Ireland legislation.

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	63
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



F167 S. 66(4)(d) omitted (1.10.2015) by virtue of Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5), Sch. 6 para.
64(a); S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i) (with art. 8)
F168 S. 66(4)(e) omitted (1.10.2015) by virtue of Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5), Sch. 6 para.
64(a); S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i) (with art. 8)
F169 S. 66(4)(f) omitted (1.10.2015) by virtue of Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5), Sch. 6 para.
64(a); S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i) (with art. 8)
F170 S. 66(4)(g) omitted (1.10.2015) by virtue of Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5), Sch. 6 para.
64(a); S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i) (with art. 8)
F171 Word in s. 66(4)(h) substituted (1.10.2015) by Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5), Sch. 6 para. 64(b); S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i)
F172 S. 66(4)(i) repealed (26.5.2008) by The Consumer Protection from Unfair Trading Regulations 2008 (S.I. 2008/1277), reg. 1, Sch. 4 Pt. 1 (with reg. 28(2)(3))
F173 S. 66(4)(ja) inserted (1.10.2009) by Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 2008 (c. 22), s. 68(2),
Sch. 7 para. 20(a); S.I. 2009/2232, art. 2(y)
F174 S. 66(4)(k) omitted (1.10.2013) by virtue of The Property Misdescriptions Act 1991 (Repeal) Order 2013 (S.I. 2013/1575), art. 1, Sch. para. 5
F175 S. 66(4)(m) repealed (23.2.2011) by The Timeshare, Holiday Products, Resale and Exchange Contracts Regulations 2010 (S.I. 2010/2960), reg. 1(2), Sch. 6 para. 2(3)(a), Sch. 8 Pt. 1 (with reg. 37, Sch. 7)
F176 S. 66(4)(ma) omitted (1.10.2015) by virtue of Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5), Sch. 6 para. 64(a); S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i) (with art. 8)
F177 S. 66(4)(n) inserted (1.3.2006 for certain purposes and 7.4.2006 for certain further purposes and 1.9.2006 otherwise) by Human Tissue Act 2004 (c. 30), ss. 56, 60, Sch. 6 para. 5(3) (with s. 58);
S.I. 2006/404, art. 2(3), Sch. (subject to art. 4 and with transitional provisions in arts. 5, 6); S.I. 2006/1997, art. 3 (subject to arts. 4, 7, 8) (as amended by S.I. 2006/2169, art. 2)
F178 S. 66(4)(o) inserted (1.10.2005) by The General Product Safety Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/1803),
reg. 47(3) (with regs. 42, 43)
F179 Word in s. 66(4)(o) substituted (1.10.2015) by Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5), Sch. 6 para. 64(c); S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i)
F180 S. 66(4)(p) inserted (27.3.2007 for W. and 6.4.2007 for E. and otherwise prosp.) by Animal Welfare Act 2006 (c. 45), ss. 64, 68, Sch. 3 para. 14(2) (with ss. 1(2), 58(1), 59, 60); S.I. 2007/1030, art. 2(1) (l); S.I. 2007/499, art. 2(2)(l)
F181 Words in Act substituted (22.4.2011) by The Treaty of Lisbon (Changes in Terminology) Order 2011 (S.I. 2011/1043), arts. 2, 3, 6 (with art. 3(2)(3), 4(2), 6(4)(5))
F182 S. 66(4)(q) omitted (1.10.2015) by virtue of Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5), Sch. 6 para.
64(a); S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i) (with art. 8)
F183 S. 66(4)(r) omitted (1.10.2015) by virtue of Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5), Sch. 6 para.
64(a); S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i) (with art. 8)
F184 S. 66(4)(s) omitted (1.10.2015) by virtue of Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5), Sch. 6 para.
64(a); S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i) (with art. 8)
F185 S. 66(4)(t) inserted (1.10.2015) by Consumer Rights Act 2015 (c. 15), s. 100(5), Sch. 6 para. 64(d);
S.I. 2015/1630, art. 3(i)
F186 S. 66(5)(a)(c)(e) repealed (1.12.2001) by S.I. 2001/3649, arts. 1, 364(c)
F187 S. 66(5)(d) omitted (1.10.2009) by virtue of The Companies Act 2006 (Consequential Amendments, Transitional Provisions and Savings) Order 2009 (S.I. 2009/1941), art. 1(2), Sch. 1 para. 189(6) (with art. 10)
F188 S. 66(5)(g) repealed (1.10.2009) by Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 2008 (c. 22), s. 68(2), Sch. 7 para. 20(b), Sch. 8 Pt. 1; S.I. 2009/2232, art. 2(y)
F189 Words in s. 66(5)(h) substituted (1.1.2025) by Digital Markets, Competition and Consumers Act 2024 (c. 13), ss. 123(7), 339(1); S.I. 2024/1226, regs. 1(2), 2(1)(2) (with Sch. paras. 2, 20)
F190 Words in s. 66(5)(i) substituted (3.7.2016) by The Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Market Abuse) Regulations 2016 (S.I. 2016/680), regs. 1, 13(3)
64	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Supplemental provisions of Part 2

Application to [F192officers of Revenue and Customs]
The powers conferred by section 114(2) of the 1984 Act and Article 85(1) of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (application of provisions relating to police officers to [F193officers of Revenue and Customs]) shall have effect in relation to the provisions of this Part as they have effect in relation to the provisions of that Act or, as the case may be, that Order.


[F19467A Application to Welsh Revenue Authority
The Welsh Ministers may by regulations—
direct that any provision of this Part is to apply, subject to such modifications as the regulations may specify, to investigations of offences conducted by the Welsh Revenue Authority;
make provision permitting a person exercising a function conferred on the Welsh Revenue Authority by the regulations to use reasonable force in the exercise of such a function.
Regulations under subsection (1) may—
make provision that applies generally or only in specified cases,
make different provision for different cases or circumstances, and
may, in modifying a provision, in particular impose conditions on the exercise of a function.
The power to make regulations under subsection (1) is exercisable by statutory instrument.
A statutory instrument containing regulations under subsection (1) may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, the National Assembly for Wales.]

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	65
Part 2 – Powers of seizure
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Application to Scotland
In the application of this Part to Scotland—
subsection (4) of section 54 and subsection (10) of section 59 shall each have effect with the omission of paragraph (c) of that subsection;
section 55 and subsection (3)(c) of section 59 shall be omitted; and
Schedule 1 shall have effect as if the powers specified in that Schedule did not include any power of seizure under any enactment mentioned in that Schedule, so far as it is exercisable in Scotland by a constable, except a power conferred by an enactment mentioned in subsection (2).
Those enactments are—
section 43(5) of the Gaming Act 1968 (c. 65);
F195(b)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(c)	section 448(3) of the Companies Act 1985 (c. 6);
F195(d)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F195(e)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(f)	[F196sections 122D(3) and 176(5)] of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (c. 8).
[F197(g)	[F198regulation 70(7) of the Money Laundering, Terrorist Financing and Transfer of Funds (Information on the Payer) Regulations 2017]; and]
F199(h)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Application to powers designated by order
The Secretary of State may by order—
provide for any power designated by the order to be added to those specified in Schedule 1 or section 63(2);
make any modification of the provisions of this Part which the Secretary of State considers appropriate in consequence of any provision made by virtue of paragraph (a);
make any modification of any enactment making provision in relation to seizures, or things seized, under a power designated by an order under this subsection which the Secretary of State considers appropriate in consequence of any provision made by virtue of that paragraph.
66	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 3 – Police and Criminal Evidence and the Terrorism Act
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Where the power designated by the order made under subsection (1) is a power conferred in relation to Scotland, the Secretary of State shall consult the Scottish Ministers before making the order.
[F200(2A) Where the power designated by the order made under subsection (1) is a power conferred in relation to Northern Ireland, the Secretary of State shall consult the Department of Justice in Northern Ireland before making the order.]
The power to make an order under subsection (1) shall be exercisable by statutory instrument; and no such order shall be made unless a draft of it has been laid before Parliament and approved by a resolution of each House.
In this section “modification” includes any exclusion, extension or application.


Consequential applications and amendments of enactments
Schedule 2 (which applies enactments in relation to provision made by this Part and contains minor and consequential amendments) shall have effect.

Part 3

Police and Criminal Evidence and the Terrorism Act

Arrestable offences

Arrestable offences
F201. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Importation of indecent or obscene material

[F202In Part 1 of Schedule 5 to each of the 1984 Act and the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989 1341 (N.I. 12)) (serious arrestable offences), after paragraph 8 there shall be inserted—

“9	An offence under section 170 of the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979 (c. 2) of being knowingly concerned, in relation to any goods, in any fraudulent evasion or attempt at evasion of a prohibition in force with
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	67
Part 3 – Police and Criminal Evidence and the Terrorism Act
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


respect to the goods under section 42 of the Customs Consolidation Act 1876 (c. 36) (prohibition on importing indecent or obscene articles).”]


Detention and arrest

Use of video and telephone links for decisions about detention
The 1984 Act shall be amended as follows.
After section 40 there shall be inserted—

“40A Use of telephone for review under s. 40
This section applies, notwithstanding anything in section 40 above, where in the case of a person who has been arrested but not charged—
it is not reasonably practicable for an officer of at least the rank of inspector to be present in the police station where that person is held to carry out any review of that person’s detention that is required by subsection (1)(b) of that section; and
the review is not one which regulations under section 45A below authorise to be carried out using video-conferencing facilities, or is one which it is not reasonably practicable, in the circumstances, to carry out using any such facilities.
The review may be carried out by an officer of at least the rank of inspector who has access to a means of communication by telephone to persons in the police station where the arrested person is held.
Where any review is carried out under this section by an officer who is not present at the station where the arrested person is held—
any obligation of that officer to make a record in connection with the carrying out of the review shall have effect as an obligation to cause another officer to make the record;
any requirement for the record to be made in the presence of the arrested person shall apply to the making of that record by that other officer; and
the requirements under section 40(12) and (13) above for—
the arrested person, or
a solicitor representing him,
to be given any opportunity to make representations (whether in writing or orally) to that officer shall have effect as a requirement for that person, or such a solicitor, to be given an opportunity to make representations in a manner authorised by subsection (4) below.
Representations are made in a manner authorised by this subsection—
68	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 3 – Police and Criminal Evidence and the Terrorism Act
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



in a case where facilities exist for the immediate transmission of written representations to the officer carrying out the review, if they are made either—
orally by telephone to that officer; or
in writing to that officer by means of those facilities;
and
in any other case, if they are made orally by telephone to that officer.
In this section “video-conferencing facilities” has the same meaning as in section 45A below.”
After section 45 there shall be inserted—

“45A Use of video-conferencing facilities for decisions about detention
(1) Subject to the following provisions of this section, the Secretary of State may by regulations provide that, in the case of an arrested person who is held in a police station, some or all of the functions mentioned in subsection (2) may be performed (notwithstanding anything in the preceding provisions of this Part) by an officer who—
is not present in that police station; but
has access to the use of video-conferencing facilities that enable him to communicate with persons in that station.
Those functions are—
the functions in relation to an arrested person taken to a police station that is not a designated police station which, in the case of an arrested person taken to a station that is a designated police station, are functions of a custody officer under section 37, 38 or 40 above; and
the function of carrying out a review under section 40(1)(b) above (review, by an officer of at least the rank of inspector, of the detention of person arrested but not charged).
Regulations under this section shall specify the use to be made in the performance of the functions mentioned in subsection (2) above of the facilities mentioned in subsection (1) above.
Regulations under this section shall not authorise the performance of any of the functions mentioned in subsection (2)(a) above by such an officer as is mentioned in subsection (1) above unless he is a custody officer for a designated police station.
Where any functions mentioned in subsection (2) above are performed in a manner authorised by regulations under this section—
any obligation of the officer performing those functions to make a record in connection with the performance of those functions shall have effect as an obligation to cause another officer to make the record; and
any requirement for the record to be made in the presence of the arrested person shall apply to the making of that record by that other officer.
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	69
Part 3 – Police and Criminal Evidence and the Terrorism Act
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Where the functions mentioned in subsection (2)(b) are performed in a manner authorised by regulations under this section, the requirements under section 40(12) and (13) above for—
the arrested person, or
a solicitor representing him,
to be given any opportunity to make representations (whether in writing or orally) to the person performing those functions shall have effect as a requirement for that person, or such a solicitor, to be given an opportunity to make representations in a manner authorised by subsection (7) below.
Representations are made in a manner authorised by this subsection—
in a case where facilities exist for the immediate transmission of written representations to the officer performing the functions, if they are made either—
orally to that officer by means of the video-conferencing facilities used by him for performing those functions; or
in writing to that officer by means of the facilities available for the immediate transmission of the representations;
and
in any other case if they are made orally to that officer by means of the video-conferencing facilities used by him for performing the functions.
Regulations under this section may make different provision for different cases and may be made so as to have effect in relation only to the police stations specified or described in the regulations.
Regulations under this section shall be made by statutory instrument and shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
Any reference in this section to video-conferencing facilities, in relation to any functions, is a reference to any facilities (whether a live television link or other facilities) by means of which the functions may be performed with the officer performing them, the person in relation to whom they are performed and any legal representative of that person all able to both see and to hear each other.”

Authorisation for delay in notifying arrest
In section 56(2)(b) of the 1984 Act (authorisation by a constable of at least the rank of superintendent for a delay in allowing an arrested person to notify someone of his arrest and detention), for “superintendent” there shall be substituted “ inspector ”.

Use of video links for proceedings about Terrorism Act detention
In paragraph 33 of Schedule 8 to the Terrorism Act 2000 (c. 11) (representation at a hearing for a warrant of further detention or for the extension or further extension of the period specified in such a warrant), after sub-paragraph (3) there shall be inserted—
70	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 3 – Police and Criminal Evidence and the Terrorism Act
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



“(4) A judicial authority may, after giving an opportunity for representations to be made by or on behalf of the applicant and the person to whom the application relates, direct—
that the hearing of the application must be conducted, and
that all representations by or on behalf of a person for the purposes of the hearing must be made,
by such means (whether a live television link or other means) falling within sub-paragraph (5) as may be specified in the direction and not in the presence (apart from by those means) of the applicant, of the person to whom the application relates or of any legal representative of that person.
A means of conducting the hearing and of making representations falls within this sub-paragraph if it allows the person to whom the application relates and any legal representative of his (without being present at the hearing and to the extent that they are not excluded from it under sub- paragraph (3))—
to see and hear the judicial authority and the making of representations to it by other persons; and
to be seen and heard by the judicial authority.
If the person to whom the application relates wishes to make representations about whether a direction should be given under sub-paragraph (4), he must do so by using the facilities that will be used if the judicial authority decides to give a direction under that sub-paragraph.
Sub-paragraph (2) applies to the hearing of representations about whether a direction should be given under sub-paragraph (4) in the case of any application as it applies to a hearing of the application.
A judicial authority shall not give a direction under sub-paragraph (4) unless—
it has been notified by the Secretary of State that facilities are available at the place where the person to whom the application relates is held for the judicial authority to conduct a hearing by means falling within sub-paragraph (5); and
that notification has not been withdrawn.
If in a case where it has power to do so a judicial authority decides not to give a direction under sub-paragraph (4), it shall state its reasons for not giving it.”

Codes of practice

Visual recording of interviews
After section 60 of the 1984 Act (tape recording of interviews) there shall be inserted—

“60A Visual recording of interviews
The Secretary of State shall have power—
to issue a code of practice for the visual recording of interviews held by police officers at police stations; and
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	71
Part 3 – Police and Criminal Evidence and the Terrorism Act
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


to make an order requiring the visual recording of interviews so held, and requiring the visual recording to be in accordance with the code for the time being in force under this section.
A requirement imposed by an order under this section may be imposed in relation to such cases or police stations in such areas, or both, as may be specified or described in the order.
An order under subsection (1) above shall be made by statutory instrument and shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
In this section—
references to any interview are references to an interview of a person suspected of a criminal offence; and
references to a visual recording include references to a visual recording in which an audio recording is comprised.”
In section 67(2) of the 1984 Act (procedure for codes of practice under section 60 or 66), after “60” there shall be inserted “ , 60A ”.

Codes of practice
In section 67 of the 1984 Act (procedure in relation to a code of practice under section 60, 60A or 66), after subsection (7) there shall be inserted—
“(7A) Subject to subsection (7B) below, the Secretary of State may by order provide that a code of practice for the time being in force is to be treated as having effect with such modifications as may be set out in the order.
(7B) The effect of the modifications made by an order under subsection (7A) above must be confined to one or more of the following—
the effect of the code in relation to such area of England and Wales as may be specified in the order;
the effect of the code during such period, not exceeding two years, as may be so specified;
the effect of the order in relation to such offences or descriptions of offender as may be so specified.
(7C) An order under subsection (7A) above shall be made by statutory instrument and shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”

Fingerprints and samples

Taking fingerprints
In section 27 of the 1984 Act (requirement to attend police station for fingerprinting), after subsection (1) there shall be inserted—
“(1A) Where a person convicted of a recordable offence has already had his fingerprints taken as mentioned in paragraph (c) of subsection (1) above, that fact (together with any time when he has been in police detention for the offence) shall be disregarded for the purposes of that subsection if—
72	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 3 – Police and Criminal Evidence and the Terrorism Act
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



the fingerprints taken on the previous occasion do not constitute a complete set of his fingerprints; or
some or all of the fingerprints taken on the previous occasion are not of sufficient quality to allow satisfactory analysis, comparison or matching.
(1B) Subsections (1) and (1A) above apply—
where a person has been given a caution in respect of a recordable offence which, at the time of the caution, he has admitted, or
where a person has been warned or reprimanded under section 65 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (c. 37) for a recordable offence,
as they apply where a person has been convicted of an offence, and references in this section to a conviction shall be construed accordingly.”
In section 61(3)(a) of the 1984 Act (compulsory fingerprinting under the authorisation of a police officer of at least the rank of superintendent), for “superintendent” there shall be substituted “ inspector ”.
After section 61(3) of the 1984 Act there shall be inserted—
“(3A) Where a person charged with a recordable offence or informed that he will be reported for such an offence has already had his fingerprints taken as mentioned in paragraph (b)(ii) of subsection (3) above, that fact shall be disregarded for the purposes of that subsection if—
the fingerprints taken on the previous occasion do not constitute a complete set of his fingerprints; or
some or all of the fingerprints taken on the previous occasion are not of sufficient quality to allow satisfactory analysis, comparison or matching (whether in the case in question or generally).”
After section 61(4) of the 1984 Act there shall be inserted—
“(4A) The fingerprints of a person who has answered to bail at a court or police station may be taken without the appropriate consent at the court or station if—
the court, or
an officer of at least the rank of inspector, authorises them to be taken.
(4B) A court or officer may only give an authorisation under subsection (4A) if—
the person who has answered to bail has answered to it for a person whose fingerprints were taken on a previous occasion and there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not the same person; or
the person who has answered to bail claims to be a different person from a person whose fingerprints were taken on a previous occasion.”
In section 61(5) of the 1984 Act (authorisation to be in writing or oral but to be confirmed in writing), after “(3)(a)” there shall be inserted “ or (4A) ”.
In section 61(6) of the 1984 Act (compulsory fingerprinting of persons convicted of recordable offences), for “he has been convicted of a recordable offence” there shall be substituted—
“(a)  he has been convicted of a recordable offence;
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	73
Part 3 – Police and Criminal Evidence and the Terrorism Act
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


he has been given a caution in respect of a recordable offence which, at the time of the caution, he has admitted; or
he has been warned or reprimanded under section 65 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (c. 37) for a recordable offence.”
F203(7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
In section 65(1) of the 1984 Act (supplementary provisions of Part 5), for the definition of “fingerprints” there shall be substituted—
““fingerprints”, in relation to any person, means a record (in any form and produced by any method) of the skin pattern and other physical characteristics or features of—
any of that person’s fingers; or
either of his palms;”.
Section 39 of the Criminal Justice Act 1948 (c. 58) (proof of previous convictions by fingerprints) shall cease to have effect.


Authority for intimate searches
In subsections (1) and (5) of section 55 of the 1984 Act (authorisation by a constable of at least the rank of superintendent of an intimate search or the use for such a search of a person without the specified qualification), for “superintendent”, in each place where it occurs, there shall be substituted “ inspector ”.

Samples
In sections 62(1)(a) and (1A)(a) and 63(3)(b) of the 1984 Act (authorisation of a police officer of or above the rank of superintendent required for the taking of an intimate or non-intimate sample), for the word “superintendent”, in each place where it occurs, there shall be substituted “ inspector ”.
F204. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
After section 63(5) of the 1984 Act there shall be inserted—
“(5A) An officer shall not give an authorisation under subsection (3) above for the taking from any person of a non-intimate sample consisting of a skin impression if—
a skin impression of the same part of the body has already been taken from that person in the course of the investigation of the offence; and
the impression previously taken is not one that has proved insufficient.”
74	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 3 – Police and Criminal Evidence and the Terrorism Act
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



F205(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Section 65 of the 1984 Act (supplementary provisions of Part 5) shall become subsection (1) of that section and—
after “this Act—” there shall be inserted—
““analysis”, in relation to a skin impression, includes comparison and matching;”
in the definition of “non-intimate sample”, for paragraph (e) (footprints etc.) there shall be substituted—
“(e)	a skin impression;”
after the definition of “registered dentist” there shall be inserted—
““skin impression”, in relation to any person, means any record (other than a fingerprint) which is a record (in any form and produced by any method) of the skin pattern and other physical characteristics or features of the whole or any part of his foot or of any other part of his body;”
and
in the definition of “sufficient” and “insufficient”, after “means” there shall be inserted “ (subject to subsection (2) below) ”.
After subsection (1) of section 65 of the 1984 Act there shall be inserted—
“(2) References in this Part of this Act to a sample’s proving insufficient include references to where, as a consequence of—
the loss, destruction or contamination of the whole or any part of the sample,
any damage to the whole or a part of the sample, or
the use of the whole or a part of the sample for an analysis which produced no results or which produced results some or all of which must be regarded, in the circumstances, as unreliable,
the sample has become unavailable or insufficient for the purpose of enabling information, or information of a particular description, to be obtained by means of analysis of the sample.”


Speculative searches
In subsection (1)(a) of section 63A of the 1984 Act (speculative searches against records held by or on behalf of specified police forces), for “a police force (or police
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	75
Part 3 – Police and Criminal Evidence and the Terrorism Act
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


forces) falling within subsection (1A) below or” there shall be substituted “ any one or more relevant law-enforcement authorities or which ”.
For subsection (1A) of that section (specified police forces) there shall be substituted—
“(1A) In subsection (1) above “relevant law-enforcement authority” means—
a police force;
the National Criminal Intelligence Service;
the National Crime Squad;
a public authority (not falling within paragraphs (a) to (c)) with functions in any part of the British Islands which consist of or include the investigation of crimes or the charging of offenders;
any person with functions in any country or territory outside the United Kingdom which—
correspond to those of a police force; or
otherwise consist of or include the investigation of conduct contrary to the law of that country or territory, or the apprehension of persons guilty of such conduct;
any person with functions under any international agreement which consist of or include the investigation of conduct which is—
unlawful under the law of one or more places,
prohibited by such an agreement, or
contrary to international law,
or the apprehension of persons guilty of such conduct.
(1B) The reference in subsection (1A) above to a police force is a reference to any of the following—
any police force maintained under section 2 of the Police Act 1996 (c. 16) (police forces in England and Wales outside London);
the metropolitan police force;
the City of London police force;
any police force maintained under or by virtue of section 1 of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 (c. 77);
the Police Service of Northern Ireland;
the Police Service of Northern Ireland Reserve;
the Ministry of Defence Police;
the Royal Navy Regulating Branch;
the Royal Military Police;
the Royal Air Force Police;
the Royal Marines Police;
the British Transport Police;
the States of Jersey Police Force;
the salaried police force of the Island of Guernsey;
the Isle of Man Constabulary. (1C) Where—
76	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 3 – Police and Criminal Evidence and the Terrorism Act
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



fingerprints or samples have been taken from any person in connection with the investigation of an offence but otherwise than in circumstances to which subsection (1) above applies, and
that person has given his consent in writing to the use in a speculative search of the fingerprints or of the samples and of information derived from them,
the fingerprints or, as the case may be, those samples and that information may be checked against any of the fingerprints, samples or information mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b) of that subsection.
(1D) A consent given for the purposes of subsection (1C) above shall not be capable of being withdrawn.”

F20682	Restriction on use and destruction of fingerprints and samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


83	Provision for Northern Ireland corresponding to s. 82
Article 64 of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989 1341 (N.I. 12)) (destruction of fingerprints and samples) shall be amended as follows.
For paragraphs (1) and (2) (obligation to destroy fingerprints and samples of persons who are not prosecuted or who are cleared) there shall be substituted—
“(1A) Where—
fingerprints or samples are taken from a person in connection with the investigation of an offence; and
paragraph (3) does not require them to be destroyed,
the fingerprints or samples may be retained after they have fulfilled the purposes for which they were taken but shall not be used by any person except for purposes related to the prevention or detection of crime, the investigation of an offence or the conduct of a prosecution.
(1B) In paragraph (1A)—
the reference to using a fingerprint includes a reference to allowing any check to be made against it under Article 63A(1) and to disclosing it to any person;
the reference to using a sample includes a reference to allowing any check to be made under Article 63A(1) against it or against information derived from it and to disclosing it or any such information to any person;
the reference to crime includes a reference to any conduct which—
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	77
Part 3 – Police and Criminal Evidence and the Terrorism Act
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


constitutes one or more criminal offences (whether under the law of a part of the United Kingdom or of a country or territory outside the United Kingdom); or
is, or corresponds to, any conduct which, if it all took place in any one part of the United Kingdom, would constitute one or more criminal offences;
and
the references to an investigation and to a prosecution include references, respectively, to any investigation outside the United Kingdom of any crime or suspected crime and to a prosecution brought in respect of any crime in a country or territory outside the United Kingdom.”
In paragraph (3), for “paragraph (3A)” there shall be substituted “ the following provisions of this Article ”.
For paragraphs (3A) and (3B) (power to retain samples for elimination purposes and restriction on use) there shall be substituted—
“(3AA) Samples and fingerprints are not required to be destroyed under paragraph (3) if—
they were taken for the purposes of the investigation of an offence of which a person has been convicted; and
a sample or, as the case may be, fingerprint was also taken from the convicted person for the purposes of that investigation.
(3AB) Subject to paragraph (3AC), where a person is entitled under paragraph (3) to the destruction of any fingerprint or sample taken from him (or would be but for paragraph (3AA)), neither the fingerprint nor the sample, nor any information derived from the sample, shall be used—
in evidence against the person who is or would be entitled to the destruction of that fingerprint or sample; or
for the purposes of the investigation of any offence;
and paragraph (1B) applies for the purposes of this paragraph as it applies for the purposes of paragraph (1A).
(3AC) Where a person from whom a fingerprint or sample has been taken consents in writing to its retention—
that sample need not be destroyed under paragraph (3); and
paragraph (3AB) shall not restrict the use that may be made of the fingerprint or sample or, in the case of a sample, of any information derived from it;
and a consent given for the purposes of this paragraph shall not be capable of being withdrawn.
(3AD) For the purposes of paragraph (3AC) it shall be immaterial whether the consent is given at, before or after the time when the entitlement to the destruction of the fingerprint or sample arises.”
In paragraph (8)(a) (saving for power conferred by Immigration Act 1971 (c. 77)), after “1971” there shall be inserted “ or section 20 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (c. 33) (disclosure of police information to the Secretary of State for use for immigration purposes); ”.
78	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 3 – Police and Criminal Evidence and the Terrorism Act
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



The fingerprints, samples and information the retention and use of which, in accordance with the amended provisions of Article 64 of the Order of 1989, is authorised by this section include—
fingerprints and samples the destruction of which should have taken place before the commencement of this section, but did not; and
information deriving from any such samples or from samples the destruction of which did take place, in accordance with that Article, before the commencement of this section.

F20784	Amendment of Terrorism Act 2000 equivalent to s. 82
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Persons authorised by the Secretary of State

Power to apply 1984 Act provisions
After section 114 of the 1984 Act (application of Act to Customs and Excise) there shall be inserted—

“114A Power to apply Act to officers of the Secretary of State etc.
The Secretary of State may by order direct that—
the provisions of Schedule 1 to this Act so far as they relate to special procedure material, and
the other provisions of this Act so far as they relate to the provisions falling within paragraph (a) above,
shall apply, with such modifications as may be specified in the order, for the purposes of investigations falling within subsection (2) as they apply for the purposes of investigations of offences conducted by police officers.
An investigation falls within this subsection if—
it is conducted by an officer of the department of the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry or by another person acting on that Secretary of State’s behalf;
it is conducted by that officer or other person in the discharge of a duty to investigate offences; and
the investigation relates to a serious arrestable offence or to anything which there are reasonable grounds for suspecting has involved the commission of a serious arrestable offence.
The investigations for the purposes of which provisions of this Act may be applied with modifications by an order under this section include investigations of offences committed, or suspected of having been committed, before the coming into force of the order or of this section.
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	79
Part 4 – Police Training
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


An order under this section shall be made by statutory instrument and shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”

Execution of process in other domestic jurisdictions

Process for obtaining excluded and special procedure material
In section 9 of the 1984 Act (which contains provision introducing the provisions of Schedule 1 to that Act for obtaining access to excluded and special procedure material), after subsection (2) there shall be inserted—
“(2A) Section 4 of the Summary Jurisdiction (Process) Act 1881 (c. 24) (which includes provision for the execution of process of English courts in Scotland) and section 29 of the Petty Sessions (Ireland) Act 1851 (c. 93) (which makes equivalent provision for execution in Northern Ireland) shall each apply to any process issued by a circuit judge under Schedule 1 to this Act as it applies to process issued by a magistrates’ court under the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980 (c. 43).”
In section 120(5) of that Act (provisions extending to the United Kingdom), after the entry for section 6(3) of that Act there shall be inserted—
“section 9(2A);”.
Section 27 of the Petty Sessions (Ireland) Act 1851 (which includes provision for the execution of process of Northern Ireland courts in other places) shall apply to any process issued by a county court judge under Schedule 1 to the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989 1341 (N.I. 12)) as it applies to a warrant mentioned in that section.

Part 4

Police Training

The Central Police Training and Development Authority

Establishment of the Authority
F208. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 4 – Police Training
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Setting of objectives by the Secretary of State
F210. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


The Authority’s annual objectives
F211. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Setting of performance targets
F212. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Training and development plans
F213. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	81
Part 4 – Police Training
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Power to require reports from the Authority
F215. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Annual reports
F216. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Secretary of State’s duty to promote efficiency etc. of Authority
F217. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Other provisions about training

Regulations for police forces
The Secretary of State may make regulations as to—
police training F218. . . ; and
the qualifications for deployment to perform particular tasks of persons serving or employed for policing purposes in England and Wales.
[F219(1A) If the College of Policing submits to the Secretary of State a draft of regulations under this section, the Secretary of State shall make regulations in terms of the draft unless the Secretary of State considers that—
doing so would impair the efficiency or effectiveness of the police, or
it would be unlawful to do so, or
it would for some other reason be wrong to do so.
82	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 4 – Police Training
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



(1B) The Secretary of State may not make regulations under this section unless the text of the regulations has been prepared or approved by the College of Policing.]
Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), regulations made by virtue of paragraph (a) of that subsection may make provision with respect to the curriculum for courses of training for persons serving or employed for policing purposes in England and Wales, including the evaluation, approval and manner of devising the curriculum, or any part of it.
In relation to any matter as to which provision may be made by regulations under this section, the regulations may—
authorise or require provision to be made by, or confer discretionary powers on, the Secretary of State, [F220local policing bodies], chief officers of police or other persons; or
authorise or require the delegation by any person of functions conferred on that person by or under the regulations.
F221(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(5) A statutory instrument containing regulations under this section shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
[F222(6) In this section—
references to the provision of police training are references to the provision of training and opportunities for professional development for persons serving or employed for policing purposes in England and Wales;
references to the provision of training include references to the provision of assessment and examination services;
references to a person serving or employed for policing purposes in England and Wales are references to a person who is—
a member of a police force in England and Wales,
a special constable appointed under section 27 of the 1996 Act, F223...
a person employed for the purposes of a police force in England and Wales][F224or
a person designated as a community support volunteer or a policing support volunteer under section 38 of the Police Reform Act 2002.]

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	83
Part 4 – Police Training
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Directions after inspection identifies training needs
Where a report made to the Secretary of State on an inspection under section 54 of the 1996 Act (functions of inspectors of constabulary) contains recommendations in the case of any police force for the taking of measures relating to—
the provision of training, or
the provision of opportunities for professional development,
the Secretary of State may direct the [F225local policing body] responsible for maintaining that force to take such measures relating to those matters as may be specified in the direction.
A [F225local policing body] shall comply with any direction given to it under this section.


Joint provision of training
For section 23(6) of the 1996 Act (collaboration agreements) there shall be substituted—
“(6) In subsection (1)—
the reference to members of a police force includes a reference to special constables appointed for the area for which that force is maintained, and
the reference to police functions includes a reference to functions with respect to training and the provision of opportunities for professional development.”

Supplemental provisions in relation to police training

Orders and regulations under Part 4
Any power of the Secretary of State to make orders or regulations under this Part shall be exercisable by statutory instrument.
Any order or regulations made by the Secretary of State under this Part may make different provision for different cases.
84	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 5 – Police Organisation
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Interpretation of Part 4
F226. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
For the purposes of this Part the Commissioner of Police for the City of London shall be deemed to be a member of the City of London police force.


Consequential amendments relating to police training
The enactments specified in Schedule 4 (amendments consequential on the provisions of this Part) shall have effect with the amendments set out in that Schedule.

Transitional arrangements relating to Authority’s establishment etc.
The Secretary of State may, in connection with the coming into force of any provision of this Part, by order make such transitional provision and savings (including provision modifying this Part) as he thinks fit.
The Secretary of State may, for the purpose of facilitating the carrying out by the Authority of their functions or in connection with the coming into force of any provision of this Part, by order make such provision as he thinks fit—
for the transfer and apportionment of property and for the transfer, apportionment and creation of rights and liabilities;
for the transfer of members of police forces in England and Wales and other persons.
An order under this section may—
provide for the Secretary of State, or any other person nominated by or in accordance with the order, to determine any matter requiring determination under or in consequence of the order; and
make provision as to the payment of fees charged, or expenses incurred, by any person nominated to determine any matter by virtue of paragraph (a).
A statutory instrument containing an order under this section shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.

Part 5

Police Organisation

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	85
Part 5 – Police Organisation
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Police authorities etc.

Vice-chairmen
In Schedule 2 to the 1996 Act (police authorities outside London), after paragraph 9 there shall be inserted—

“Vice-chairmen
9A	(1) At an annual meeting a police authority may appoint one or more vice- chairmen from among its members.
The making of appointments under sub-paragraph (1) shall be the first business transacted at the meeting after the appointment of the chairman.
Where a vice-chairman ceases to hold office at any time between annual meetings, a police authority may make an appointment to fill the vacancy at any meeting of the authority held more than fourteen days after the occurrence of the vacancy.
Subject to any standing orders made by a police authority, anything authorised or required to be done by, to or before their chairman may be done by, to or before any vice-chairman of the authority.”
In Schedule 2A to that Act (the Metropolitan Police Authority), after paragraph 6 there shall be inserted—

“Vice-chairmen
6A	(1) At an annual meeting the Metropolitan Police Authority may appoint one or more vice-chairmen from among its members.
The making of appointments under sub-paragraph (1) shall be the first business transacted at the meeting after the appointment of the chairman.
Where a vice-chairman ceases to hold office at any time between annual meetings, the Metropolitan Police Authority may make an appointment to fill the vacancy at any meeting of the Authority held more than fourteen days after the occurrence of the vacancy.
Subject to any standing orders made by the Metropolitan Police Authority, anything authorised or required to be done by, to or before their chairman may be done by, to or before any vice-chairman of the authority.”
F227. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
In the following provisions (tenure of office, eligibility for reappointment and validity of acts of chairman and members of police authorities etc.)—
paragraphs 17(1) and 21 to 23 of Schedule 2 to the 1996 Act,[F228 and]
paragraphs 12(1) and 16 to 18 of Schedule 2A to that Act, F229. . .
F229. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 5 – Police Organisation
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



after “chairman”, wherever it occurs, there shall be inserted “ or vice-chairman ”.
In paragraph 24 of Schedule 2 to the 1996 Act, paragraph 19 of Schedule 2A to that Act and paragraph 16 of Schedule 2 to the 1997 Act (validity of acts)—
after “of chairman”, in each case, there shall be inserted, “ by a vacancy for a vice-chairman ”; and
after “as chairman”, in each case, there shall be inserted “ or vice-chairman ”.
In paragraph 25 of Schedule 2 to the 1996 Act (allowances for members of police authorities)—
in sub-paragraph (1), after “chairman” there shall be inserted “ , vice-chairmen ”; and
in sub-paragraph (2), after “chairman,” there shall be inserted “ a vice- chairman, ”.
In paragraph 20 of Schedule 2A to the 1996 Act (allowances for members of the Metropolitan Police Authority etc.)—
in sub-paragraph (1), after “chairman” there shall be inserted “ , vice-chairmen ”; and
in sub-paragraph (3), after “chairman,” there shall be inserted “ a vice- chairman, ”.
F230. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
In paragraph 6B(b) of Schedule 12 to the Local Government Act 1972 (c. 70) (persons to preside in the case of a police authority in the absence of the chairman), for the words from “another member” to “preside” there shall be substituted “the following person shall preside—
in a case in which only one vice-chairman is present at the meeting, that vice-chairman;
in a case in which more than one vice-chairman is present at the meeting, the vice-chairman chosen by the members present; and
in any other case, the member chosen by the members present;”.

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	87
Part 5 – Police Organisation
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Political balance on police authorities
In paragraph 4(1) of Schedule 2 to the 1996 Act (balance of parties on council to be reflected in appointments to police authority), for the words from “the members for” onwards there shall be substituted “in the case of the members for whose appointment it is responsible, the proportion who are members of any given party—
where it is a council that is responsible for their appointment, is the same as the proportion of the members of the council who are members of that party; and
where it is a joint committee that is so responsible, is the same as the proportion of the members of the relevant councils taken as a whole who are members of that party.”
In paragraph 2(3) of Schedule 2A to that Act (which makes corresponding provision for the Metropolitan Police Authority), for the words from “the members for” onwards there shall be substituted “ in the case of the members of the Authority who are members of the London Assembly appointed under this paragraph, the proportion who are members of any given party is the same as the proportion of the members of the London Assembly who are members of that party ”.


Removal of age qualification for membership
The following provisions (which disqualify persons of more than seventy years old from membership of police authorities etc. and from selection panels of police authorities) shall cease to have effect—
paragraph 10 of Schedule 2 to the 1996 Act (police authorities outside London);
paragraph 1(b) of Schedule 2 to the 1997 Act (service authorities for the National Crime Squad and the National Criminal Intelligence Service).
Accordingly, in paragraphs 12 to 14 of Schedule 2 to the 1996 Act, for the words “paragraphs 10 and 11”, wherever they occur, there shall be substituted “ paragraph 11 ”.

88	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 5 – Police Organisation
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Payment of allowances to authority members etc.
In each of the following provisions (which provide for the members of certain authorities to be made such payments by way of reimbursement of expenses and allowances as the Secretary of State may determine), the words “and allowances” shall be omitted—
paragraph 25(1) of Schedule 2 to the 1996 Act (police authorities outside London);
paragraph 20(1) of Schedule 2A to that Act (the Metropolitan Police Authority);
F231. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
After paragraph 25 of Schedule 2 to the 1996 Act (the police authorities outside London) there shall be inserted—

“Allowances for members etc.
25A (1) Subject to the following provisions of this paragraph, a police authority may make to its chairman, vice-chairmen and other members such payments by way of allowances as the authority may determine.
Subject to sub-paragraph (6), no payment shall be made under this paragraph except in accordance with arrangements published by the authority not more than twelve months before the making of the payment.
A police authority may from time to time revise any arrangements made for the purposes of this paragraph; but, no revisions shall take effect until published by the authority.
It shall be the duty of a police authority, when making or revising any arrangements made for the purposes of this paragraph, to have regard to any guidance given by the Secretary of State about the payment of allowances.
Payments made under this paragraph may differ according to whether the recipient is the chairman, a vice chairman or other member or is appointed under paragraph 2, 5 or 8.
The Secretary of State may by regulations impose such limits as may be provided for by or under the regulations on the payments that may be made under this paragraph.
A statutory instrument containing regulations under sub-paragraph (6) shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.

Members of standards committees
25B	Paragraphs 25 and 25A shall have effect in relation to a police authority as if references to members of the authority included references to persons who are not members of the authority but are members of the authority’s standards committee; and the power to make different payments according to the recipient shall include power to make different payments to persons who are not members of the authority but are members of the authority’s standards committee.”
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	89
Part 5 – Police Organisation
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


After paragraph 20 of Schedule 2A to that Act (the Metropolitan Police Authority) there shall be inserted—

“Allowances for members etc.
20A (1) Subject to the following provisions of this paragraph, the Metropolitan Police Authority may make to its chairman, vice-chairmen and other members such payments by way of allowances as that Authority may determine.
Subject to sub-paragraphs (6) and (7), no payment shall be made under this paragraph except in accordance with arrangements published by the Metropolitan Police Authority not more than twelve months before the making of the payment.
The Metropolitan Police Authority may from time to time revise any arrangements made for the purposes of this paragraph; but, no revisions shall take effect until published by that Authority.
It shall be the duty of the Metropolitan Police Authority, when making or revising any arrangements made for the purposes of this paragraph, to have regard to any guidance given by the Secretary of State about the payment of allowances.
Payments made under this paragraph may differ according to whether the recipient is the chairman, a vice chairman or one of the other members of the Metropolitan Police Authority, or is appointed under paragraph 3 or 5.
No payment shall be made under this paragraph to any member of the Metropolitan Police Authority who is also a member of the London Assembly.
The Secretary of State may by regulations impose such limits as may be provided for by or under the regulations on the payments that may be made under this paragraph.
A statutory instrument containing regulations under sub-paragraph (7) shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.

Members of standards committees
20B	Paragraphs 20 and 20A shall have effect in relation to the Metropolitan Police Authority as if references to the members of that Authority included references to persons who are not members of that Authority but are members of the Authority’s standards committee; and the power to make different payments according to the recipient shall include power to make different payments to persons who are not members of that Authority but are members of the Authority’s standards committee.”
F232. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 5 – Police Organisation
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Constitution of the Service Authorities for NCIS and NCS

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F233. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F234. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Financial provisions for NCIS Service Authority

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F235. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	91
Part 5 – Police Organisation
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Funding of NCIS Service Authority
F236. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Duty of NCIS Service Authority to prepare accounts
F237. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Financial provisions for NCS Service Authority

Preparation of budget statement by NCS Service Authority
F238. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Funding of NCS Service Authority
F239. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Duty of NCS Service Authority to prepare accounts
92	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 5 – Police Organisation
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Director General and other members of NCIS

Appointment of NCIS Director General
F241. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Removal of NCIS members (other than the Director General)
F242. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Removal of NCIS Director General, etc.
F243. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Director General and other members of NCS

Appointment of NCS Director General
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	93
Part 5 – Police Organisation
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Removal of NCS members (other than the Director General)
F245. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Removal of NCS Director General etc.
F246. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Police ranks

Deputy Assistant Commissioners of Police of the Metropolis
Before section 9G of the 1996 Act (appointment and removal of Commanders in the metropolitan police force), there shall be inserted—

“9FA Appointment and removal of Deputy Assistant Commissioners
The ranks that may be held in the metropolitan police force shall include that of Deputy Assistant Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis (“Deputy Assistant Commissioner”).
Any appointment of a Deputy Assistant Commissioner shall be made by the Metropolitan Police Authority, but subject to the approval of the Secretary of State and to regulations under section 50.
Subsections (1) to (3) of section 9E shall apply in relation to a Deputy Assistant Commissioner as they apply in relation to the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis.
Subsection (3) of this section is without prejudice to—
any regulations under section 50, or
94	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 5 – Police Organisation
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



any regulations under the Police Pensions Act 1976 (c. 35).”
In section 9H(2) of that Act (ranks that may be held in the metropolitan police force), for “and” at the end of paragraph (c) there shall be substituted—
“(ca)	Deputy Assistant Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, and”.
F247. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Appointment and removal of deputy chief constables
After section 11 of the 1996 Act (appointment and removal of chief constables), there shall be inserted—

“11A Appointment and removal of deputy chief constables
Every police force maintained under section 2 shall have a deputy chief constable.
The appointment of a person to be the deputy chief constable of a police force shall be made, in accordance with regulations under section 50, by the police authority responsible for maintaining that force, but only after consultation with the chief constable and subject to the approval of the Secretary of State.
Subsections (2) to (4) of section 11 shall apply in relation to a deputy chief constable as they apply in relation to a chief constable.”
In section 13 of that Act (ranks that may be held in police forces)—
in subsection (1), after “chief constable” there shall be inserted “ , deputy chief constable ”; and
subsection (2) shall be omitted.
F248. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Power of deputy to exercise functions of chief constable
In section 12 of the 1996 Act (assistant chief constable), subsections (4) to (6) shall be omitted.
After that section, there shall be inserted—
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	95
Part 5 – Police Organisation
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


“12A Power of deputy to exercise functions of chief constable
A deputy chief constable of a police force may exercise or perform any or all of the powers or duties of the chief constable of that force—
during any absence, incapacity or suspension from duty of the chief constable,
during any vacancy in the office of the chief constable, or
at any other time, with the consent of the chief constable.
A police authority responsible for maintaining a police force may designate a person holding the rank of assistant chief constable in that force to exercise or perform any or all of the powers or duties of the chief constable of that force—
during any absence, incapacity or suspension from duty of both the chief constable and the deputy chief constable, or
during any vacancy in the offices of both the chief constable and the deputy chief constable.
Only one person shall be authorised to act at any one time by virtue of a designation under subsection (2).
The power to act by virtue of subsection (1)(a) or (b) or subsection (2) shall not be exercisable for a continuous period exceeding three months except with the consent of the Secretary of State.
The provisions of subsections (1) and (2) shall be without prejudice to any other enactment that makes provision for the exercise by any other person of powers conferred on a chief constable.”

Chief superintendents
In section 9H(2) of the 1996 Act (ranks that shall be prescribed for the metropolitan police force), after “those of” there shall be inserted “ chief superintendent, ”.
In section 13(1) of that Act (ranks that shall be prescribed for other police forces), after “ranks of” there shall be inserted “ chief superintendent, ”.
In the provisions of that Act that are set out in subsection (4), before the word “superintendent”, wherever occurring, there shall be inserted “ chief ”.
Those provisions are—
section 50(3) (meaning of “senior officer” for the purposes of proceedings in which a member of a police force may be dismissed etc.);
F249. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
section 84(1) and (3) (representation at disciplinary and other proceedings).
In Schedule 6 to the 1996 Act (appeals to police appeal tribunals)—
in paragraph 10(a), before “superintendent” there shall be inserted “ chief ”; and
in paragraph 10(c)(i)—
after “of the rank of” there shall be inserted “ chief superintendent or ”; and
for “that rank” there shall be substituted “ one of those ranks ”.
96	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 5 – Police Organisation
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



The amendments of Schedule 6 to that Act by virtue of this section shall not affect any appeal brought by a member of a police force under section 85 of that Act before the coming into force of this section.


Police pensions etc.

Pensions for members of NCIS and NCS
In section 7(2) of the Police Pensions Act 1976 (c. 35) (payment of pensions and contributions into Consolidated Fund or out of moneys provided by Parliament), before paragraph (d) there shall be inserted—
“(ca) the Director General of the National Criminal Intelligence Service; (cb)  the Director General of the National Crime Squad;
(cc) a police member of the National Criminal Intelligence Service appointed under subsection (1)(b) of section 9 of the Police Act 1997 (c. 50) by virtue of subsection (2)(a) of that section;
(cd) a police member of the National Crime Squad appointed under subsection (1)(b) of section 55 of the Police Act 1997 by virtue of subsection (2)(a) of that section;”.
In section 11(1) of that Act (meaning of membership of police force or service in a police force), before paragraph (c) there shall be inserted—
“(ba) service as the Director General of the National Criminal Intelligence Service;
(bb)  service as the Director General of the National Crime Squad;
(bc) service as a police member of the National Criminal Intelligence Service appointed under subsection (1)(b) of section 9 of the Police Act 1997 by virtue of subsection (2)(a) of that section;
(bd) service as a police member of the National Crime Squad appointed under subsection (1)(b) of section 55 of the Police Act 1997 by virtue of subsection (2)(a) of that section;”.
In section 11(2) of that Act (meaning of “police authority”), for paragraphs (c) and (d) (service for which the service Authorities for the NCIS and NCS are treated as police authorities) there shall be substituted—
“(c) in relation to any such service as is mentioned in subsection (ba) or (bc) above or any service of the kind described in section 97(1)(ca) of the Police Act 1996 (c. 16) or section 38A(1)(ba) of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 (c. 77), it means the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service;
(d) in relation to any such service as is mentioned in subsection (bb) or (bd) above or any service of the kind described in section 97(1)(cb) of the Police Act 1996, it means the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad;”.
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	97
Part 5 – Police Organisation
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


In section 11(3)(b) of that Act (meaning of “police force”), after “(ab),” there shall be inserted “ (ba), (bb), (bc), (bd) ”.

Pensions for ACPO staff
The persons to whom section 1 of the Superannuation Act 1972 (c. 11) (“the 1972 Act”) applies (persons to or in respect of whom benefits may be provided by schemes under that Act) shall include persons who at any time after the coming into force of this section are serving in employment with the Association of Chief Police Officers of England, Wales and Northern Ireland; and, accordingly, in Schedule 1 to that Act (kinds of employment to which that Act applies), in the entries under the heading “Other bodies”, there shall be inserted, at the appropriate place—
“The Association of Chief Police Officers of England, Wales and Northern Ireland”.
Section 1 of the 1972 Act shall also apply to persons who at any time before the coming into force of this section have ceased to serve with the Association of Chief Police Officers of England, Wales and Northern Ireland.
The Association of Chief Police Officers of England, Wales and Northern Ireland shall pay to the Minister for the Civil Service, at such times as he may direct, such sums as he may determine in respect of any increase attributable to this section in the sums payable under the 1972 Act out of money provided by Parliament.

Minor and consequential amendments

Amendments relating to NCIS and NCS
Schedule 6 to this Act (which makes minor and consequential amendments relating to this Part) shall have effect.
In relation to any time before the coming into force of section 2(3) of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 2000 (c. 32), the reference to the Northern Ireland Policing Board in Schedule 2A to the 1997 Act (inserted by Schedule 6 to this Act) shall be construed as a reference to the Police Authority for Northern Ireland.

98	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 6 – Miscellaneous and supplemental
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Part 6

Miscellaneous and supplemental

Remands and committals

Requirement to give reasons for granting or continuing bail
After section 5(2) of the Bail Act 1976 (c. 63) (supplementary provisions about decisions on bail) there shall be inserted—
“(2A) Where a magistrates’ court or the Crown Court grants bail in criminal proceedings to a person to whom section 4 of this Act applies after hearing representations from the prosecutor in favour of withholding bail, then the court shall give reasons for granting bail.
(2B) A court which is by virtue of subsection (2A) above required to give reasons for its decision shall include a note of those reasons in the record of its decision and, if requested to do so by the prosecutor, shall cause the prosecutor to be given a copy of the record of the decision as soon as practicable after the record is made.”
After section 5A(1) of that Act (supplementary provisions in cases of police bail) there shall be inserted—
“(1A) Subsections (2A) and (2B) shall be omitted.”
After section 5B(8) of that Act (reconsideration of decisions granting bail) there shall be inserted—
“(8A) Where the court, on a reconsideration under this section, refuses to withhold bail from a relevant person after hearing representations from the prosecutor in favour of withholding bail, then the court shall give reasons for refusing to withhold bail.
(8B) In subsection (8A) above, “relevant person” means a person to whom section 4(1) (and Schedule 1) of this Act is applicable in accordance with subsection (4) above.
(8C) A court which is by virtue of subsection (8A) above required to give reasons for its decision shall include a note of those reasons in any record of its decision and, if requested to do so by the prosecutor, shall cause the prosecutor to be given a copy of any such record as soon as practicable after the record is made.”
In Part 1 of Schedule 1 to that Act, paragraph 9A (court to give reasons for granting bail in certain homicide and rape cases) shall be omitted.

F250130 Remands and committals to secure accommodation etc
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	99
Part 6 – Miscellaneous and supplemental
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




131	Monitoring of compliance with bail conditions
In section 3 of the Bail Act 1976 (c. 63) (general provisions), after subsection (6) there shall be inserted—
“(6ZAA) Subject to section 3AA below, if he is a child or young person he may be required to comply with requirements imposed for the purpose of securing the electronic monitoring of his compliance with any other requirement imposed on him as a condition of bail.”
After that section there shall be inserted—

“3AA Electronic monitoring of compliance with bail conditions
A court shall not impose on a child or young person a requirement under section 3(6ZAA) above (an “electronic monitoring requirement”) unless each of the following conditions is satisfied.
The first condition is that the child or young person has attained the age of twelve years.
The second condition is that—
the child or young person is charged with or has been convicted of a violent or sexual offence, or an offence punishable in the case of an adult with imprisonment for a term of fourteen years or more; or
he is charged with or has been convicted of one or more imprisonable offences which, together with any other imprisonable offences of which he has been convicted in any proceedings—
amount, or
would, if he were convicted of the offences with which he is charged, amount,
to a recent history of repeatedly committing imprisonable offences while remanded on bail or to local authority accommodation.
The third condition is that the court—
has been notified by the Secretary of State that electronic monitoring arrangements are available in each petty sessions area which is a relevant area; and
is satisfied that the necessary provision can be made under those arrangements.
The fourth condition is that a youth offending team has informed the court that in its opinion the imposition of such a requirement will be suitable in the case of the child or young person.
Where a court imposes an electronic monitoring requirement, the requirement shall include provision for making a person responsible for the monitoring;
100	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 6 – Miscellaneous and supplemental
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



and a person who is made so responsible shall be of a description specified in an order made by the Secretary of State.
The Secretary of State may make rules for regulating—
the electronic monitoring of compliance with requirements imposed on a child or young person as a condition of bail; and
without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (a) above, the functions of persons made responsible for securing the electronic monitoring of compliance with such requirements.
Rules under this section may make different provision for different cases.
Any power of the Secretary of State to make an order or rules under this section shall be exercisable by statutory instrument.
A statutory instrument containing rules made under this section shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
In this section “local authority accommodation” has the same meaning as in the Children and Young Persons Act 1969 (c. 54).
For the purposes of this section a petty sessions area is a relevant area in relation to a proposed electronic monitoring requirement if the court considers that it will not be practicable to secure the electronic monitoring in question unless electronic monitoring arrangements are available in that area.”
In subsection (7) of that section (cases where parent or guardian may be required to secure compliance with requirements), after “(6)” there shall be inserted “ , (6ZAA) ”.
In section 3A(3) of that Act (which modifies section 3 of that Act in its application to bail granted by a custody officer), after “subsections” there shall be inserted “ (6ZAA), ”.

F251132 Monitoring of compliance with conditions of non-secure remand
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


F252133 Arrangements for detention in secure training centres
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) Part 6 – Miscellaneous and supplemental
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
101
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Criminal records

Registration for criminal records purposes
After section 120 of the 1997 Act there shall be inserted—

“120A Refusal and cancellation of registration
The Secretary of State may refuse to include a person in the register maintained for the purposes of this Part if it appears to him that the registration of that person is likely to make it possible for information to become available to an individual who, in the Secretary of State’s opinion, is not a suitable person to have access to that information.
The Secretary of State may remove a person from the register if it appears to the Secretary of State—
that the registration of that person is likely to make it possible for information to become available to an individual who, in the Secretary of State’s opinion, is not a suitable person to have access to that information; or
that the registration of that person has resulted in information becoming known to such an individual.
In determining for the purposes of this section whether an individual is a suitable person to have access to any information, the Secretary of State may have regard, in particular, to—
any information relating to that person which concerns a relevant matter;
whether that person is included in any list mentioned in section 113(3A) or (3C); and
any information provided to the Secretary of State under subsection (4).
It shall be the duty of the chief officer of any police force to comply, as soon as practicable after receiving it, with any request by the Secretary of State to provide the Secretary of State with information which—
is available to the chief officer;
relates to—
an applicant for registration;
a registered person; or
an individual who is likely to have access to information in consequence of the countersigning of applications by a particular applicant for registration or by a particular registered person;
and
concerns a matter which the Secretary of State has notified to the chief officer to be a matter which, in the opinion of the Secretary of State, is relevant to the determination of the suitability of individuals for having access to the information that may be provided in consequence of the countersigning of applications under this Part.
In this section “relevant matter” has the same meaning as in section 113.”
102	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 6 – Miscellaneous and supplemental
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



In section 119 of that Act (sources of information)—
in subsections (1) and (4) (supply of information to the Secretary of State for the purposes of applications under Part V), for “for the purposes of an application under this Part” there shall be substituted “for the purpose of enabling him to carry out his functions under this Part in relation to—
any application for a certificate or for registration; or
the determination of whether a person should continue to be a registered person.”;
after subsection (1) there shall be inserted—
“(1A) Any person who keeps a list mentioned in section 113(3A) or (3C) above shall make the contents of that list available to the Secretary of State for the purpose of enabling him to carry out his functions under this Part in relation to—
any application for a certificate or for registration; or
the determination of whether a person should continue to be a registered person.”
and
in subsection (3) (payment for information provided under subsection (2)), for “subsection (2)” there shall be substituted “ section 120A(4) or subsection (2) of this section ”.
[F253In section 120(2) of that Act (duty to grant registration), after “Subject to” there shall be inserted “ section 120A and ”.]
[F254In section 120(3) of that Act (regulations about registration), after paragraph (a) there shall be inserted—
“(aa)  the nomination, in the case of a body corporate or unincorporate, of the individuals authorised to act for the body in relation to the countersigning of applications under this Part;
(ab) the refusal by the Secretary of State, on such grounds as may be specified in or determined under the regulations, to accept or to continue to accept the nomination of a person as so authorised;”.]


Supplemental

Ministerial expenditure etc
There shall be paid out of money provided by Parliament—
any expenditure incurred by the Secretary of State for or in connection with the carrying out of his functions under this Act; and
any increase attributable to this Act in the sums which are payable out of money so provided under any other Act.
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) Part 6 – Miscellaneous and supplemental
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
103
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


General interpretation
In this Act—
“the 1984 Act” means the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60); “the 1996 Act” means the Police Act 1996 (c. 16); and
“the 1997 Act” means the Police Act 1997 (c. 50).

Repeals
The enactments and instruments mentioned in Schedule 7 (which include spent provisions) are hereby repealed or (as the case may be) revoked to the extent specified in the third column of that Schedule.


Short title, commencement and extent
This Act may be cited as the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001.
The provisions of this Act, other than this section and sections 42 and 43, 81 to 85, 109, 116(7) and 119(7), shall come into force on such day as the Secretary of State may by order made by statutory instrument appoint; and different days may be appointed under this subsection for different purposes.
An order under subsection (2) may contain such savings as the Secretary of State thinks fit.
Section 85 comes into force at the end of the period of two months beginning with the day on which this Act is passed.
Subject to subsections (6) to (12), this Act extends to England and Wales only.
The following provisions of this Act extend to the United Kingdom—
sections 33 to 38;
Part 2;
section 86(1) and (2);
F255. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
section 127; and
section 136 and this section.
F256(7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Section 126 extends to Great Britain only.
104	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
Part 6 – Miscellaneous and supplemental
Chapter 3 – Other provisions for combatting crime and disorder
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Sections 29, 39 to 41, 72, 75, 84 and 134 extend to England and Wales and Northern Ireland only.
Section 83 extends to Northern Ireland only.
Section 86(3) has the same extent as section 27 of the Petty Sessions (Ireland) Act 1851 (c. 93).
An amendment, repeal or revocation contained in Schedule 4, 6 or 7 has the same extent as the enactment or instrument to which it relates.

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
105
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes







SCHEDULES 


SCHEDULE 1	Sections 50, 51 & 55

Powers of seizure


Part 1

Powers to which section 50 applies

Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60)
Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of Part 2 or 3 of the 1984 Act (police powers of entry, search and seizure).

Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989 1341 (N.I. 12))
Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of Parts 3 and 4 of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (police powers of entry, search and seizure).

F257...
F257	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Children and Young Persons (Harmful Publications) Act 1955 (c. 28)
The power of seizure conferred by section 3(1) of the Children and Young Persons (Harmful Publications) Act 1955 (seizure of copies of work to which that Act applies etc.).

Obscene Publications Act 1959 (c. 66)
Each of the powers of seizure conferred by section 3(1) and (2) of the Obscene Publications Act 1959 (power to search for and seize obscene materials and documents relating to a connected business).

Betting, Gaming and Lotteries Act 1963 (c. 2)
F258. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
106	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Licensing Act 1964 (c. 26)
F259. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Firearms Act 1968 (c. 27)
The power of seizure conferred by section 46 of the Firearms Act 1968 (seizure of firearms etc.).

Trade Descriptions Act 1968 (c. 29)
F2609	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Theft Act 1968 (c. 60)
The power of seizure conferred by section 26(3) of the Theft Act 1968 (seizure of goods suspected of being stolen).

Gaming Act 1968 (c. 65)
F261. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969 (c. 16 (N.I.))
The power of seizure conferred by section 25(3) of the Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969 (seizure of goods suspected of being stolen).
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
107
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Taxes Management Act 1970 (c. 9)
F262. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (c. 38)
Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of section 23(2) and (3) of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (power to search for and seize controlled drugs and related documents).

Immigration Act 1971 (c. 77)
Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of sections 28D(3), 28E(5) and 28F(6) of the Immigration Act 1971 (seizure of evidence of offences under that Act).

Fair Trading Act 1973 (c. 41)
F26316	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Biological Weapons Act 1974 (c. 6)
17	Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of section 4(1)(b), (c) and
of the Biological Weapons Act 1974 (seizures under a warrant).

Prices Act 1974 (c. 24)
F26418	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F26518A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
108	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Consumer Credit Act 1974 (c. 39)
F26619	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Lotteries and Amusements Act 1976 (c. 32)
F267. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Protection of Children Act 1978 (c. 37)
The power of seizure conferred by section 4(2) of the Protection of Children Act 1978 (seizure of indecent photographs or pseudo-photographs of children).

Protection of Children (Northern Ireland) Order 1978 (S.I. 1978 1047 (N.I. 17))
The power of seizure conferred by Article 4(1) of the Protection of Children (Northern Ireland) Order 1978 (seizure of indecent photographs or pseudo- photographs of children).

Customs and Excise Management Act 1979 (c. 2)
The power of seizure conferred by section 118C(4) of the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979 (seizure of evidence of fraud offences).

Estate Agents Act 1979 (c. 38)
F26824   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
109
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Indecent Displays (Control) Act 1981 (c. 42)
The power of seizure conferred by section 2(3) of the Indecent Displays (Control) Act 1981 (seizure of indecent matter believed to have been used in the commission of an offence under that Act).

Forgery and Counterfeiting Act 1981 (c. 45)
Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of sections 7(1) and 24(1) of the Forgery and Counterfeiting Act 1981 (seizure of forgeries and counterfeits and of things used for making them etc.).

Betting and Gaming Duties Act 1981 (c. 63)
F26927	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

28	F270. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

29	F271. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Firearms (Northern Ireland) Order 2004 (S.I. 2004) (N.I. ))
[F27230	The power of seizure conferred by Article 52 of the Firearms (Northern Ireland) Order 2004 (seizure of firearms, etc.).]


Weights and Measures (Northern Ireland) Order 1981 (S.I. 1981 231 (N.I. 10))
31	[F273The power of seizure conferred by paragraph 4 of Schedule 9 to the Weights and Measures (Northern Ireland) Order 1981.]
110	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



F27432	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Dogs (Northern Ireland) Order 1983 (S.I. 1983 764 (N.I. 8))
The power of seizure conferred by Article 25C(2) of the Dogs (Northern Ireland) Order 1983 (seizure of evidence of offences).

Video Recordings Act 1984 (c. 39)
The power of seizure conferred by section 17(2) of the Video Recordings Act 1984 (seizure of evidence of offences under that Act).

Companies Act 1985 (c. 6)
The power of seizure conferred by section 448(3) of the Companies Act 1985 (seizure of documents which have not been produced in compliance with a requirement etc.).

Weights and Measures Act 1985 (c. 72)
F27536	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

37	F276. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Betting, Gaming, Lotteries and Amusements (Northern Ireland) Order 1985 (S.I. 1985 1204 (N.I. 11))
38	The power of seizure conferred by Article 180(4) of the Betting, Gaming, Lotteries and Amusements (Northern Ireland) Order 1985 (seizure of evidence of offences under that Order).
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
111
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Protection of Military Remains Act 1986 (c. 35)
39	The power of seizure conferred by section 6(3) of the Protection of Military Remains Act 1986 (seizure of evidence of offences under that Act etc.)
F27740	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Greater London Council (General Powers) Act 1986 (c. iv)
41	Any power of seizure conferred by virtue of section 12 of the Greater London Council (General Powers) Act 1986 (seizure of items which may be subject to forfeiture).

Companies (Northern Ireland) Order 1986 (S.I. 1986 1032 (N.I. 6))
F27842	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F27943	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Criminal Justice Act 1987 (c. 38)
44	The power of seizure conferred by section 2(5) of the Criminal Justice Act 1987 (seizure of documents for the purposes of an investigation under section 1 of that Act).

Consumer Protection Act 1987 (c. 43)
45	Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of section [F28029(4)] of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 (seizure for the purposes of ascertaining whether safety provisions have been contravened etc.).

112	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Consumer Protection (Northern Ireland) Order 1987 (S.I. 1987 2049 (N.I. 20))
F28146	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Criminal Justice Act 1988 (c. 33)
47	F282. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 (c. 48)
[F28348 The powers of seizure conferred by sections 109(4), 200(3A) and 297B(4) of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 (seizure of evidence relating to offences concerning infringing copies, illicit recordings and unauthorised decoders).]

F284. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Food Safety Act 1990 (c. 16)
The power of seizure conferred by section 32(6) of the Food Safety Act 1990 (seizure of evidence for the purposes of proceedings under that Act).

Computer Misuse Act 1990 (c. 18)
The power of seizure conferred by section 14(4) of the Computer Misuse Act 1990 (seizure of evidence of offences under that Act).

Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990 (c. 37)
[F28552	Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of paragraph 7(1) and (2) of Schedule 3B to the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990.]
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
113
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Property Misdescriptions Act 1991 (c. 29)
F28653	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Dangerous Dogs Act 1991 (c. 65)
The power of seizure conferred by section 5(2) of the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991 (seizure of evidence of offences under that Act).

Food Safety (Northern Ireland) Order 1991 (S.I. 1991 762 (N.I. 7))
The power of seizure conferred by Article 33(7) of the Food Safety (Northern Ireland) Order 1991 (seizure of evidence of offences under that Order).

Timeshare Act 1992 (c. 35)
F28756	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Charities Act 2011
[F28856A The power of seizure conferred by section 48(3) of the Charities Act 2011 (seizure of material for the purposes of an inquiry under section 46 of that Act).]


Finance Act 1994 (c. 9)
F289. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
114	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Value Added Tax Act 1994 (c. 23)
F290. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Trade Marks Act 1994 (c. 26)
[F29158A The power of seizure conferred by section 92A(4) of the Trade Marks Act 1994 (seizure of evidence relating to offences concerning unauthorised use of a trade mark, etc. in relation to goods).]


Drug Trafficking Act 1994 (c. 37)
The power of seizure conferred by section 56(5) of the Drug Trafficking Act 1994 (seizure of material likely to be of substantial value to an investigation into drug trafficking).

Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995 (c. 39)
[F29259A The power of seizure conferred by section 23E(3) of the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995 (seizure of evidence of Revenue and Customs offences).]


Chemical Weapons Act 1996 (c. 6)
Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of section 29(2)(c), (d) and (e) of the Chemical Weapons Act 1996 (seizure of evidence of offences under that Act).
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
115
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Finance Act 1996 (c. 8)
F293. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Proceeds of Crime (Northern Ireland) Order 1996 (S.I. 1996 1299 (N.I. 9))
The power of seizure conferred by Article 51(5) of the Proceeds of Crime (Northern Ireland) Order 1996 (seizure of material relevant to investigation).

Knives Act 1997 (c. 21)
The power of seizure conferred by section 5(2) of the Knives Act 1997 (seizure of publications consisting of or containing prohibited material).

Protection from Harassment Act 1997
[F29463A The power of seizure conferred by section 2B(2) of the Protection from Harassment Act 1997 (seizure of material relevant to stalking).]


Nuclear Explosions (Prohibitions and Inspections) Act 1998 (c. 7)
Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of section 10(2)(c), (d) and (e) of the Nuclear Explosions (Prohibitions and Inspections) Act 1998 (seizure of evidence of offences under that Act).

Data Protection Act 1998 (c. 29)
F29565   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Landmines Act 1998 (c. 33)
Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of section 18(3)(c), (d) and (e) of the Landmines Act 1998 (seizure of evidence of offences under that Act).
116	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Competition Act 1998 (c. 41)
Each of the powers of seizure conferred by [F296sections 28(2) and 28A(2)] of the Competition Act 1998 (seizure of documents or information).


Nuclear Safeguards Act 2000 (c. 5)
The power of seizure conferred by section 8(2) of the Nuclear Safeguards Act 2000 (seizure of evidence of offences under that Act etc.).

Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (c. 8)
[F29768A The power of seizure conferred by section 122D(3) of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (entry of premises under warrant).]

The power of seizure conferred by section 176(5) of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (seizure of documents or information not supplied in compliance with a requirement etc.).


Terrorism Act 2000 (c. 11)
[F29869A The power of seizure conferred by section 43(4B)(b) of the Terrorism Act 2000 (seizure on the occasion of a search of a vehicle in relation to a person suspected of being a terrorist).]

[F29869B The power of seizure conferred by section 43A(3) of the Terrorism Act 2000 (seizure on the occasion of a search of a vehicle suspected of being used for the purposes of terrorism).]
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
117
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


[F29969C The power of seizure conferred by section 43E(2) of the Terrorism Act 2000 (seizure on the occasion of a search necessary for purposes connected with protecting members of the public from a risk of terrorism).]

The power of seizure conferred by section 82(3) of the Terrorism Act 2000 (power of constable in Northern Ireland to seize items used or intended for use in the commission of certain offences).

Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of paragraphs 1, 3, 11, 15 and 19 of Schedule 5 to that Act (powers for use in terrorism investigations).

Finance Act 2000 (c. 17)
F300. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Freedom of Information Act 2000 (c. 36)
The power of seizure conferred by paragraph 1 of Schedule 3 to the Freedom of Information Act 2000.

International Criminal Court Act 2001 (c. 17)
[F30173A The power of seizure conferred by paragraph 9 of Schedule 5 to the International Criminal Court Act 2001 (seizure of evidence in connection with offences under that Act).]
118	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29)
[F30273A The power of seizure conferred by section 352(4) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (seizure of material likely to be of substantial value to certain investigations).]


Enterprise Act 2002
[F30373B The power of seizure conferred by section 194(2) of the Enterprise Act 2002 (seizure of documents for the purposes of an investigation under section 192(1) of that Act).]

F30473BA	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Crime (International Co-operation) Act 2003
[F30573C The power of seizure conferred by sections 17 and 22 of the Crime (International Co-operation) Act 2003 (seizure of evidence relevant to overseas investigation or offence).]


Extradition Act 2003 (c. 41)
[F30673D  The powers of seizure conferred by sections 156(5), 160(5), 161(4), 162(6) and
(7) and 164(6) and (7) of the Extradition Act 2003 (seizure in connection with
extradition).]
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
119
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Human Tissue Act 2004 (c. 30)
[F30773E Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of paragraph 5(1) (seizure of material relevant to licensing functions) and (2) (seizure of evidence of offences) of Schedule 5 to the Human Tissue Act 2004.]


Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005
[F30873F The power of seizure conferred by section 66 of the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (seizure of documents for purposes of investigation by DPP or other Investigating Authority).]


Gambling Act 2005
[F30973F	The powers conferred by section 317 of the Gambling Act 2005 (inspection powers).]


Weights and Measures (Packaged Goods) Regulations 2006 (S.I.2006/659)
F31073G	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

120	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




[F31173H	The power of seizure conferred by section 28 of the Terrorism Act 2006.]


Charities Act (Northern Ireland) 2008
[F31273H The power of seizure conferred by section 52(3) of the Charities Act (Northern Ireland) 2008 (seizure of material for the purposes of an inquiry under section 22 of that Act).]


Animal Welfare Act 2006
[F31373I	The power of seizure conferred by paragraph 10(2)(j) of Schedule 2 to the Animal Welfare Act 2006.]


[F315The Money Laundering, Terrorist Financing and Transfer of Funds (Information on the Payer) Regulations 2017]
[F31473J The power of seizure conferred by [F316regulation 70(7) of the Money Laundering, Terrorist Financing and Transfer of Funds (Information on the Payer) Regulations 2017] (entry to premises under warrant).]

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
121
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Business Protection from Misleading Marketing Regulations 2008
F31773J.	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .



F318...
F318.	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


The Transfer of Funds (Information on the Payer) Regulations 2007
F31973K	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 (c. 23)
[F32073L Each of the powers of seizure conferred by section 252(1) and (3) of the Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009.]


Cluster Munitions (Prohibitions) Act 2010 (c. 11)
[F32173M Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of section 22(2)(c), (e),
(f) and (g) of the Cluster Munitions (Prohibitions) Act 2010 (seizure of evidence of
offences under that Act).]

122	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Marine (Scotland) Act 2010 (asp 5)
[F32273M Each of the powers of seizure conferred by section 140(1) and (3) of the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010.]


Timeshare, Holiday Products, Resale and Exchange Contracts Regulations 2010
F32373N	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Weights and Measures (Packaged Goods) Regulations (Northern Ireland) 2011 (S.R. 2011 No. 331)
F32473O	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Consumer Rights Act 2015
[F32573P	Each of the powers of seizure conferred by paragraphs 27(1)(b), 28(1) and 29(1) of Schedule 5 to the Consumer Rights Act 2015.]


Cultural Property (Armed Conflicts) Act 2017
[F32673Q The power of seizure conferred by section 23 of the Cultural Property (Armed Conflicts) Act 2017 (seizure of property liable to forfeiture under section 19 of that Act).]

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
123
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Criminal Justice (European Investigation Order) Regulations 2017
F32773R	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Data Protection Act 2018
[F32873S	The power of seizure conferred by paragraphs 1 and 2 of Schedule 15 to the Data Protection Act 2018 (powers of entry and inspection).]


The Electricity and Gas (Market Integrity and Transparency) (Enforcement etc.) Regulations 2013 (S.I. 2013/1389)
[F32973S. The power of seizure conferred by regulation 16(4) of the Electricity and Gas (Market Integrity and Transparency) (Enforcement etc.) Regulations 2013 (entry to premises for purposes of investigation by Gas and Electricity Markets Authority).]


Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022
[F33073U Each of the powers of seizure conferred by section 55(9)(a) of, and paragraph 11(a) of Schedule 6 to, the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (seizure in connection with human remains or material relating to human remains).]


National Security Act 2023 (c. 32)
[F33173V Each of the powers of seizure conferred by paragrahs 2, 9 and 12 of Schedule 2 to the National Security Act 2023.]
124	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Online Safety Act 2023
[F33273V Each of the powers of seizure conferred by paragraph 7(f), (j) and (k) of Schedule 12 to the Online Safety Act 2023.]


Digital Markets, Competition and Consumers Act 2024
[F33373W Each of the powers of seizure conferred by section 75(2)(i) and (j) of the Digital Markets, Competition and Consumers Act 2024 (seizure of information for the purposes of a breach investigation).]



Part 2

Powers to which section 51 applies

Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60)
Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of Part 3 of the 1984 Act (police powers of search and seizure on arrest).

Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989 1341 (N.I. 12))
Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of Part 4 of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (police powers of seizure on arrest).

Firearms Act 1968 (c. 27)
The power of seizure conferred by section 46 of the Firearms Act 1968 (seizure of firearms etc.).
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
125
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (c. 38)
Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of section 23(2) and (3) of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (power to search for and seize controlled drugs and related documents).

Immigration Act 1971 (c. 77)
The power of seizure conferred by section 28G(7) of the Immigration Act 1971 (seizure of evidence of offences under that Act etc.).

Biological Weapons Act 1974 (c. 6)
Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of section 4(1)(b), (c) and
(d) of the Biological Weapons Act 1974 (seizures under a warrant).

Firearms (Northern Ireland) Order 2004 (S.I. 2004/ (N.I. ))
[F33480	The power of seizure conferred by Article 52 of the Firearms (Northern Ireland) Order 2004 (seizure of firearms, etc.).]


Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 (c. 33)
The power of seizure conferred by section 139(10) of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 (seizure of items found in searching persons arrested under certain cross-border powers).

Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995 (c. 39)
[F33581A The power of seizure conferred by section 23E(3) (as read with section 23E(5)(c)) of the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995 (seizure of evidence of Revenue and Customs offences).]


Terrorism Act 2000 (c. 11)
The power of seizure conferred by section 43(4) of the Terrorism Act 2000 (seizure on the occasion of a search of a suspected terrorist).
[F33682A The power of seizure conferred by section 43A(3) of the Terrorism Act 2000 (seizure on the occasion of a search of a vehicle suspected of being used for the purposes of terrorism).]
126	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



[F33782B The power of seizure conferred by section 43E(2) of the Terrorism Act 2000 (seizure on the occasion of a search necessary for purposes connected with protecting members of the public from a risk of terrorism).]

Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of paragraphs 1, 3, 11, 15 and 19 of Schedule 5 to the Terrorism Act 2000 (powers for use in terrorism investigations).

Extradition Act 2003 (c. 41)
[F33883A The powers of seizure conferred by section 163(6) and (7) of the Extradition Act 2003 (seizure in connection with extradition).]


National Security Act 2023 (c. 32)
[F33983B Each of the powers of seizure conferred by paragrahs 2, 9 and 12 of Schedule 2 to the National Security Act 2023.]



Part 3

Powers to which section 55 applies

Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60)
The power of seizure conferred by section 8(2) of the 1984 Act (police power, on exercise of search warrant, to seize property searched for).
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
127
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989 1341 (N.I. 12))
The power of seizure conferred by Article 10(2) of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (police power, on exercise of search warrant, to seize property searched for).

F340...
F340	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Children and Young Persons (Harmful Publications) Act 1955 (c. 28)
The power of seizure conferred by section 3(1) of the Children and Young Persons (Harmful Publications) Act 1955 (seizure of copies of work to which that Act applies etc.).

Obscene Publications Act 1959 (c. 66)
Each of the powers of seizure conferred by section 3(1) and (2) of the Obscene Publications Act 1959 (power to search for and seize obscene materials and documents relating to a connected business).

Betting, Gaming and Lotteries Act 1963 (c. 2)
F341. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F342. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Firearms Act 1968 (c. 27)
The power of seizure conferred by section 46 of the Firearms Act 1968 (seizure of firearms etc.).
128	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Theft Act 1968 (c. 60)
The power of seizure conferred by section 26(3) of the Theft Act 1968, (power to search for and seize goods suspected of being stolen).

Gaming Act 1968 (c. 65)
F343. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969 (c. 16 (N.I.))
The power of seizure conferred by section 25(3) of the Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969 (seizure of goods suspected of being stolen).

Immigration Act 1971 (c. 77)
The power of seizure conferred by section 28D(3) of the Immigration Act 1971 (seizure of evidence of offences under that Act).

Biological Weapons Act 1974 (c. 6)
Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of section 4(1)(b), (c) and
(d) of the Biological Weapons Act 1974 (seizures under a warrant).

Lotteries and Amusements Act 1976 (c. 32)
F344. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Protection of Children Act 1978 (c. 37)
The power of seizure conferred by section 4(2) of the Protection of Children Act 1978 (seizure of indecent photographs or pseudo-photographs of children).

Protection of Children (Northern Ireland) Order 1978 (S.I. 1978 1047 (N.I. 17))
The power of seizure conferred by Article 4(1) of the Protection of Children (Northern Ireland) Order 1978 (seizure of indecent photographs or pseudo- photographs of children).
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
129
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Indecent Displays (Control) Act 1981 (c. 42)
The power of seizure conferred by section 2(3) of the Indecent Displays (Control) Act 1981 (seizure of indecent matter believed to have been used in the commission of an offence under that Act).

Forgery and Counterfeiting Act 1981 (c. 45)
Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of sections 7(1) and 24(1) of the Forgery and Counterfeiting Act 1981 (seizure of forgeries and counterfeits and of things used for making them etc.).

Firearms (Northern Ireland) Order 2004 (S.I. 2004/ (N.I.))
[F345102	The power of seizure conferred by Article 52 of the Firearms (Northern Ireland) Order 2004 (seizure of firearms, etc.).]


Video Recordings Act 1984 (c. 39)
The power of seizure conferred by section 17(2) of the Video Recordings Act 1984 (seizure of evidence of offences under that Act).

Betting, Gaming, Lotteries and Amusements (Northern Ireland) Order 1985 (S.I. 1985 1204 (N.I. 11))
The power of seizure conferred by Article 180(4) of the Betting, Gaming, Lotteries and Amusements (Northern Ireland) Order 1985 (seizure of evidence of offences under that Order).

Criminal Justice Act 1988 (c. 33)
F346. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 (c. 48)
[F347106 The powers of seizure conferred by sections 109(4), 200(3A) and 297B(4) of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 (seizure of evidence relating to offences concerning infringing copies, illicit recordings and unauthorised decoders).]
130	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Computer Misuse Act 1990 (c. 18)
The power of seizure conferred by section 14(4) of the Computer Misuse Act 1990 (seizure of evidence of offences under that Act).

Trade Marks Act 1994 (c. 26)
[F348107A The power of seizure conferred by section 92A(4) of the Trade Marks Act 1994 (seizure of evidence relating to offences concerning unauthorised use of a trade mark, etc. in relation to goods).]


Drug Trafficking Act 1994 (c. 37)
The power of seizure conferred by section 56(5) of the Drug Trafficking Act 1994 (seizure of material likely to be of substantial value to an investigation into drug trafficking).

Terrorism Act 2000 (c. 11)
(1) Each of the powers of seizure conferred by the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 3 of Schedule 5 to the Terrorism Act 2000 (powers for use in terrorism investigations).
(2) Each of the powers of seizure conferred by paragraphs 15 and 19 of Schedule 5 to that Act, so far only as the power in question is conferred by reference to paragraph 1 of that Schedule.

Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (c. 29)
[F349110	The power of seizure conferred by section 352(4) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (seizure of material likely to be of substantial value to certain investigations).]

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 1 – Powers of seizure Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
131
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Licensing Act 2003
[F350[
F351111]
The power of seizure conferred by section 90 of the Licensing Act 2003 (seizure of documents relating to club).]



Gambling Act 2005
[F352112	The powers conferred by section 317 of the Gambling Act 2005 (inspection powers).]

[F353113	The power of seizure conferred by section 28 of the Terrorism Act 2006.]


National Security Act 2023 (c. 32)
[F354114(1) The power of seizure conferred by paragraph 2 of Schedule 2 to the National Security Act 2023.
(2) The power of seizure conferred by paragraph 12 of that Schedule, so far as conferred by reference to paragraph 2 of that Schedule.]

132	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 2 – Applications and minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




SCHEDULE 2	Section 70

Applications and minor and consequential amendments


Part 1

Application of enactments

Notice of tests
F3551	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2	Section 31 of the Fair Trading Act 1973 (c. 41) (notice of test) shall apply in relation to items seized under section 50 of this Act in reliance on the power of seizure conferred by section 29(1) of that Act as it applies in relation to items seized in pursuance of Part 2 of that Act.
3	Section 30(6) and (7) of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 (c. 43) (provision about the testing of seized goods) shall apply in relation to items seized under section 50 of this Act in reliance on the power of seizure conferred by section [F35629(4)] of that Act as it applies in relation to items seized under section [F35629(4)] of that Act.

F3574	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

[F3584A  Regulation 23(6) of the General Product Safety Regulations 2005 (provision about the testing of seized products) shall apply in relation to items seized under section 50
of this Act in reliance on the power of seizure conferred by regulation [F35922(4)] of those Regulations as it applies in relation to items seized under regulation [F36022(4)] of those Regulations.]

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 2 – Applications and minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
133
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F3614B	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F3624C.	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

[F3634D  Paragraph 39 of Schedule 5 to the Consumer Rights Act 2015 (notice of testing of goods) shall apply in relation to items seized under section 50 of this Act in reliance on the power of seizure conferred by paragraph 28(1) of that Schedule as it applies in relation to goods seized under that paragraph.


Access to seized items
4E	Subject to section 61 of this Act, paragraph 38 of Schedule 5 to the Consumer Rights Act 2015 (access to seized goods and documents) shall apply in relation to items seized under section 50 of this Act in reliance on the power of seizure conferred by paragraph 28(1) or 29(1) of that Schedule as it applies in relation to things seized under Part 4 of that Schedule.]


Access to seized items
F3645	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
134	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 2 – Applications and minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Compensation for seizure and detention
6	Section 32 of the Fair Trading Act 1973 (c. 41) (compensation for seizure and detention) shall apply in relation to the seizure of items under section 50 of this Act in reliance on the power of seizure conferred by section 29(1) of that Act, and the retention of those items, as it applies in relation to the seizure and detention of goods under section 29 of that Act.
F3657	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8	Section 34 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 (compensation for seizure and detention) shall apply in relation to the seizure of items under section 50 of this Act in reliance on the power of seizure conferred by section [F36629(4)] of that Act, and the retention of those items, as it applies in relation to the seizure and detention of goods under section [F36629(4)] of that Act.

F3679	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

[F3689A  Regulation 26 of the General Product Safety Regulations 2005 (compensation for seizure and detention) shall apply in relation to the seizure of items under section 50
of this Act in reliance on the power of seizure conferred by regulation [F36922(4)] of those Regulations, and the retention of [F370those items, as it applies to the seizure and detention of products under regulation 22(4) of those Regulations.]]

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 2 – Applications and minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
135
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F3719B	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F3729C	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

[F3739D  Paragraph 41 of Schedule 5 to the Consumer Rights Act 2015 (compensation for seizure and detention) shall apply in relation to the seizure of items under section 50 of this Act in reliance on the power of seizure conferred by paragraph 28(1) or 29(1) of that Schedule, and the retention of those items, as it applies in relation to the seizure and detention of goods under Part 4 of that Schedule.]


Forfeiture of seized items
(1) The provisions mentioned in sub-paragraph (2) (which are about the forfeiture etc. of items which have been seized) shall apply in relation to an item seized under section 50 as if the item had been seized under the power of seizure in reliance on which it was seized.
Those provisions are—
section 3(3) of the Obscene Publications Act 1959 (c. 66);
F374. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F374. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
sections 7(2) and 24(2) of the Forgery and Counterfeiting Act 1981 (c. 45).


Disclosure of information
Any provision which—
136	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 2 – Applications and minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




restricts the disclosure, or permits the disclosure only for limited purposes or in limited circumstances, of information obtained through the exercise of a power of seizure specified in Part 1 or 2 of Schedule 1, or
confers power to make provision which does either or both of those things,
shall apply in relation to information obtained under section 50 or 51 in reliance on the power in question as it applies in relation to information obtained through the exercise of that power.

Interpretation
For the purposes of this Part of this Schedule, an item is seized, or information is obtained, under section 50 or 51 in reliance on a power of seizure if the item is seized, or the information obtained, in exercise of so much of any power conferred by that section as is exercisable by reference to that power of seizure.

Part 2

Minor and consequential amendments
(1) In each of the provisions mentioned in sub-paragraph (2) (which confer powers to require the production of information contained in a computer in a visible and legible form)—
for “contained in a computer” there shall be substituted “ stored in any electronic form ”; and
after “in which it is visible and legible” there shall be inserted “ or from which it can readily be produced in a visible and legible form ”.
(2) Those provisions are—
sections 19(4) and 20(1) of the 1984 Act;
Articles 21(4) and 22(1) of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989 1341 (N.I. 12));
section 43(5)(aa) of the Gaming Act 1968 (c. 65);
F375. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
section 118D(4) of the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979 (c. 2);
paragraph 11(4) of Schedule 11 to the Value Added Tax Act 1994 (c. 23);
paragraph 4A(4) of Schedule 7 to the Finance Act 1994 (c. 9);
paragraph 7(4) of Schedule 5 to the Finance Act 1996 (c. 8);
paragraph 131(4) of Schedule 6 to the Finance Act 2000 (c. 17).

In paragraph 5 of Schedule 1 to each of the 1984 Act and the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989 1341 (N.I. 12)) (power to require the production of information contained in a computer in a visible and legible form)—
for “contained in a computer” there shall be substituted “ stored in any electronic form ”; and
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 2 – Applications and minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
137
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



in paragraph (a), after “in which it is visible and legible” there shall be inserted “ or from which it can readily be produced in a visible and legible form ”.
In section 46(3) of the Firearms Act 1968 (c. 27) (power to require the production of information kept by means of a computer in a visible and legible form)—
for “kept by means of a computer” there shall be substituted “ stored in any electronic form ”; and
after “in which it is visible and legible” there shall be inserted “ or from which it can readily be produced in a visible and legible form ”.
(1) In each of the provisions mentioned in sub-paragraph (2) (which confer power to require the production in legible form of information recorded otherwise than in legible form), after “information in legible form” there shall be inserted “ , or in a form from which it can readily be produced in visible and legible form ”.
Those provisions are—
F376(a)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F376(b)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F376(c)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F376(d)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F377(e)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(f)	the definition of “documents” in section 417(1) of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (c. 8).

F37817	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In section 32 of the Food Safety Act 1990 (c. 16) (powers of entry), in subsections
(5) and (6)(b), for “kept by means of a computer” there shall be substituted “ stored in any electronic form ”.
In Article 33 of the Food Safety (Northern Ireland) Order 1991 (S.I. 1991 762 (N.I. 7)) (powers of entry), in paragraphs (6) and (7)(b), for “kept by means of a computer” there shall be substituted “ stored in any electronic form ”.
F37920    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
138	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 2 – Applications and minor and consequential amendments
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



In sections 27(5)(e) and 28(2)(f) of the Competition Act 1998 (c. 41) (power to require the production of information held in a computer in a visible and legible form)—
for “held in a computer” there shall be substituted “ stored in any electronic form ”; and
after “in which it is visible and legible” there shall be inserted “ or from which it can readily be produced in a visible and legible form ”.
In section 8(2)(c) of the Nuclear Safeguards Act 2000 (c. 5) (power to require the production of information which is held in electronic form in a form in which it can be read and copied), after “copy it” there shall be inserted “ , or from which it can readily be produced in a form in which he can read and copy it ”.
In section 2 of the Criminal Justice Act 1987 (c. 38) (investigation powers of the Director of the Serious Fraud Office), after subsection (8C) there shall be inserted—
“(8D) The references in subsections (8A) to (8C) above to evidence obtained by the Director include references to evidence obtained by him by virtue of the exercise by a constable, in the course of a search authorised by a warrant issued under subsection (4) above, of powers conferred by section 50 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001.”
In section 7 of the Criminal Justice (International Co-operation) Act 1990 (c. 5) (search etc. for material relevant to overseas investigation), after subsection (8) there shall be inserted—
“(8A) Subject to subsection (8B) below, the reference in subsection (4) above to evidence seized by a constable by virtue of this section shall be taken to include a reference to evidence seized by a constable by virtue of the exercise, in the course of a search authorised by a warrant issued by virtue of this section, of powers conferred by section 50 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001.
(8B) Nothing in subsection (8A) above requires any evidence to be furnished to the Secretary of State—
before it has been found, on the completion of any examination required to be made by arrangements under subsection (2) of section 53 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001, to be property which falls within subsection (3) of that section (property which may be retained after examination); or
at a time when it constitutes property in respect of which a person is required to ensure that arrangements such as are mentioned in section 61(1) of that Act (duty to secure) are in force.”
In section 8 of the Criminal Justice (International Co-operation) Act 1990 (which makes similar provision for Scotland) after subsection (6) there shall be added—
“(7) Subject to subsection (8) below, the reference in subsection (2) above to evidence seized by a constable by virtue of this section shall be taken to include a reference to evidence seized by a constable by virtue of the
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 3
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
139
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



exercise, in the course of a search authorised by a warrant issued by virtue of this section, of powers conferred by section 50 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001.
(8) Nothing in subsection (7) above requires any evidence to be furnished to the Lord Advocate—
before it has been found, on the completion of any examination required to be made by arrangements under subsection (2) of section 53 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001, to be property which falls within subsection (3) of that section (property which may be retained after examination); or
at a time when it constitutes property in respect of which a person is required to ensure that arrangements such as are mentioned in section 61(1) of that Act (duty to secure) are in force.”
Section 426 of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (c. 8) (consequential and supplementary provision) shall have effect as if the provisions referred to in subsection (2)(b) of that section included the provisions of this Part of this Act.
In paragraph 29(1)(a) of Schedule 5 to the Terrorism Act 2000 (c. 11) (conditions for grant of warrant), for “28” there shall be substituted “ 22 ”.


F380F380SCHEDULE 3


. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1) The Central Police Training and Development Authority shall consist of the members appointed by the Secretary of State; and the Secretary of State shall appoint one of the members to be the chairman of the Authority.
Before appointing the chairman the Secretary of State shall consult—
persons whom he considers to represent the interests of police authorities for areas in England and Wales; and
persons whom he considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police of police forces in England and Wales.
The members, apart from the chairman, shall at all times include—
at least two members whom the Secretary of State considers to be capable of representing the interests of police authorities for areas in England and Wales;
at least two members whom the Secretary of State considers to be capable of representing the interests of chief officers of police of police forces in England and Wales; and
at least one Crown Servant.
140	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 3
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




The total number of the members of the Authority shall not at any time be less than eleven.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a member of the Authority if he has not attained the age of twenty-one years.

(1) Subject to sub-paragraphs (2) and (3), a person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a member of the Authority, or for continuing to be such a member if—
a bankruptcy order has been made against him or his estate has been sequestrated or he has made a composition or arrangement with, or granted a trust deed for, his creditors;
he is subject to a disqualification order under the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986 (c. 46) or Part 2 of the Companies (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989 2404 (N.I. 18)), or to an order made under section 429(2)(b) of the Insolvency Act 1986 (c. 45) (failure to pay under county court administration order); or
within the period of five years before, or at any time on or after, the date of his appointment he has been convicted in any part of the British Islands of an offence in respect of which he was sentenced to imprisonment for a period of three months or more.
Where a person is disqualified under sub-paragraph (1)(a) by reason that a bankruptcy order has been made against him or his estate has been sequestrated, the disqualification shall cease to have effect—
in the case of the bankruptcy order being annulled or the sequestration of his estate being recalled or reduced, on the date of that event; and
in any other case, on his obtaining a discharge.
Where a person is disqualified under sub-paragraph (1)(a) by reason of his having made a composition or arrangement with, or granted a trust deed for, his creditors, the disqualification shall cease to have effect—
in the case of his paying his debts in full, on the date on which the payment is completed; and
in any other case, at the end of the period of five years beginning with the date on which the terms of the deed of composition or arrangement or trust deed are fulfilled.
For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1)(c)—
the date of a conviction shall be taken to be the ordinary date on which the period allowed for making an appeal or application expires or, if an appeal or application is made, the date on which the appeal or application is finally disposed of or abandoned or fails by reason of its non-prosecution;
a sentence of imprisonment for any term the whole or any part of which is suspended shall be taken to be a sentence of imprisonment for the whole term.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 3
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
141
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Subject to paragraphs 3(1) and 5 to 7 a person shall hold and vacate office as a member of the Authority in accordance with the terms of his appointment.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A person shall be appointed to hold office as a member of the Authority for—
a term of five years; or
such shorter term as the Secretary of State may determine in any particular case.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A person may at any time resign his office as chairman or as a member of the Authority by notice in writing to the Secretary of State.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Secretary of State may remove a person from office as the chairman or as a member the Authority if he is satisfied that—
that person has been absent from meetings of the Authority for a period exceeding four consecutive months without the consent of the Authority;
that person has been convicted of a criminal offence (but is not disqualified for continuing to be a member under paragraph 3);
that person is unable or unfit to carry out his functions as a member; or
that person has failed to comply with the terms of his appointment.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A person who ceases to be a member, or to be the chairman, of the Authority otherwise than by virtue of paragraph 7 may (if otherwise eligible) be re-appointed.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1) The Authority shall pay to its members such remuneration and allowances as the Secretary of State may determine.
The Authority shall, as regards any of its members or former members in whose case the Secretary of State may so determine, pay or make payments in respect of such pension or gratuity as the Secretary of State may determine.
If—
a person ceases to be a member or ceases to be the chairman of the Authority, and
it appears to the Secretary of State that there are special circumstances which make it right that he should receive compensation,
the Secretary of State may direct the Authority to make a payment of such amount as he may determine.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1) The Authority shall have—
142	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 3
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




a chief executive, with responsibility to the Authority for the carrying out of the Authority’s functions and the management of their staff; and
subject to the approval of the Secretary of State as to numbers and terms and conditions of service, such other staff as the Authority may appoint.
The chief executive shall be appointed by the Authority, but no appointment of a chief executive may be made except with the consent of the Secretary of State.
References in this Schedule to the staff of the Authority include references to their chief executive.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1) The Authority—
shall pay to members of their staff such remuneration and allowances, and
may make such payments in respect of remuneration and allowances paid by others to persons engaged with the Authority as members of their staff on periods of temporary service,
as the Authority may, with the consent of the Secretary of State, determine.
The Authority shall—
pay, or make payments in respect of, such pensions or gratuities to or in respect of any persons who are, or have been, members of their staff as the Authority may, with the consent of the Secretary of State, determine; and
establish and maintain such schemes (whether contributory or not) as they may determine, with the consent of the Secretary of State, for the payment of pensions or gratuities to or in respect of any such persons.
References in this paragraph to pensions and gratuities include references to pensions or gratuities by way of compensation to or in respect of members of the staff of the Authority who suffer loss of employment or loss or diminution of emoluments.
If any person—
after ceasing to be employed by the Authority becomes or continues to be one of the Authority’s members, and
was, by reference to his employment, a participant in a pension scheme maintained by the Authority,
the Authority may, with the consent of the Secretary of State, make provision for that person to continue to participate in that scheme, on such terms and conditions as they may with the consent of the Secretary of State determine, as if his service as a member of the Authority were service as a member of their staff.
Any provision made by virtue of sub-paragraph (4) is without prejudice to paragraph 9.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1) Employment as a member of staff of the Authority shall be included among the kinds of employment to which a scheme under section 1 of the Superannuation Act 1972 (c. 11) can apply.
Where a person is, by reference to employment as a member of the Authority’s staff, a participant in a scheme under section 1 of that Act and becomes a member of
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 3
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
143
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



the Authority, the Minister for the Civil Service may determine that his service as a member of the Authority shall be treated for the purposes of the scheme as service as a member of staff (whether or not any benefits are payable to or in respect of him by virtue of paragraph 9).

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1) A person holding the office of constable immediately before his appointment as the chief executive of the Authority—
continues to hold that office while he is the chief executive; and
as the chief executive, shall hold that office with the rank of chief constable.
(2) A person holding the office of constable immediately before his appointment as a member of staff of the Authority (other than the chief executive) continues to hold that office while he is a member of that staff.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1) The Authority shall be liable in respect of any unlawful conduct of seconded constables in the carrying out, or purported carrying out, of their functions as members of the staff of the Authority in like manner as an employer is liable in respect of any unlawful conduct of his employees in the course of their employment; and accordingly the Authority shall , in the case of a tort, be treated for all purposes as a joint tortfeasor.
In this paragraph “seconded constables” means constables serving as members of the staff of the Authority without being employees of the Authority.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1) The Authority may establish committees.
Any committee established under sub-paragraph (1) may establish one or more sub- committees.
A person who is not a member of the Authority may be appointed to a committee or sub-committee of the Authority.
The Authority may pay to members of their committees or sub-committees who are neither members nor members of staff of the Authority such remuneration and allowances as the Secretary of State may determine.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1) The Authority may, to such extent as they may determine, delegate any of their functions to any committee of the Authority.
Any such committee may, to such extent as it may determine, delegate any function conferred on it to any of its sub-committees.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1) Subject to the following provisions of this paragraph, the Authority may regulate—
their own procedure (including quorum); and
144	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 3
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




the procedure (including quorum) of their committees and sub-committees.
(2) The Authority shall make provision for a quorum for meetings of their committees or sub-committees to include at least one member or member of staff of the Authority.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The acts and proceedings of any person appointed to be a member, or to be chairman, of the Authority and acting in that office shall, notwithstanding his disqualification or want of qualification, be as valid and effectual as if he had been qualified.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The proceedings of the Authority shall not be invalidated by a vacancy in the membership of the Authority or in the office of chairman or by any defect in the appointment of a person as a member or as chairman.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The application of the seal of the Authority shall be authenticated by the signature—
of any member of the Authority; or
of any other person who has been authorised by the Authority (whether generally or specially) for that purpose.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A document purporting to be—
duly executed by the Authority under their seal, or
signed on their behalf,
shall be received in evidence and shall, unless the contrary is proved, be taken to be so executed or signed.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Authority shall not be regarded as the servant or agent of the Crown or as enjoying any status, immunity or privilege of the Crown; and the property of the Authority shall not be regarded as property of, or property held on behalf of, the Crown.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Secretary of State may make payments to the Authority out of money provided by Parliament.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1) The Authority may impose such charges as they consider appropriate in connection with the carrying out of any of their functions.
The Authority shall pay to the Secretary of State all sums received by them (otherwise than under paragraph 23) in the course of, or in connection with, the carrying out of their functions.
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 4 – Consequential amendments relating to police training Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
145
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Sub-paragraph (2) shall not apply where the Secretary of State so directs.
Any sums received by the Secretary of State under sub-paragraph (2) shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1) Subject to sub-paragraph (3), the Authority may, in the course of or in connection with the carrying out of any of their functions, accept gifts or loans of money or other property, on such terms (if any) as appear to the Authority to be appropriate.
The terms on which gifts or loans are accepted under sub-paragraph (1) may include terms providing for the commercial sponsorship of any activity of the Authority.
The Authority shall not borrow money except with the consent of the Secretary of State.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1) The Authority shall—
keep proper accounts and proper records in relation to the accounts; and
prepare a statement of accounts in respect of each financial year.
The statement of accounts shall be in such form, and shall contain such information, as the Secretary of State may direct.
The Authority shall, within such period after the end of each financial year as the Secretary of State may direct, send copies of the statement of accounts relating to that year to the Secretary of State and to the Comptroller and Auditor General.
The Comptroller and Auditor General shall—
examine, certify and report on every statement of accounts sent to him by the Authority under this paragraph; and
lay copies of each such statement and of his report on it before each House of Parliament.


SCHEDULE 4	Section 102

Consequential amendments relating to police training

The Public Records Act 1958 (c. 51)
In Schedule 1 to the Public Records Act 1958 (definition of public records), in Part
of the Table at the end of paragraph 3 there shall be inserted, at the appropriate place—
“Central Police Training and Development Authority”.

The Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967 (c. 13)
146	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 4 – Consequential amendments relating to police training
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




The Superannuation Act 1972 (c. 11)
F384. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


The House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975 (c. 24)
F385. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


The Northern Ireland Assembly Disqualification Act 1975 (c. 25)
F386. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Amendments of Police Pensions Act 1976 (c. 35)
F387. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


The Police Act 1996 (c. 16)
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 5
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
147
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



The Freedom of Information Act 2000 (c. 36)
8	F389. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .



F390F390SCHEDULE 5
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .




SCHEDULE 6	Section 128

Minor and consequential amendments relating to NCIS and NCS


Part I

THE 1997 ACT
F391. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F392. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

148	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 6 – Minor and consequential amendments relating to NCIS and NCS
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




F393. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F394. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F395. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F396. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F397. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F398. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F399. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 6 – Minor and consequential amendments relating to NCIS and NCS Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
149
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



F400. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F401. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F402. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F403. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F404. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F405. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F406. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

150	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 6 – Minor and consequential amendments relating to NCIS and NCS
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




F407. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F408. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F409. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F410. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F411. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .



Part 2

Local government enactments relating to NCS Service Authority

Local Government Act 1972 (c. 70)
The Local Government Act 1972 shall be amended as follows.
In section 94 (disability of members of authorities for voting on account of interest in contracts, etc.), in subsection (5)(b) (receipts of certain allowances not to be treated as a pecuniary interest), the words “or paragraph 17 of Schedule 2 to the Police Act 1997” shall be omitted.
In section 98, the following shall be omitted—
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 6 – Minor and consequential amendments relating to NCIS and NCS Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
151
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



in subsection (1A) (application to joint authorities of provisions about members’ interests), the words “and the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”; and
subsection (1B) (powers to remove a disability resulting from members’ interests restricted to cases where transaction of business impeded).
In section 99 (meeting and proceedings of local authorities), the words “, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad” shall be omitted.
In section 100J (application to joint authorities etc. of provision relating to access to meetings and documents), the following shall be omitted—
subsection (1)(ea);
in subsection (3), the word “, (ea)”;
subsection (3A); and
in subsection (4), the words “or the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”.
In section 107 (application to police authorities of provisions relating to the discharge of functions by local authorities)—
in subsection (7), for “(a), (aa) and (b)” there shall be substituted “ (a) and
”; and
(b)	subsection (8A) shall be omitted.
In section 146A (application to police authorities of miscellaneous powers of local authorities)—
in subsection (1)—
for “subsections (1A) and (1AA)” there shall be substituted “ subsection (1A) ”; and
for “, the Metropolitan Police Authority and the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad” there shall be substituted “ and the Metropolitan Police Authority ”;
in subsection (1A), the words “nor the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad” shall be omitted; and
subsection (1AA) shall be omitted.
In section 223 (appearance of local authorities in legal proceedings), in subsection (2), for “, the Metropolitan Police Authority and the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad” there shall be substituted “ and the Metropolitan Police Authority ”.
In section 228 (inspection of documents), in subsection (7A), the words “or the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad” shall be omitted.
The words “and the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad” shall be omitted where they appear—
in section 229 (photographic copies of documents), in subsection (8);
in section 231 (service of notices on local authorities, etc.), in subsection (4);
in section 232 (public notices), in subsection (1A);
in section 233 (service of notices by local authorities), in subsection (11); and
in section 234 (authentication of documents), in subsection (4).
152	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 6 – Minor and consequential amendments relating to NCIS and NCS
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




In Schedule 12 (meetings and proceedings of local authorities), the following shall be omitted—
in paragraph 6A, the words “or of the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”;
in paragraph 6B—
in sub-paragraph (b), the words “or of the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad,”; and
sub-paragraph (c) and the word “and” immediately preceding it;
and
in paragraph 46, the words “and the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”.

Local Government Act 1974 (c. 7)
In section 25 of the Local Government Act 1974 (authorities subject to investigation by Commission for Local Administration), in subsection (1), paragraph (caa) shall be omitted.

Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1976 (c. 57)
In section 30 of the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1976 (power to forgo repayment of remuneration paid to deceased employees), in subsection (3), the words “, and a member of the National Crime Squad within section 55(1)(a) or
(b) of the Police Act 1997 shall be treated as employed by the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad,” shall be omitted.
In section 44 of that Act (interpretation), in subsection (1)(a) the words “, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad” shall be omitted.

Local Government, Planning and Land Act 1980 (c. 65)
In section 20 of the Local Government, Planning and Land Act 1980 (interpretation of provisions relating to direct labour organisations), in subsection (1)—
in paragraph (a)(i) of the definition of “local authority”, the words “, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad” shall be omitted; and
in paragraph (aa) of the definition the words “or the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad” shall be omitted.
In section 99 of that Act (directions to dispose of land), in subsection (4), paragraph (dd) shall be omitted.
In Schedule 16 to that Act (bodies to whom provisions of Part 10 relating to registration of land apply), paragraph 5D shall be omitted.

Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (c. 30)
In section 33 of the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (enforceability by local authorities of certain covenants relating to land), in subsection (9)(a), the words “, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad” shall be omitted.
In section 41 of that Act (lost and uncollected property), in subsection (13), in the definition of “local authority” paragraph (cb) shall be omitted.
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 6 – Minor and consequential amendments relating to NCIS and NCS Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
153
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Local Government Act 1986 (c. 10)
In section 6 of the Local Government Act 1986 (interpretation of provisions relating to publicity and promotion of homosexuality), in subsection (2)(a), the words “the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad,” shall be omitted.
In section 9 of that Act (interpretation of provisions relating to the transfer of mortgages), in subsection (1)(a), the words “the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad,” shall be omitted.

Local Government Act 1988 (c. 9)
In section 1 of the Local Government Act 1988 (defined authorities for provisions on competition), in subsection (1), paragraph (ea) shall be omitted.
In Schedule 2 to that Act, in the list of public authorities to which provisions on supply or works contracts apply, the entry for the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad shall be omitted.

Local Government Finance Act 1988 (c. 41)
The Local Government Finance Act 1988 shall be amended as follows.
In section 111, in subsection (2) (definition of “relevant authority” for the purposes of provisions regulating financial administration), paragraph (ea) (the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad) shall be omitted.
In section 112 (financial administration as to certain police and fire authorities), in subsection (2), paragraph (ab) shall be omitted.
In section 114 (functions of chief finance officer as regards reports), subsection (9) shall be omitted.

Local Government and Housing Act 1989 (c. 42)
The Local Government and Housing Act 1989 shall be amended as follows.
In section 21, in subsection (1) (definition of local authority for purposes of various provisions relating to their members, officers, staff and committees, etc.), in paragraph (g), for “, the Metropolitan Police Authority or the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad” there shall be substituted “ or the Metropolitan Police Authority ”.
In section 39, in subsection (1) (authorities to which provisions about revenue accounts and capital finance apply), paragraph (ja) (the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad) shall be omitted.
In section 67 (application of provisions relating to companies in which local authorities have interests), in subsection (3)(i), the words “or the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad” shall be omitted.
In section 155 (emergency assistance to local authorities), in subsection (4)—
F412. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
paragraph (eb) (National Crime Squad) shall be omitted.
154	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 6 – Minor and consequential amendments relating to NCIS and NCS
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



In section 157 (commutation of, and interest on, periodic payments of grants, etc.), subsection (6)(ga) shall be omitted.

Part 3

Miscellaneous other enactments

Public Records Act 1958 (c. 51)
F413. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967 (c. 13)
F414. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Employers’ Liability (Compulsory Insurance) Act 1969 (c. 57)
In section 3 of the Employers’ Liability (Compulsory Insurance) Act 1969 (employers exempted from insurance), in subsection (2)(b) for “, any police authority, the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service and the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad” there shall be substituted “ and any police authority ”.

Local Authorities (Goods and Services) Act 1970 (c. 39)
In section 1 of the Local Authorities (Goods and Services) Act 1970 (supply of goods and services by local authorities), in subsection (4), in the definition of “public body” the words “, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad, the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service” shall be omitted.
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 6 – Minor and consequential amendments relating to NCIS and NCS Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
155
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Employers’ Liability (Defective Equipment and Compulsory Insurance) (Northern Ireland) Order 1972 (N.I. 6)
In Article 7 of the Employers’ Liability (Defective Equipment and Compulsory Insurance) (Northern Ireland) Order 1972 (employers exempted from insurance), paragraph (ab) shall be omitted.

House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975 (c. 24)
F415. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Northern Ireland Assembly Disqualification Act 1975 (c. 25)
F416. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Rent (Agriculture) Act 1976 (c. 80)
In section 5 of the Rent (Agriculture) Act 1976 (no statutory tenancy where landlord’s interest belongs to the Crown etc), in subsection (3), in paragraph (baa), the words “, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad and the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service” shall be omitted.

Rent Act 1977 (c. 42)
In section 14 of the Rent Act 1977 (landlord’s interest belonging to local authority, etc), paragraph (caaa) shall be omitted.

Finance Act 1981 (c. 35)
In section 107 of the Finance Act 1981 (sale of houses at discount by local authorities etc), in subsection (3), paragraph (ka) shall be omitted.

Acquisition of Land Act 1981 (c. 67)
In section 17 of the Acquisition of Land Act 1981 (compulsory purchase of local authority and statutory undertakers’ land), in subsection (4), in the definition (for the purposes of subsection (3)) of “local authority”—
in paragraph (a), the words “, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad, the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service” shall be omitted, and
156	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 6 – Minor and consequential amendments relating to NCIS and NCS
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




in paragraph (b), the words “, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad or the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service” shall be omitted.

County Courts Act 1984 (c. 28)
In section 60 of the County Courts Act 1984 (right of audience for officer of local authority in proceedings brought by authority), in subsection (3), in the definition of “local authority” the words “, the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad” shall be omitted.

Housing Act 1985 (c. 51)
In section 4 of the Housing Act 1985 (interpretation), in paragraph (e), the words “, the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad” shall be omitted.

Housing Associations Act 1985 (c. 69)
In section 106 of the Housing Associations Act 1985 (minor definitions), in subsection (1), in the definition of “local authority” for the words from “, the Metropolitan Police Authority” to the end of the definition there shall be substituted “ and the Metropolitan Police Authority ”.

Landlord and Tenant Act 1985 (c. 70)
In section 38 of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1985 (minor definitions), in the definition of “local authority”, the words “, the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad” shall be omitted.

Landlord and Tenant Act 1987 (c. 31)
In section 58 of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1987, in subsection (1) (definition of “exempt landlord”), in paragraph (a), the words “, the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad” shall be omitted.

Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988 (c. 1)
In section 842A of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988 (meaning of “local authority” in the Tax Acts), in subsection (1)—
in paragraph (a) the words “or the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service or the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad” shall be omitted; and
in both paragraphs (b) and (c) the words “or the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service” shall be omitted.
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 6 – Minor and consequential amendments relating to NCIS and NCS Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
157
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Local Government Finance Act 1988 (c. 41)
In section 64, in subsection (7) (exclusion from Crown exemption of hereditaments of certain authorities), paragraphs (da) and (db) shall be omitted.
In section 65A (Crown property), in subsection (4)(b) for the words from “, a police authority” to the end there shall be substituted “ or by a police authority established under section 3 of the Police Act 1996. ”

Housing Act 1988 (c. 50)
F417. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (c. 8)
In section 252 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (procedure for making of orders relating to highways), in subsection (12), in the definition of “local authority” the words “, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad, the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service” shall be omitted.

Local Government Finance Act 1992 (c. 14)
In section 19 of the Local Government Finance Act 1992 (exclusion of Crown exemption in certain cases), in subsection (3), paragraphs (ca) and (cb) shall be omitted.

Police Act 1996 (c. 16)
F418. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Housing Grants, Construction and Regeneration Act 1996 (c. 53)
The Housing Grants, Construction and Regeneration Act 1996 shall be amended as follows.
In section 3 (persons ineligible for certain grants), in subsection (2)(g), the words “, the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service or the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad” shall be omitted.
F419. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
158	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 7 – Repeals and revocations
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes






SCHEDULE 7	Section 137

Repeals and revocations


Part 1

Provisions for combatting alcohol-related disorder

Short title and chapter	Extent of repeal
The Licensing Act 1964 (c. 26).	In section 196A(1), at the end of
paragraph (a), the word “and”.


Part 2

Fingerprints and samples

REPEALS

Short title and chapter	Extent of repeal
The Criminal Justice Act 1948 (c. 58).	Section 39.
The Criminal Justice Act 1961 (c. 39).	In Schedule 4, the entry relating to section 39
of the Criminal Justice Act 1948.
The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60).
The Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 (c. 33).
Section 27(4A). Section 64(4).
Section 57(3).
The Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (c. 37).	In Schedule 8, paragraph 61.

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 7 – Repeals and revocations Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
159
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



REVOCATION

Title and reference	Extent of revocation
The Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989 1341 (N.I.
12)).
Article 64(4).




Part 3

Police Training

Short title and chapter	Extent of repeal
The Police Act 1996 (c. 16).	In section 54(2), the word “and”, in the third place where it occurs.


Part 4

Police Organisation


Short title and chapter	Extent of repeal
The Police Act 1996.	In section 12, subsections (4) to (6).
Section 13(2).
In Schedule 2—
paragraph 10;
in paragraph 16(1)(a), the words from “or a term” to “shorter”; and
in paragraph 25(1), the words “and allowances”.
In Schedule 2A, in paragraph 20—
in sub-paragraph (1), the words “and allowances”; and
sub-paragraph (2).
In Schedule 3—
in each of paragraphs 2 and 9(a), the word “10”; and
in paragraph 3, in sub-paragraph (1), the words “for a police area listed in Schedule 1” and the words from “or for a term” to “shorter”, and sub-paragraph (1A).
The Police Act 1997 (c. 50).	In Schedule 2—
160	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 7 – Repeals and revocations
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes










The Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29).
paragraph 1(b) and the word “or” immediately preceding it;
in paragraph 5(a), the words from “or a term” to “shorter”; and
in paragraph 17, in sub-paragraph (1) the words “and allowances”, and sub- paragraph (2).
In Schedule 27, paragraph 106(5) and (6).




Part 5

NCIS AND NCS

(1) Repeals

Short title and chapter	Extent of repeal
The Local Authorities (Goods and Services) Act 1970 (c. 39).
In section 1(4), in the definition of “public body”, the words “, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad, the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service”.
The Local Government Act 1972 (c. 70).    In section 94(5)(b), the words “or paragraph
of Schedule 2 to the Police Act 1997”.
In section 98—
in subsection (1A) the words “and the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”; and
subsection (1B).
In section 99 the words “, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”. In section 100J—
subsection (1)(ea);
in subsection (3) the word “, (ea)”;
subsection (3A); and
in subsection (4) the words “or the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”.
Section 107(8A). In section 146A—
in subsection (1A) the words “nor the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”; and
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 7 – Repeals and revocations Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
161
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



subsection (1AA).
In section 228(7A) the words “or the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”.
In section 229(8) the words “and the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”.
In section 231(4) the words “and the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”.
In section 232(1A) the words “and the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”.
In section 233(11) the words “and the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”.
In section 234(4) the words “and the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”.
In Schedule 12—
in paragraph 6A the words “, or of the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”;
in paragraph 6B(b) the words “ or of the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad,”;
in paragraph 6B, sub-paragraph (c) and the word “and” immediately preceding it; and
in paragraph 46 the words “and the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”.
The Local Government Act 1974 (c. 7).	Section 25(1)(caa).
The Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1976 (c .57).
In section 30(3) the words “, and a member of the National Crime Squad within
section 55(1)(a) or (b) of the Police Act 1997 shall be treated as employed by the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad,”.
In section 44(1)(a) the words “, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”.
The Rent (Agriculture) Act 1976 (c. 80).	In section 5(3)(baa) the words “, the Service
Authority for the National Crime Squad and the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service”.
The Rent Act 1977 (c. 42).	Section 14(caaa).
The Local Government, Planning and Land Act 1980 (c. 65).
In section 20(1)—
in paragraph (a)(i) of the definition of “local authority”, the words “, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”; and
in paragraph (aa) of that definition “or the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”.
Section 99(4)(dd).
In Schedule 16, paragraph 5D.
The Finance Act 1981 (c. 35).	Section 107(3)(ka).
162	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 7 – Repeals and revocations
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




The Acquisition of Land Act 1981 (c. 67).   In section 17(4), in the definition (for
the purposes of subsection (3)) of “local authority”—
in paragraph (a) the words “, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad, the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service”, and
in paragraph (b) the words “, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad
or the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service”.
The Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (c. 30).
In section 33(9)(a) the words “, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”. In section 41(13), in the definition of “local authority”, paragraph (cb).
The County Courts Act 1984 (c. 28).	In section 60(3), in the definition of “local
authority”, the words “, the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad.”
The Housing Act 1985 (c. 68).	In section 4(e), the words “, the Service
Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”.
The Landlord and Tenant Act 1985 (c. 70).	In section 38, in the definition of “local
authority”, the words “, the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”.
The Local Government Act 1986 (c. 10).	In section 6(2)(a) the words “the Service
Authority for the National Crime Squad,”. In section 9(1)(a) the words “the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad,”.
The Landlord and Tenant Act 1987 (c. 31).	In section 58(1)(a) the words “, the Service
Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”.
The Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988 (c. 1).
In section 842A(1)—
in paragraph (a), the words “or the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service or the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”; and
in both paragraphs (b) and (c), the words “or the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service”.
The Local Government Act 1988 (c. 9).	Section 1(1)(ea).
In Schedule 2, the words “The Service Authority for the National Crime Squad.”
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 7 – Repeals and revocations Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
163
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


The Local Government Finance Act 1988 (c. 41).


The Local Government and Housing Act 1989 (c. 42).



The Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (c. 8).



The Local Government Finance Act 1992 (c. 14).

The Housing Grants, Construction and Regeneration Act 1996 (c. 53).
Section 64(7)(da) and (db). Section 111(2)(ea).
In section 112(2), paragraph (ab). Section 114(9).
Section 39(1)(ja).
In section 67(3)(i) the words “or the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”.
Section 155(4)(eb). Section 157(6)(ga).
In section 252(12), in the definition of “local authority”, the words “, the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad, the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service”.
Section 19(3)(ca) and (cb). Section 32(6A).
Section 43(5A).
In section 3(2)(g) the words “, the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service or the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”.
In section 64(7)(e) the words “, the Service Authority for the National Criminal Intelligence Service or the Service Authority for the National Crime Squad”.
The Police Act 1997 (c. 50).	In section 1(4)—
in paragraph (a), the words “(if it is then in existence)”; and
the word “and” at the end of paragraph (d).
In section 2(6), the words “or under Schedule 3”.
In section 3(4), the word “and” at the end of paragraph (c).
In section 4(5), the word “and” at the end of paragraph (f).
In section 5(3), the word “and” at the end of paragraph (f).
In section 6—
in subsection (2) the words “after consultation with the Scottish Ministers”;
in subsection (4)(a) the words “(other than under paragraph 6, 7(f) or 8(1)(h) of Schedule 1)”; and
(b) in subsection (4)(b) the words “local authority” and “(as defined in paragraph 14 of that Schedule)”.
Section 7.
Section 9(10).
Section 16(3).
164	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 7 – Repeals and revocations
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Section 18.
In section 26(2), the word “and” at the end of paragraph (g).
In section 41—
in subsection (1), the word “and” at the end of paragraph (c), and
in subsection (2), the word “and” at the end of paragraph (e).
Section 44.
In section 47(4)(a), the words “(if it is then in existence)”.
In section 48(7), the words “or under Schedule 5”.
In section 49(4), the word “and” at the end of paragraph (b).
In section 50(5), the word “and” at the end of paragraph (d).
In section 51(3), the word “and” at the end of paragraph (d).
In section 52—
in subsection (4)(a) the words “(other than under paragraph 6 of Schedule 1)”; and
in subsection (4)(b) the words “local authority” and “(as defined in paragraph 14 of that Schedule)”.
Section 53.
Section 55(10).
Section 61(3).
Sections 63, 67 and 68.
In section 71(2), the word “and” at the end of paragraph (e).
In section 85—
in subsection (1), the word “and” at the end of paragraph (b), and
in subsection (2), the word “and” at the end of paragraph (b).
Section 137(2)(d). In Schedule 1—
in paragraph 2(2)(c), the words “local authority”;
in paragraph 2(4), the words “in relation to the NCIS Service Authority”.
paragraph 3(2);
in paragraph 4(1), the words “local authority”;
paragraph 4(2);
in paragraph 8(1)(e), the words “(being not less than two)” and “local authority”;
paragraph 8(2);
in paragraph 9(b), the words “local authority”;
in paragraph 10(1)(c), the words “(being not less than six)” and “local authority”;
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) SCHEDULE 7 – Repeals and revocations Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or
165
before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



paragraph 10(2);
paragraph 12;
in paragraph 13(a), the words “local authority”; and
paragraph 14.
In Schedule 2, paragraph 9.
Schedules 3, 4 and 5.
Schedule 6 (other than paragraphs 5(1) and (2), 6(1), (2) and (3)(a) and (c), 7 and 29).
In Schedule 9, paragraphs 23, 25, 38, 39, 42,
43, 45, 49, 51 to 53, 55, 63, 67 and 68.
The Audit Commission Act 1998 (c. 18).	In section 17(7), paragraph (g) and the word
“and” immediately preceding it.
In section 32(2), paragraph (b) and the word “or” immediately preceding it.
In Schedule 2, paragraph 1(1).
In Schedule 3, paragraph 33.
The Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29).


The Police (Northern Ireland) Act 2000 (c. 32).
Section 86(3). Section 104(3)(b).
In Schedule 27, paragraphs 28(2), 29, 63,
110, 111, 113(3), 114 and 115.
In Schedule 6, in paragraph 20(7), the words “(7)(b) and”.


(2) Revocations

Title and reference	Extent of revocation
The Employers’ Liability (Defective Equipment and Compulsory Insurance) (Northern Ireland) Order (S.I. 1972 963 (N.I. 6)).
The Scotland Act 1998 (Cross-Border Public Authorities) (Adaptation of Functions etc.) Order 1999 (S.I. 1999/1747).
Article 7(ab).



In Schedule 18, paragraph 2(6), (7), (15)(a),
(25), (27) and (28)(b).




Part 6

Miscellaneous


Short title and chapter	Extent of repeal
The Bail Act 1976 (c. 63).	In Schedule 1, paragraph 9A.
166	Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)
SCHEDULE 7 – Repeals and revocations
Document Generated: 2025-01-23
Changes to legislation: Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 23 January 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



The Criminal Justice Act 1988 (c. 33).	Section 153.

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) Document Generated: 2025-01-23
167


24/03/2025  Custody management and planning
https://www.college.police.uk/app/detention-and-custody/custody-management-and-planning Page



Custody management and planning


This page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published
23 October 2013 Updated
9 October 2024
Written by College of Policing Detention and custody
mins read

Legal framework
The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) and the associated Codes of Practice set out the legislation and standards for dealing with people who come into contact with the police. PACE Codes C and G set out the expectations and powers placed on the police during and throughout a police investigation. They also set out the rights of any individual suspected of committing a criminal offence.
The following areas of PACE and the Codes of Practice are particularly relevant.  police use of force
 lawful arrest
 searches
 designation of a police station  police resources
Learning standards and materials relevant to the work of the custody suite are available from the national policing curriculum (NPC) in many areas, including:
 custody  first aid
 personal safety  mental health
Forces are required to pay due regard to:
 National Police Chiefs' Council (NPCC) (2022) National Strategy for Police Custody
 HM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire & Rescue Services (HMICFRS) Expectations for Police Custody
 Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) Learning the lessons bulletins  Authorised Professional Practice (APP)
There is a separate section for detainees arrested for offences related to terrorism.

Principles of safer detention
There is a strategic focus, supported by the chief officer group, which promotes the safe and decent delivery of custody.
Detention is appropriate, authorised and lasts no longer than is necessary. Forces adhere to all rights relating to PACE and the PACE Codes of Practice. While detainees are in custody, officers and staff treat them in a way that is dignified and takes account of their human rights and diverse individual needs. Custody staff are respectful in their day-to-day working and are aware of and responsive to any particular risks and vulnerabilities.
Detainees have access to health and social care services appropriate to their physical and mental health needs. They receive emergency medical care where necessary and are provided with appropriate medication or support according to their needs.
Any force used within a custody suite is necessary, proportionate and lawful.
All custody officers and staff have undergone appropriate and adequate training. Police, contract and healthcare professionals (HCPs) understand their role and their legal responsibilities, and are operationally competent.
All areas of the custody suite are clean and safe. Officers and staff keep custody facilities in a good state of repair and ensure that they are fit for purpose and meet fire safety standards.
Officers and staff record and monitor all use of force.
Forces must ensure that there are appropriate governance and accountability arrangements in place for contracted and commissioned staff.

Information sharing in custody
Police forces should make use of existing information sharing statements within and between custodial agencies and services.
Although medical confidentiality is supported by the right to respect for private life under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights, the state has positive obligations under Article 2, the right to life, to protect a detainee from the risk of suicide or self-harm. Effective information exchange, in accordance with privacy rights, between the police, prison, immigration service and health services, on the vulnerability of a detainee to suicide or mental illness, or the threat which he or she may pose to others, is crucial to establishing an individual approach to detainee care in accordance with the positive obligations under Article 2.
(from House of Lords/House of Commons Joint Committee on Human Rights, Deaths in Custody, Third Report of Session 2004-2005 Vol 1, para 131, referencing European Court of Human Rights, Edwards v UK (2002) 35 EHRR 19, paras 63-64)

Senior management considerations
To achieve the adequate strategic focus necessary for the safe delivery of custody, senior management should maintain a policy focus on custody issues at chief officer level and an effective management structure. There must also be effective, proactive oversight by independent custody visitors (ICVs), offices of police and crime commissioners (PCCs) and quality assurance procedures that include monitoring the use of force data. See use of force recording.
Maintaining a policy focus on custody should include:  developing and maintaining the custody estate
 suitable and sufficient training for police officers and staff undertaking custody duties
 safe and effective staffing arrangements that allow detainees to be lawfully and expeditiously processed in custody
 due regard to the Code of Ethics for policing  managing the risks of custody
 meeting the mental and physical health and wellbeing needs of detainees
 meeting the diverse needs of detainees, including vulnerable adults and safeguarding children
 working effectively with commissioners and providers of health services, immigration services, youth offending teams, criminal justice teams, the Crown Prosecution Service, courts and other law enforcement agencies
 cooperation between forces and local authorities to ensure safe, alternative secure and non-secure accommodation for children and young persons where required
 strategic links with HM Courts and Tribunal Service to ensure access to courts, avoiding unnecessary delays
Tools to ensure that management structures remain effective must include:
 establishing and implementing appropriate custody policies and procedures
 proactively monitoring custody against agreed standards and performance measures
 proactively monitoring use of force, adverse incidents and complaints locally and at force-wide level  establishing partnership agreements facilitating constructive engagement, including at local criminal
justice board level

Health and safety
Under the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974, an organisation (including a police force) has a duty and liability as an employer that extends to employees (police officers and staff) and those who are not strictly employees but who provide a service to it, such as agency or contract staff. This employer’s duty includes:
 providing and maintaining a safe place of work and equipment  providing competent employees
 establishing and enforcing a safe system of work All duties are personal and cannot be delegated.
Designation of a police station
It is the responsibility of the chief officer to designate a police station for the purposes of PACE.
Custody suites must be fit for purpose before a police station is designated under section 35 of PACE. Forces must continue to maintain them at that standard.
HMICFRS and HMIP specify that new custody suites must provide spaces that allow private booking-in areas for charging detainees for sensitive offences, or booking in vulnerable people.

Human resources and training
Appropriate training and resources can help to minimise problems arising while people are detained by the police.

Police resources
There is no standard model for staffing levels or resource composition in custody. Forces should establish a staffing model which considers:
 demand levels, such as at peak times of day, month and year, including seasonal variations  the number of people detained each year
 the number of detainees anticipated in future years  the efficiency of the custody process
 geographical area
 resourcing of special events
 the physical structure and design of the custody suite  staff training
 succession planning  operational resilience

Custody resources
The following resources must be available when required:  custody officers
 detention staff (police officers/staff/contract staff)
 adequate inspector and superintendent cover to meet the requirements of PACE
 an appropriate gender balance among staff to ensure female detainees have appropriate access to female custody staff
 HCPs
 legal advice
 referral scheme workers
 interpreters via telephone/videophone or in person  appropriate adults
Using private contracts for some roles within custody may help to make the most efficient use of designated staff (see contractual arrangements for contract staff).
Those working in custody must have clearly defined roles and responsibilities regardless of the title of the role. Each employee should fully understand their role and responsibilities.
Each force should have a specific profile for the role of the:
 custody officer
 detention officer
 detention assistant  escort officer
The IOPC’s jurisdiction in relation to contractors is set out in The Independent Police Complaints Commission (Complaints and Misconduct) (Contractors) Regulations 2015. These regulations apply to any new matters coming to the attention of the appropriate authority on or after 8 April 2015 and apply to all contractors who enter into a contract with the chief officer or PCC.

Custody officer
It is a statutory requirement under PACE section 36 that a chief officer (or other officer as directed by the chief officer) appoints a custody officer in a designated police station.
The custody officer must be of at least the rank of sergeant, although an officer of a lower rank can perform the functions of a custody officer in limited circumstances.
The custody officer has specific responsibility and authority for the custody and protection of the detainee and the progress of the investigative process in the police station.
The custody officer must be able to direct and call on resources to protect and provide safe detention.
The custody officer also has personal responsibility for the safe and lawful operation of activities in the custody suite. This may include delegating some tasks and functions to officers and staff to assist them. Where this is done, the custody officer must be satisfied that the officers or police staff concerned are suitable, trained and competent to carry out the task or action in question (refer to note 3F, PACE Code C).

Staff responsibilities
Police forces are required to have an effective organisational management structure for their custody operations, with clear lines of accountability. Lines of management need to be clear and unequivocal, and should be graphically conveyed to all staff performing custody duties. Police forces should ensure that custody officers and staff clearly understand their individual roles and responsibilities in the custody suite. All staff must be trained and competent to perform their role in custody and be aware of their responsibilities, their obligations
under PACE and the expectations of their colleagues and the force.
Chief officers have a statutory responsibility under section 3 of the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 to ensure that detainees have access to appropriate healthcare while in custody. This must be provided in a timely and effective manner.

Healthcare models
Forces must develop an appropriate healthcare model in consultation with health commissioners and other key stakeholders that best meets the needs of detainees based on a regular needs assessment. The agencies and individuals providing this service must have the legal authority, qualifications, experience, capability and capacity to deliver a continuous quality service within set timeframes.
Forces should monitor their healthcare provision to ensure quality of service and effectiveness.
Forces should have appropriate partnership arrangements to monitor response times for adult social services/mental health trusts to complete mental health assessments in custody to ensure vulnerable detainees are detained no longer than is necessary.
Forces should ensure that they have protocols with ambulance and local hospitals to ensure violent detainees, Mental Health Act 1983 section 136 detainees and drunk and incapable detainees are dealt with consistently and in accordance with the National Mental Health Crisis Care Concordat and National Ambulance Service Protocol.

Healthcare professionals
A healthcare professional (HCP) is a person with clinical and forensic competencies to work in a forensic custodial environment. All HCPs must work within the scope of practice as determined by their relevant professional body, such as the GMC, Nursing and Midwifery Council and Health and Care Professions Council. PACE and their clinical competencies will define the functions and role that a particular HCP can undertake. For example, full prescribing is limited to doctors and HCPs with prescribing qualifications.
For further information, see PACE Code C paragraph 9.16 and Annex G, paragraph 7.
For further details on the roles and responsibilities of HCPs in custody suites, see The Faculty of Forensic and Legal Medicine (FFLM) of the Royal College of Physicians (2024) The Role of the Healthcare Professional.
For further details on the equipment and procedures for the medical rooms in custody, see FFLM (2024) operational procedures and equipment for clinical and forensic examination rooms in police stations.

Contractual arrangements for contract staff
Contract staff should work to the legislation and principles of safer detention set out above, including fulfilling obligations under the Equality Act 2010. The responsibilities and duties of privately contracted detention staff vary according to the contractual arrangements made by each force. Contract staff working in the custody environment and, as designated, detention and escort officers must be fully aware of their role and how it integrates with the police officers and staff they work with. Contract staff must be trained to understand and appreciate their designated legal responsibilities. They must carry their appropriate designation cards.

Police Reform Act 2002
Schedule 4, Part 3 of the Police Reform Act 2002 deals with the powers and duties of designated detention officers. The designated powers that detention officers have may vary between forces according to their operational requirements.

Service standards
Custody managers and officers should be given and take time to read employment contracts and wider contractual arrangements made between forces and private companies supplying custody staff. These contracts govern the working relationship that custody officers have with the contracted staff they supervise. Contracts and role specifications may include details of certain duties and responsibilities that differ from initial expectations and assumptions.
Police custody managers, officers and staff should also be aware of the content of relevant contracts for healthcare and cleaning services. Forces should monitor standards effectively and hold service providers and staff to account according to their contract requirements. Custody officers should be aware of the procedure for raising issues or concerns about development needs or professional competence for a contracted employee.

Independent custody visitors
Independent custody visitors (ICVs) are volunteers. Their role is to attend police stations to check on the treatment of detainees and the conditions in which they are held and also to establish that their rights are being observed. This protects both detainees and the custody staff, and provides reassurance to the community at large. Responsibility for organising and overseeing the delivery of independent custody visiting lies with PCCs, in consultation with chief constables.
ICVs may visit police stations at any time and must be given immediate access to all custody areas unless doing so would place them in danger. A custody officer may delay but not deny access. A full explanation must be given for any delay, which the ICV records in their report. Where a custody officer reasonably believes the visitor may be in danger, or that access could interfere with the process of justice, an inspector (or higher ranked officer) may legally limit or deny the ICV access to a specific detainee. Any such decision must be recorded in the detainee’s custody record.
For further information see:
 PACE Code C, Notes for Guidance 1F
 The Independent Custody Visiting Association
 Home Office (2013) Code of Practice on Independent Custody Visiting  Outline of protocols for ICVs

Training and learning
Forces must ensure that all staff working in the custody suite are fully trained and operationally competent in their role before being appointed or allocated tasks. All custody staff have responsibility for detainees in custody. In addition to formal training, staff retain individual responsibility for their own professional and personal development.
Police custody training should systematically incorporate lessons learnt as a consequence of deaths and adverse incidents that occur.
Learning standards and materials relevant to the work of the custody suite are available from the NPC in many areas including:
 custody  first aid
 personal safety  mental health
Forces should use qualified trainers and assessors who have relevant experience. Trainers must be operationally competent and should maintain that competency. Following the delivery of formal, structured custody training, the practice of shadowing experienced members of staff is recommended as an effective means of improving staff competence prior to starting work in the custody suite.
Forces should also pay due regard to:
 IOPC Learning the lessons bulletins
 HM Inspectorate of Prisons (HMIP) and HM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire & Rescue Services (HMICFRS) Expectations for Police Custody

Custody training checklist

 All police officers and staff working in a custody suite must receive training which meets the standards as set out in the NPC before they commence their role and undertake refresher training while in post.
 Custody managers should identify the training requirements for existing staff through a training needs analysis as part of the annual personal development review process.
 Designated and contracted staff must be adequately trained and able to undertake their role within custody.
 All police officers who work in operational roles, and staff who work in custody, must be trained in risk assessment as it is fundamental to the welfare of detainees and all those present in the custody environment.
 Forces must make full personal safety training and personal safety refresher training available to custody officers and staff as appropriate to their role.
 All custody staff, including contracted staff, must have adequate first aid training for their role. As an absolute minimum, all staff should know how to conduct basic life support and know how to use all healthcare equipment, including resuscitation equipment.
 There should always be at least one officer or member of staff who is trained in first aid, working in the custody suite at any time. This ensures that immediate medical care can be provided to detainees prior to the arrival of ambulance crews or other medically trained persons.
 All custody officers and staff must be trained to use the Police National Computer (PNC) and local IT systems, and should know how to access the Police National Database (PND) for intelligence relating to detainees.
 Custody officers and staff must be trained in how to respond to deaths or successful interventions in custody and how their role is affected by a post-incident investigation.
 Custody officers and staff must be trained to meet their obligations under the Corporate Manslaughter and Corporate Homicide Act 2007 and relevant health and safety legislation.
 Mutual benefits can be achieved through joint agency training. For example, staff from mental health teams could deliver training to custody staff on dealing safely with detainees experiencing mental ill health.

Contracted staff training
All contracted staff must be suitable and adequately trained for their contracted role in a police custody suite. Privately contracted designated detention officers who may be required to book in detainees must be adequately trained in risk assessment.
All HCPs must have competences defined by the National Service Specification framework and the Faculty of Forensic and Legal Medicine. These include a valid certificate in Immediate Life Support approved by the Resuscitation Council UK and Safeguarding Vulnerable Adults and Children (level 3) qualification.

Refresher training
All custody staff must receive refresher training. There must be continuing access to refresher training and learning opportunities while in post. The period required for refresher training should be determined by its content and the method of delivery. Forces should conduct a training needs analysis to identify when further training is required.

Personal safety training
All custody staff must be trained in personal safety in accordance with ACPO (2012) Personal Safety Manual of Guidance (available via College Learn to registered users). Forces should make additional provision for joint training for groups of custody staff who regularly work together. Forces must make full personal safety training and personal safety refresher training available to custody officers and staff as appropriate to their role.

Equality Act 2010
All staff should be trained to understand their obligations and duties under this Act.

First aid training
The Police First Aid Learning Programme (FALP) (available via College Learn to registered users) has five modules:
 module 1 FALP – basic life support
 module 2 FALP – first aid skills initial training  module 3 FALP – custody first aid
 module 4 FALP – first aid skills initial and requalification  module 5 FALP – first aid enhanced skills
Police custody staff must receive training to at least modules 2 and 3 before taking up post in a custody suite. Refresher training must be completed at least every 12 months.

First aid training for contracted staff
All private contracts for custody staff must require contract custody staff to be trained to the same standard required for police staff. Under some existing contractual arrangements, contracted custody staff may not be trained, or adequately trained, in first aid. In such cases, contracts for custody staff should require contract custody staff to immediately report any identified need for urgent first aid to the custody officer. The custody officer will then arrange for the necessary first aid to be provided.

Health and safety training
All officers and staff must be trained to meet their obligations under health and safety legislation. Initial health and safety training must be specific to the role and give an overview of health and safety legislation. Clear lines of designated responsibility, thorough risk assessment and handover briefings are essential to protect the safety of detainees and custody staff. Information recorded on the custody record must be clear, accurate and completed in a timely manner.

Cleaning
Custody suites should have hygiene control measures similar to those found in hospitals for the control of MRSA and other infections. This includes using hygiene wipes and hand scrubs. Staff must be trained to use them properly.

Food hygiene certification
All staff preparing food supplied to others should hold a food hygiene certificate, unless the preparation is purely reheating sealed or pre-cooked items.

Contingency planning
Forces should establish protocols with other emergency services and develop local procedures that cover responsibilities for emergency situations in custody. Forces should establish contingency plans for dealing with:
 major incidents resulting in a high volume of arrests
 activation of Operation Safeguard (use of police cells to hold Home Office prisoners), or a dramatic increase in prison lock-outs
 death or serious injury in custody  bomb threat
 terrorist detainees
 high-profile detainees likely to attract media and public attention  other sensitive detainees
 fires
 chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear incidents

Evacuation
Contingency plans for evacuating a custody suite must include details of alternative accommodation for detainees if an immediate return to the evacuated premises is not possible. A copy of the plans must be available at an agreed location outside the facility, for other emergency services to use.
All staff engaged in custody duties must be briefed and trained in the procedures to be followed in the event of a fire or other emergency requiring the custody suite to be evacuated. A nominated senior officer should ensure that evacuation plans are tested on a regular basis and that, where possible, this is a joint exercise with local fire and rescue services.

Fire safety
In a secure facility, the occupants are not all free to leave in the event of a fire. Compliance with fire safety legislation requirements is critical, and a competent person should assess this. Custody officers and staff must pay special attention to ensuring everyone’s safety should a fire occur.
See the Police Custody Design Guide (PCDG), which can be obtained from the Ministry of Justice Estates Directorate, Technical Standards, 102 Petty France, London SW1H 9AJ ( moj_ed_technicalstandards@justice.gov.uk). Some of this advice is statutory in nature and applies equally to both old and new police custody suites.
Where a custody suite is built and maintained according to the PCDG, it is exempt from some fire safety requirements. For example, the requirement is removed for panic release bars on external doors to secure areas, break glass fire alarm points and the provision of fire extinguishers in corridors.
Fires within police custody suites are relatively infrequent but potentially very serious events, with risks to both detainees and custody staff. In most instances, smoke and smoke control are the principal issues for detainees and staff rather than fire itself.
It is a legal requirement that an adequate, custody-specific fire risk assessment (FRA) is in place and available on site. Fire emergency plans based on this FRA must describe appropriate fire safety responses for potential fire scenarios that are reasonably foreseeable. These include a cell fire, a fire in the vehicle dock and fires elsewhere within the suite. Fire emergency plans should include partial horizontal evacuation (in the event of a cell fire) and complete evacuation scenarios. Fire safety measures should assess risks to detainees and staff, and should include consideration of an aspirated fire detection system, fire-fighting and safety equipment (for example, water misting, smoke hoods).

Further fire safety advice

Police forces must ensure that:
 a competent person is responsible for fire safety issues within each force and reads, understands and ensures compliance with PCDG Section 17, custody fire safety in all operational custody suites
 smoke detection equipment which automatically and rapidly detects smoke within a cell is regularly tested and recorded
 an appropriate plan is in place that allows staff to safely evacuate the cell in which the fire has occurred without placing the life of that detainee, other detainees or their own lives at serious risk

Inadequate ventilation systems

Smoke modelling shows that a ventilation and fire detection system which meets PCDG provides the best protection for detainees and staff.
Waiting for the fire and rescue service is not an appropriate or adequate response.
In the event of a cell fire, smoke is released into the corridor, so it is essential that custody staff are trained to use cell fire rescue methods and know that it is critical that the cell door is closed after rescue.
Ventilation systems meeting PCDG guidance help to ensure that other cells are kept clear of smoke and that smoke is cleared from the cell corridor.
Inappropriate and inadequate ventilation systems in older suites that do not achieve negative air pressure within the cell place staff and other detainees at risk when the cell door is opened.
Custody staff should be made aware of the individual fire and ventilation hazards in their custody suite so they can immediately attend to the welfare of detainees in locked cells, as well as their own safety.
Back to Detention and custody overview

Tags
Detention and custody



Home  Crime, justice and the law  Your rig hts and legal support


Data protection


The UK's data protection legislation
Data protection legislation controls how your personal information is used by organisations, including businesses and government departments.
In the UK, data protection is governed by the UK General Data Protection Regulation (UK GDPR) and the Data Protection Act 2018.
Everyone responsible for using personal data has to follow strict rules called ‘data protection principles’ unless an exemption applies. There is a g uide to the data protection exemptions on the Information Commissioner’s Oﬃce (ICO) website.
Anyone responsible for using personal data must make sure the information is:
Related content
Personal data an employer can keep about an employee
Request CCTV footage of yourself
used fairly, lawfully and transparently used for specified, explicit purposes
used in a way that is adequate, relevant and limited to only what is necessary
accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date kept for no longer than is necessary
handled in a way that ensures appropriate security, including protection against unlawful or unauthorised processing, access, loss, destruction or damage
There is stronger legal protection for more sensitive information, such as: race
ethnic background political opinions religious beliefs
trade union membership genetics
biometrics (where used for identification) health
sex life or orientation
There are separate safeguards for personal data relating to criminal convictions and oﬀences.

Your rights
Under the legislation, you have rights in relation to your personal data, with some exceptions. These include the right to:
be informed about how your data is being used access personal data
have incorrect data updated have data erased
stop or restrict the processing of your data
data portability (allowing you to get and reuse your data for diﬀerent services)
object to how your data is processed in certain circumstances
You also have rights when an organisation is using your personal data for:
automated decision-making processes (without human involvement) profiling, for example to predict your behaviour or interests

If you’re concerned about how an organisation is handling your personal data
Contact the ICO for advice or to make a complaint. ICO
Telephone: 0303 123 1113
Textphone: 18001 0303 123 1113 Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm Find out about call charges

Information Commissioner’s Oﬃce Wycliﬀe House
Water Lane Wilmslow Cheshire SK9 5AF

You can find more contact details on the ICO website.

 Next
Find out what data an organisation has about you

View a printable version of the whole guide

Explore the topic
Your rights and legal support













Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes





Police Reform Act 2002
2002 CHAPTER 30

An Act to make new provision about the supervision, administration, functions and conduct of police forces, police officers and other persons serving with, or carrying out functions in relation to, the police; to amend police powers and to provide for the exercise of police powers by persons who are not police officers; to amend the law relating to anti-social behaviour orders; to amend the law relating to sex offender orders; and for connected purposes.	[24th July 2002]
BE IT ENACTED by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:—




Part 1

Powers of the Secretary of State

National Policing Plan
After section 36 of the 1996 Act there shall be inserted—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 1 – Powers of the Secretary of State
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


“36A National Policing Plan
It shall be the duty of the Secretary of State, before the beginning of each financial year, to prepare a National Policing Plan for that year.
The Secretary of State shall lay the National Policing Plan for a financial year before Parliament.
Subject to subsection (4), any such plan must be laid before Parliament not later than 30th November in the preceding financial year.
If there are exceptional circumstances, any such plan may be laid before Parliament after the date mentioned in subsection (3); but it must be so laid before the beginning of the financial year to which it relates.
If a plan is laid before Parliament after the date mentioned in subsection (3), the plan must contain a statement of the exceptional circumstances that gave rise to its being so laid.
The National Policing Plan for a financial year—
must set out whatever the Secretary of State considers to be the strategic policing priorities generally for the police forces maintained for police areas in England and Wales for the period of three years beginning with that year;
must describe what, in relation to that period, the Secretary of State is intending or proposing so far as each of the following is concerned—
the setting of objectives under section 37 and the giving of general directions in relation to any objective so set;
the specification, under section 4 of the Local Government Act 1999 (c. 27) (performance indicators), of performance indicators (within the meaning of that section) for police authorities;
the making of regulations under the powers conferred by this Act, by Part 4 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) (police training) and by Part 2 of the Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) (complaints etc.);
the issuing of guidance under any provision of this Act or of Part 2 of the Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30); and
the issuing and revision of codes of practice under this Act and under Chapter 1 of Part 4 of the Police Reform Act 2002 (powers exercisable by civilians);
may contain such other information, plans and advice as the Secretary of State considers relevant to the priorities set out in the plan.
Before laying the National Policing Plan for a financial year before Parliament, the Secretary of State shall consult with—
persons whom he considers to represent the interests of police authorities;
persons whom he considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police; and
such other persons as he thinks fit.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	3
Part 1 – Powers of the Secretary of State
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

In this section—
“financial year” means the period of twelve months ending with 31st March; and
“general direction” means a direction under section 38 establishing performance targets for all police authorities to which section 37 applies.”

Codes of practice for chief officers
After section 39 of the 1996 Act (codes of practice for police authorities) there shall be inserted—

“39A Codes of practice for chief officers
If the Secretary of State considers it necessary to do so for the purpose of promoting the efficiency and effectiveness generally of the police forces maintained for police areas in England and Wales, he may issue codes of practice relating to the discharge of their functions by the chief officers of police of those forces.
The Secretary of State may from time to time revise the whole or any part of a code of practice issued under this section.
Where the Secretary of State proposes to issue or revise a code of practice under this section, he shall first require the Central Police Training and Development Authority to prepare a draft of the code or of the revisions; and the draft prepared by that Authority must contain all such matters as the Secretary of State may specify in the requirement.
Before preparing a draft code of practice under this section or any draft revisions of such a code, the Central Police Training and Development Authority shall consult with—
persons whom it considers to represent the interests of police authorities;
persons whom it considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police; and
such other persons as it thinks fit.
The Secretary of State shall lay any code of practice issued by him under this section, and any revision of any such code, before Parliament.
The Secretary of State shall not be required by subsection (5) to lay before Parliament, or may exclude from what he does so lay, anything the publication of which, in his opinion—
would be against the interests of national security;
could prejudice the prevention or detection of crime or the apprehension or prosecution of offenders; or
could jeopardise the safety of any person.
In discharging any function to which a code of practice under this section relates, a chief officer of police shall have regard to the code.”
4	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 1 – Powers of the Secretary of State
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Powers to require inspection and report
In section 54 of the 1996 Act (appointment and functions of inspectors of constabulary), after subsection (2A) there shall be inserted—
“(2B) The Secretary of State may at any time require the inspectors of constabulary to carry out an inspection under this section of—
a police force maintained for any police area;
the National Criminal Intelligence Service; or
the National Crime Squad;
and a requirement under this subsection may include a requirement for the inspection to be confined to a particular part of the force, Service or Squad in question, to particular matters or to particular activities of that force, Service or Squad.
(2C) Where the inspectors carry out an inspection under subsection (2B), they shall send a report on that inspection to the Secretary of State.”;
and in section 55(1) of that Act (publication of reports) for “or (2A)” there shall be substituted “ , (2A) or (2C) ”.
In section 41 of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (c. 32) (appointment and functions of inspectors), after subsection (3) there shall be inserted—
“(3A) The Secretary of State may at any time require the inspectors to carry out an inspection under this section of—
the Police Service of Northern Ireland; or
the National Criminal Intelligence Service;
and a requirement under this subsection may include a requirement for the inspection to be confined to a particular part of the Service in question, to particular matters or to particular activities of that Service.
(3B) Where the inspectors carry out an inspection under subsection (3A), they shall send a report on that inspection to the Secretary of State.”;
and in section 42(1) of that Act (publication of reports) for “or (3)” there shall be substituted “ , (3) or (3B) ”.

Directions to police authorities
For section 40 of the 1996 Act (power to give directions in response to report on an inspection of a police force carried out for the purposes of that section) there shall be substituted—

“40 Power to give directions to a police authority
Where a report made to the Secretary of State on an inspection under section 54 states, in relation to any police force maintained under section 2, or in relation to the metropolitan police force—
that, in the opinion of the person making the report, the whole or any part of the force inspected is, whether generally or in particular respects, not efficient or not effective, or
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	5
Part 1 – Powers of the Secretary of State
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

that, in that person’s opinion, the whole or a part of the force will cease to be efficient or effective, whether generally or in particular respects, unless remedial measures are taken,
the Secretary of State may direct the police authority responsible for maintaining that force to take such remedial measures as may be specified in the direction.
Those remedial measures must not relate to any matter other than—
a matter by reference to which the report contains a statement of opinion falling within subsection (1)(a) or (b); or
a matter that the Secretary of State considers relevant to any matter falling within paragraph (a).
If the Secretary of State exercises his power to give a direction under this section in relation to a police force—
he shall prepare a report on his exercise of that power in relation to that force; and
he shall lay that report before Parliament.
A report under subsection (3)—
shall be prepared at such time as the Secretary of State considers appropriate; and
may relate to more than one exercise of the power mentioned in that subsection.
The Secretary of State shall not give a direction under this section in relation to any police force unless—
the police authority maintaining that force and the chief officer of that force have each been given such information about the Secretary of State’s grounds for proposing to give that direction as he considers appropriate for enabling them to make representations or proposals under the following paragraphs of this subsection;
that police authority and chief officer have each been given an opportunity of making representations about those grounds;
that police authority has had an opportunity of making proposals for the taking of remedial measures that would make the giving of the direction unnecessary; and
the Secretary of State has considered any such representations and any such proposals.
The Secretary of State may by regulations make further provision as to the procedure to be followed in cases where a proposal is made for the giving of a direction under this section.
Before making any regulations under this section, the Secretary of State shall consult with—
persons whom he considers to represent the interests of police authorities;
persons whom he considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police; and
such other persons as he thinks fit.
6	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 1 – Powers of the Secretary of State
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Regulations under this section may make different provision for different cases and circumstances.
A statutory instrument containing regulations under this section shall not be made unless a draft of the regulations has been laid before Parliament and approved by a resolution of each House.”

Directions as to action plans
F1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Regulation of equipment
For subsections (2) and (3) of section 53 of the 1996 Act (regulations as to standard of equipment), there shall be substituted—
“(1A) The Secretary of State may by regulations make any or all of the following provisions—
provision requiring all police forces in England and Wales, when using equipment for the purposes specified in the regulations to use only—
the equipment which is specified in the regulations;
equipment which is of a description so specified; or
equipment which is of a type approved by the Secretary of State in accordance with the regulations;
provision requiring all police forces in England and Wales to keep available for use the equipment falling within paragraph (a)(i) to (iii) which is specified or described in, or approved in accordance with, the regulations;
provision prohibiting all police forces in England and Wales from using equipment of a type approved as mentioned in paragraph (a)(iii) except—
where the conditions subject to which the approval was given are satisfied; and
in accordance with the other terms of that approval;
provision requiring equipment used by police forces in England and Wales to comply, in the case of all police forces, with such conditions as may be specified in the regulations, or as may be approved by the Secretary of State in accordance with the regulations;
provision prohibiting all police forces in England and Wales from using equipment specified in the regulations, or any equipment of a description so specified.
(1B) The Secretary of State shall not make any regulations under subsection (1A) unless he considers it necessary to do so for the purpose of promoting the
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	7
Part 1 – Powers of the Secretary of State
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

efficiency and effectiveness generally of the police forces maintained for police areas in England and Wales.
(2) Before making any regulations under this section, the Secretary of State shall consult with—
persons whom he considers to represent the interests of police authorities;
persons whom he considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police; and
such other persons as he thinks fit.
(2A) Regulations under this section may make different provision for different cases and circumstances.
(2B) A statutory instrument containing any regulations under this section shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
(2C) In this section “equipment” includes—
vehicles; and
headgear and protective and other clothing.”

Regulation of procedures and practices
After section 53 of the 1996 Act there shall be inserted—

“53A Regulation of procedures and practices
The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision requiring all police forces in England and Wales—
to adopt particular procedures or practices; or
to adopt procedures or practices of a particular description.
Before making any regulations under this section, the Secretary of State shall seek advice from—
the chief inspector of constabulary; and
the Central Police Training and Development Authority.
Before seeking advice under subsection (2) the Secretary of State shall consult about his proposal to do so with—
persons whom he considers to represent the interests of police authorities; and
persons whom he considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police.
A request for the purposes of subsection (2) may specify a period within which the requested advice is to be provided; and, if a period is so specified, the requested advice must be provided within it.
Before giving any advice in response to a request for the purposes of subsection (2), the Central Police Training and Development Authority shall consult with—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 1 – Powers of the Secretary of State
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


persons whom it considers to represent the interests of police authorities;
persons whom it considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police; and
such other persons as it thinks fit.
The Secretary of State shall not make any regulations under this section requiring the adoption of any procedure or practice unless—
he has, as respects that procedure or practice, received advice from the Central Police Training and Development Authority and has considered that advice;
the advice of the chief inspector of constabulary states that that inspector is satisfied as to the matters mentioned in subsection (7); and
the Secretary of State himself is satisfied as to those matters.
Those matters are—
that the adoption of that procedure or practice is necessary in order to facilitate the carrying out by members of any two or more police forces of joint or co-ordinated operations;
that the making of regulations is necessary for securing the adoption of that procedure or practice; and
that securing the adoption of that procedure or practice is in the national interest.
Regulations under this section may make different provision for different cases and circumstances.
A statutory instrument containing the first regulations to be made under this section shall not be made unless a draft of the regulations has been laid before Parliament and approved by a resolution of each House.
A statutory instrument containing any other regulations under this section shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”

Equivalent provision for NCIS and NCS
F2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	9
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Part 2

Complaints and Misconduct


Modifications etc. (not altering text)
C3	Pt. 2 power to apply amend or modify conferred (31.10.2011) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 7 para. 7(1); S.I. 2011/2515, art. 2(d)
C4	Pt. 2 applied (with modifications) (22.11.2012) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2012 (S.I. 2012/1204), regs. 1(1), 35(1) (with reg. 35(2))
C5	Pt. 2 applied (with modifications) (22.11.2012) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2012 (S.I. 2012/1204), regs. 1(1), 27
C6	Pt. 2 applied (with modifications) (9.8.2013) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct)(Old Cases) Regulations 2013 (S.I. 2013/1778), regs. 1(1), 2
C7	Pt. 2 modified (8.4.2015) by The Independent Police Complaints Commission (Complaints and Misconduct) (Contractors) Regulations 2015 (S.I. 2015/431), regs. 1, 4, Sch.
C8	Pt. 2: power to amend conferred (E.W.) (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 17.7.2017 in so far as not already in force) by 2009 c. 20, s. 107EE(4) (as inserted by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 8(2), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/726, reg. 2(a))
C9	Pt. 2: power to amend conferred (E.W.) (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 in so far as not already in force) by 2004 c. 21, s. 4K(2)(4) (as inserted by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 1 para. 5; S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 38)
C10 Pt. 2 modified (15.12.2017) by S.I. 2012/1204, Sch. Pt. 1 (as inserted by The Police (Conduct, Complaints and Misconduct and Appeal Tribunal) (Amendment) Regulations 2017 (S.I. 2017/1134), reg. 1(1), Sch. 2 (with reg. 2))
C11 Pt. 2 applied (with application in accordance with reg. 1(3) of the amending S.I.) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2020 (S.I. 2020/2), regs. 1(1), 43(3)
C12 Pt. 2 applied (with modifications) (with application in accordance with reg. 1(3) of the amending S.I.) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2020 (S.I. 2020/2), regs. 1(1), 52
C13 Pt. 2 applied (with modifications) (with application in accordance with reg. 1(3) of the amending S.I.) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2020 (S.I. 2020/2), regs. 1(1), 42(1), Sch. 2
C14 Pt. 2 applied (with modifications) (with application in accordance with reg. 1(3) of the amending S.I.) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2020 (S.I. 2020/2), regs. 1(1), 43(1)(2)
C15 Pt. 2 applied (with modifications) (with application in accordance with reg. 1(3) of the amending S.I.) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2020 (S.I. 2020/2), regs. 1(1), 42(2)
C16 Pt. 2: power to amend conferred (E.W.) (26.12.2023) by Levelling Up and Regeneration Act 2023 (c. 55), ss. 38, 255(2)(c) (with s. 247)
C17 Pt. 2 (ss. 9-29) applied (with modifications) (1.4.2004) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2004 (S.I. 2004/643), regs. 21, 29, 30
C18  Pt. 2 (ss. 9-29) applied (1.4.2004) by The Police (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2004 (S.I.
2004/643), reg. 28
C19 Pt. 2 (ss. 9-29) excluded (1.4.2004) by The Independent Police Complaints Commission (Transitional Provisions) Order 2004 (S.I. 2004/671), arts. 2(2), 3
C20 Pt. 2 (ss. 9-29) excluded (E.W.) (28.12.2005) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), regs. 3(7), 8, 9
C21 Pt. 2 (ss. 9-29): power to apply conferred (7.4.2005 at 5.45 p.m.) by Commissioners for Revenue and Customs Act 2005 (c. 11), ss. 28(2)(a), 53; S.I. 2005/1126, art. 2
10	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


[F3The Independent Office for Police Conduct]


[F4The Independent Office for Police Conduct]
[F5(1) The body corporate previously known as the Independent Police Complaints Commission—
is to continue to exist, and
is to be known instead as the Independent Office for Police Conduct.]
[F6(2) The Office is to consist of—
a Director General appointed by Her Majesty, and
at least six other members.
(2A) The other members must consist of—
persons appointed as non-executive members (see paragraph 1A of Schedule 2), and
persons appointed as employee members (see paragraph 1B of that Schedule),
but the powers of appointment under those paragraphs must be exercised so as to secure that a majority of members of the Office (including the Director General) are non-executive members.]
A person shall not be appointed as the [F7Director General]F8... if—
he holds or has held office as a constable in any part of the United Kingdom;
he is or has been under the direction and control of a chief officer or of any person holding an equivalent office in Scotland or Northern Ireland;
he is a person in relation to whom a designation under section 39 is or has been in force;
he is a person in relation to whom an accreditation under section 41 [F9or 41A] is or has been in force;
[F10(da)	he F11... has been the chairman or a member of, or a member of the staff of, the Serious Organised Crime Agency;]
[F12(db)	he F13... has been—
the chairman or chief executive of, or
another member of, or
another member of the staff of,
the National Policing Improvement Agency;]
[F14(dc)	the person is, or has been, a National Crime Agency officer;]
he F15. . . has been a member of the National Criminal Intelligence Service or the National Crime Squad; or
he is or has at any time been a member of a body of constables which at the time of his membership is or was a body of constables in relation to which any procedures are or were in force by virtue of an agreement or order under—
section 26 of this Act; or
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	11
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

section 78 of the 1996 Act or section 96 of the 1984 Act (which made provision corresponding to that made by section 26 of this Act).
An appointment made in contravention of subsection (3) shall have no effect.
[F16Neither the Office nor the Director General shall—]
be regarded as the servant or agent of the Crown; or
enjoy any status, privilege or immunity of the Crown;
and the [F17Office's] property shall not be regarded as property of, or property held on behalf of, the Crown.
Schedule 2 (which makes further provision in relation to the [F18Office]) shall have effect.
The Police Complaints Authority shall cease to exist on such day as the Secretary of State may by order appoint.


Textual Amendments
F4	S. 9 heading substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 33(3), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F5	S. 9(1) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 33(4), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F6  S. 9(2)(2A) substituted for s. 9(2) (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 33(5), 183(1)(5) (e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 6; S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F7	Words in s. 9(3) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 33(6)(a), 183(1) (5)(e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 6; S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F8  Words in s. 9(3) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 33(6)(b), 183(1) (5)(e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 6; S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F9  Words in s. 9(3)(d) inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 14 para.
40; S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(p) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
F10  S. 9(3)(da) inserted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 178,
Sch. 2 para. 2(a); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F11  Words in s. 9(3)(da) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch.
8 para. 153(1)(a); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(v)
F12  S. 9(3)(db) inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 1, 53, Sch. 1 para. 81; S.I.
2007/709, art. 3(a) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
F13  Words in s. 9(3)(db) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch.
8 para. 153(1)(b); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(v)
F14 S. 9(3)(dc) inserted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 8 para. 153(1) (c); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(v)
F15  Words in s. 9(3)(e) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),
ss. 55, 174, 178, Sch. 2 para. 2(b), Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 8, 12, 13(oo) (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F16 Words in s. 9(5) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 33(7)(a), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F17 Word in s. 9(5) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 33(7)(b), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
12	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



General functions of the [F19Director General]
The functions of the [F19Director General] shall be—
to secure the maintenance by the [F19Director General]F20..., and by [F21local policing bodies] and chief officers, of suitable arrangements with respect to the matters mentioned in subsection (2);
to keep under review all arrangements maintained with respect to those matters;
to secure that arrangements maintained with respect to those matters comply with the requirements of the following provisions of this Part, are efficient and effective and contain and manifest an appropriate degree of independence;
to secure that public confidence is established and maintained in the existence of suitable arrangements with respect to those matters and with the operation of the arrangements that are in fact maintained with respect to those matters;
to make such recommendations, and to give such advice, for the modification of the arrangements maintained with respect to those matters, and also of police practice in relation to other matters, as appear, from the carrying out by the [F19Director General] of [F22the Director General's] other functions, to be necessary or desirable; F23. . .
to such extent as [F24the Director General] may be required to do so by regulations made by the Secretary of State, to carry out functions in relation to F25. . . bodies of constables maintained otherwise than by [F26local policing bodies] which broadly correspond to those conferred on the [F19Director General] in relation to police forces by the preceding paragraphs of this subsection[F27; F28. . .
to carry out functions in relation to the [F29National Crime Agency] which correspond to those conferred on the [F19Director General] in relation to police forces by paragraph (e) of this subsection][F30; and
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	13
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

[
F31(ga)
to carry out such corresponding functions in relation to officers of the Gangmasters and Labour Abuse Authority in their capacity as labour abuse prevention officers (see section 114B of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE powers for labour abuse prevention officers))][F32; and
(gb) to carry out such corresponding functions in relation to officers of the Food Standards Agency acting in the exercise of functions conferred on them by virtue of—
section 114C of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE powers for food crime officers), or
section 39A of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 (powers for food crime officers: inferences from silence).]
F33(h)	]
Those matters are—
the handling of complaints [F34(within the meaning given by section 12)][F35or other concerns raised by virtue of Part 2B (whistle-blowing)];
the recording of matters from which it appears that there may have been conduct by [F36persons serving with the police] which constitutes or involves the commission of a criminal offence or behaviour justifying disciplinary proceedings;
[F37(ba) the recording of matters from which it appears that a person has died or suffered serious injury during, or following, contact with a person serving with the police;]
the manner in which any such complaints [F38or other concerns] or any such matters as are mentioned in paragraph (b) [F39or (ba)] are investigated or otherwise handled and dealt with.
The [F19Director General] shall also have the functions which are conferred on [F40the Director General] by—
F41. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
any agreement or order under section 26 of this Act (other bodies of constables);
[F42(bc)	any regulations under section 26C of this Act (the National Crime Agency);] [F43(bd)	any regulations under section 26D of this Act (labour abuse prevention
officers);]
[F44(be)	any regulations under section 26E of this Act (food crime officers);]
any regulations under section 39 of this Act (police powers for contracted- out staff); or
any regulations or arrangements relating to disciplinary or similar proceedings against persons serving with the police, or against members of F45	any body
of constables maintained otherwise than by a [F46local policing body].
[F47(3A) The [F19Director General] also has any functions conferred on [F48the Director General] by regulations under section 29C of this Act (regulations about super-complaints).]
[F49(3B) The [F19Director General] also has the functions which are conferred on [F50the Director General] by Part 2B (whistle-blowing).]
It shall be the duty of the [F19Director General]—
to exercise the powers and perform the duties conferred on [F51the Director General] by the following provisions of this Part in the manner that [F51the Director General] considers best calculated for the purpose of securing the
14	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


proper carrying out of [F52the Director General's] functions under subsections
(1) and (3); and
to secure that arrangements exist which are conducive to, and facilitate, the reporting of misconduct by persons in relation to whose conduct the [F19Director General] has functions.
It shall also be the duty of the [F19Director General]—
to enter into arrangements with the chief inspector of constabulary for the purpose of securing co-operation, in the carrying out of their respective functions, between the [F19Director General] and the inspectors of constabulary; and
to provide those inspectors with all such assistance and co-operation as may be required by those arrangements, or as otherwise appears to the [F19Director General] to be appropriate, for facilitating the carrying out by those inspectors of their functions.
[F53(5A) In carrying out functions the Director General must have regard to any advice provided to the Director General by the Office (see section 10A(1)(c)).]
Subject to the other provisions of this Part, the [F19Director General] may do anything which appears to [F54the Director General] to be calculated to facilitate, or is incidental or conducive to, the carrying out of [F55the Director General's] functions.
The [F56Office] may, in connection with the making of any recommendation or the giving of any advice to any person for the purpose of carrying out—
[F57the Director General's] function under subsection (1)(e), F58. . .
any corresponding function conferred on [F59the Director General] by virtue of subsection (1)(f), [F60or
[F57the Director General's] function under subsection (1)(g) [F61or (h)],]
impose any such charge on that person for anything done by the [F19Director General] for the purposes of, or in connection with, the carrying out of that function as [F59the Director General] thinks fit.
F62(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F63(9) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	15
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F24 Words in s. 10(1)(f) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(4); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F25 Words in s. 10(1)(f) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 174, 178, Sch. 2 para. 3(2)(b), Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 8, 12, 13(oo)
(subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F26 Words in s. 10(1)(f) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 278(2); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F27 S. 10(1)(g) and preceding word inserted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 3(2)(c); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F28  Word in s. 10(1) repealed (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 15 Pt.
1(A); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(q) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
F29 Words in s. 10(1)(g) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 9(2)(a); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F30  S. 10(1)(h) and preceding word inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 1, 53,
Sch. 1 para. 82(2); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(a) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
F31  S. 10(1)(ga) inserted (12.7.2016) by Immigration Act 2016 (c. 19), s. 94(1), Sch. 3 para. 11(a); S.I.
2016/603, reg. 3(u)
F32  S. 10(1)(gb) and word inserted (28.6.2022) by Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32),
ss. 54(4)(a)(i), 208(5)(f) (with s. 54(5)-(10))
F33  S. 10(1)(h) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.
9(2)(b); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F34 Words in s. 10(2)(a) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 2(a); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F35  Words in s. 10(2)(a) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3),
ss. 34(3)(a), 183(1)(5)(e)
F36 Words in s. 10(2)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 2(b); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F37  S. 10(2)(ba) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178,
Sch. 12 para. 2(2); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F38  Words in s. 10(2)(c) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3),
ss. 34(3)(b), 183(1)(5)(e)
F39  Words in s. 10(2)(c) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.
160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 2(3); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F40 Words in s. 10(3) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(5); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F41 S. 10(3)(a) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 174, 178, Sch. 2 para. 3(3)(a), Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 8, 12, 13(oo) (subject to
art. 4(2)-(7))
F42  S. 10(3)(bc) substituted for s. 10(3)(ba)(bb) (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s.
61(2), Sch. 6 para. 9(3); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F43  S. 10(3)(bd) inserted (12.7.2016) by Immigration Act 2016 (c. 19), s. 94(1), Sch. 3 para. 11(b); S.I.
2016/603, reg. 3(u)
F44 S. 10(3)(be) inserted (28.6.2022) by Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 (c. 32), ss. 54(4) (a)(ii), 208(5)(f) (with s. 54(5)-(10))
F45  Words in s. 10(3)(d) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),
ss. 55, 174, 178, Sch. 2 para. 3(3)(c), Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 8, 12, 13(oo)
(subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F46 Words in s. 10(3)(d) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 278(3); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
16	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F47 S. 10(3A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 16.4.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 27(2), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2018/456, reg. 3(c)
F48 Words in s. 10(3A) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(6); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F49 S. 10(3B) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 28(3), 183(1)(5)(e)
F50 Words in s. 10(3B) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(7); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F51 Words in s. 10(4)(a) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(8)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F52 Words in s. 10(4)(a) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(8)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F53 S. 10(5A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 34(4), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F54 Words in s. 10(6) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(9)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F55 Words in s. 10(6) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(9)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F56 Word in s. 10(7) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 34(5), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F57 Words in s. 10(7) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(10)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F58  Word in s. 10(7)(a) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),
ss. 55, 174, 178, Sch. 2 para. 3(4), Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 8, 12, 13(oo)
(subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F59 Words in s. 10(7) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 17(10)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F60 S. 10(7)(c) and preceding word inserted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 3(4); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F61  Words in s. 10(7)(c) inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 1, 53, Sch. 1 para.
82(4); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(a) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
F62  S. 10(8) omitted (22.11.2012) by virtue of Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s.
157(1), Sch. 14 para. 6(a); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)
F63  S. 10(9) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.
9(4); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)

Modifications etc. (not altering text)
C28 S. 10 applied (with modifications) (E.W.) (28.12.2005) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(2)(6), Sch. 1
C29 S. 10(7) applied (with modifications) (16.1.2012) by The Elected Local Policing Bodies (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2012 (S.I. 2012/62), regs. 1, 3(5) (with reg. 3(6))
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	17
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

[F6410A General functions of the Office
The functions of the Office are—
to secure that the Office has in place appropriate arrangements for good governance and financial management,
to determine and promote the strategic aims and values of the Office,
to provide support and advice to the Director General in the carrying out of the Director General's functions, and
to monitor and review the carrying out of such functions.
The Office also has such other functions as are conferred on it by any other enactment (whenever passed or made).
The Office is to perform its functions for the general purpose of improving the way in which the Director General's functions are carried out (including by encouraging the efficient and effective use of resources in the carrying out of those functions).
In carrying out its functions the Office must in particular have regard to public confidence in the existence of suitable arrangements with respect to the matters mentioned in section 10(2) and with the operation of the arrangements that are in fact maintained with respect to those matters.
The Office may do anything which appears to it to be calculated to facilitate, or is incidental or conducive to, the carrying out of its functions.


10B	Efficiency etc in exercise of functions
The Director General and the Office must carry out their functions efficiently and effectively.


10C	Strategy for exercise of functions
The Director General and the Office must jointly—
prepare a strategy for the carrying out of their functions, and
review the strategy (and revise it as appropriate) at least once every 12 months.
The strategy must set out how the Director General and the Office propose to carry out their functions in the relevant period.
The strategy must also include a plan for the use during the relevant period of resources for the carrying out of functions of the Director General and the Office.
18	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


The Director General and the Office must each give effect to the strategy in carrying out their functions.
The Director General and the Office must jointly publish a strategy (or revised strategy) prepared under this section (stating the time from which it takes effect).
In this section “relevant period”, in relation to a strategy, means the period of time that is covered by the strategy.


10D	Code of practice
The Director General and the Office must jointly prepare a code of practice dealing with the relationship between the Director General and the Office.
In doing so, they must (in particular) seek to reflect the principle that the Director General is to act independently when making decisions in connection with the carrying out of the Director General's functions.
The code must include provision as to the following—
how the strategy required by section 10C is to be prepared, reviewed and revised;
the matters to be covered by the strategy and the periods to be covered by it from time to time;
how the carrying out of functions by the Director General is to be monitored and reviewed by other members of the Office;
the giving of advice to the Director General by other members of the Office in connection with the carrying out of functions by the Director General;
the keeping of written records of instances where the Director General has not followed advice given by other members of the Office and the reasons for not doing so;
how non-executive members of the Office are to give practical effect to the requirement imposed by subsection (2).
The Code may include whatever other provision the Director General and the Office think appropriate.
The Director General and the Office must jointly review the code regularly and revise it as appropriate.
The Director General and the Office must each comply with the code.
The Director General and the Office must jointly publish a code (or revised code) prepared under this section (stating the time from which it takes effect).]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	19
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Reports to the Secretary of State
As soon as practicable after the end of each of [F65the Office's] financial years, the [F66Director General and the Office must jointly] make a report to the Secretary of State on the carrying out of [F67their] functions during that year.
[F68(2) The Secretary of State may also require reports to be made (at any time)—
by the Director General about the carrying out of the Director General's functions,
by the Office about the carrying out of the Office's functions, or
jointly by the Director General and the Office about the carrying out of their functions.]
[F69(2A) The Director General may, from time to time, make such other reports to the Secretary of State as the Director General considers appropriate for drawing the Secretary of State's attention to matters which—
have come to the Director General's notice, and
are matters which the Director General considers should be drawn to the attention of the Secretary of State by reason of their gravity or of other exceptional circumstances.]
The [F70Office] may, from time to time, make such other reports to the Secretary of State as it considers appropriate for drawing his attention to matters which—
have come to the [F71Office's] notice; and
are matters that it considers should be drawn to his attention by reason of their gravity or of other exceptional circumstances.
[F72(3A) The Director General and the Office may jointly make reports under subsections (2A) and (3).]
The [F73Director General] shall prepare such reports containing advice and recommendations as [F74the Director General] thinks appropriate for the purpose of carrying out—
[F75the Director General's] function under subsection (1)(e) of section 10; or
any corresponding function conferred on [F74the Director General] by virtue of subsection (1)(f) of that section.
Where the Secretary of State receives any report under this section, he shall—
in the case of every annual report under subsection (1), and
in the case of any other report, if and to the extent that he considers it appropriate to do so,
lay a copy of the report before Parliament and cause the report to be published.
The [F76Office] shall send a copy of every annual report under subsection (1)—
to every [F77local policing body];
F78(b)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F79(c)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
to every authority that is maintaining a body of constables in relation to which any procedures are for the time being in force by virtue of any agreement or order under section 26 or by virtue of subsection (9) of that section[F80; and
F81(e)	]
[F82(f)  to the National Crime Agency.]
[F83(6A) The Director General must send a copy of every report under subsection (2A) —
to any local policing body that appears to the Director General to be concerned, and
to the chief officer of police of any police force that appears to the Director General to be concerned.]
The [F84Office] shall send a copy of every report under subsection (3)—
to any [F85local policing body] that appears to the [F84Office] to be concerned; and
to the chief officer of police of any police force that appears to it to be concerned.
[F86(8) Where a report under subsection [F87(2A) or] (3) relates to the [F88National Crime Agency], the [F89Director General or the Office (as the case may be)] shall send a copy of that report to the Agency.]
Where a report under subsection [F90(2A) or] (3) relates to a body of constables maintained by an authority other than a [F91local policing body], the [F92Director General or the Office (as the case may be)] shall send a copy of that report—
to that authority; and
to the person having the direction and control of that body of constables.
F93(9A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The [F94Director General] shall send a copy of every report under subsection (4)to—
the Secretary of State;
every [F95local policing body];
every chief officer;
F96(d)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F97(e)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
every authority that is maintaining a body of constables in relation to which any procedures are for the time being in force by virtue of any agreement or order under section 26 or by virtue of subsection (9) of that section; F98. . .
every person who has the direction and control of such a body of constables[F99; F100...
F101(h)	][F102; and
the National Crime Agency.]
The [F103Director General] shall send a copy of every report made or prepared by [F104the Director General] under subsection [F105(2A)] or (4) to such of the persons (in addition to those specified in the preceding subsections) who—
are referred to in the report, or
appear to the [F103Director General] otherwise to have a particular interest in its contents,
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	21
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

as the [F103Director General] thinks fit.
[F106(12) The Office must send a copy of every report made or prepared by it under subsection (3) to such of the persons (in addition to those specified in the preceding subsections) who—
are referred to in the report, or
appear to the Office otherwise to have a particular interest in its contents, as the Office thinks fit.
(13) Where a report under subsection (2A) or (3) is prepared jointly by virtue of subsection (3A), a duty under this section to send a copy of the report to any person is met if either the Director General or the Office sends a copy to that person.]


Textual Amendments
F65 Words in s. 11(1) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(2)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F66 Words in s. 11(1) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(2)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F67 Word in s. 11(1) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(2)(c); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F68 S. 11(2) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(3); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F69 S. 11(2A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(4); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F70 Word in s. 11(3) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(5)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F71 Word in s. 11(3) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(5)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F72 S. 11(3A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(6); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F73 Words in s. 11(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(7)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F74 Words in s. 11(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(7)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F75 Words in s. 11(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(7)(c); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F76 Word in s. 11(6) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(8); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
22	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F77 Words in s. 11(6)(a) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 279; S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F78  S. 11(6)(b) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.
10(2)(a); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F79  S. 11(6)(c) omitted (1.4.2006) by virtue of Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.
55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 4(2); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F80  S. 11(6)(e) and preceding word inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 1, 53,
Sch. 1 para. 83(2); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(a) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
F81  S. 11(6)(e) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.
10(2)(a); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F82  S. 11(6)(f) inserted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 10(2)(b);
S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F83 S. 11(6A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(9); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F84  Word in s. 11(7) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(10); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F85 Words in s. 11(7)(a) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 279; S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F86  S. 11(8) substituted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 178,
Sch. 2 para. 4(3); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F87 Words in s. 11(8) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(11)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F88  Words in s. 11(8) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.
10(3); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F89 Words in s. 11(8) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(11)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F90 Words in s. 11(9) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(12)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F91  Words in s. 11(9) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),
s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 279; S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F92 Words in s. 11(9) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(12)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F93  S. 11(9A) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.
10(4); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F94 Words in s. 11(10) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 18(13); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F95 Words in s. 11(10)(b) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 279; S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F96  S. 11(10)(d) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.
10(5)(a); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F97  S. 11(10)(e) omitted (1.4.2006) by virtue of Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.
55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 4(4); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F98 Words in s. 11(6)(10) repealed (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 15 Pt. 1(A); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(q) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
F99  S. 11(10)(h) and preceding word inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 1, 53,
Sch. 1 para. 83(4); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(a) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	23
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Application of Part 2

Complaints, matters and persons to which Part 2 applies
[F107(1) In this Part references to a complaint are references (subject to the following provisions of this section) to any expression of dissatisfaction with a police force which is expressed (whether in writing or otherwise) by or on behalf of a member of the public.
(1A) But an expression of dissatisfaction is a complaint for the purposes of this Part—
where it relates to conduct of a person serving with the police, only if the person in question is a person falling within subsection (1B);
in any other case, only if the person in question has been adversely affected by the matter about which dissatisfaction is expressed.
(1B) In relation to an expression of dissatisfaction that relates to conduct of a person serving with the police, a person falls within this subsection if the person is—
a person who claims to be the person in relation to whom the conduct took place;
a person not falling within paragraph (a) who claims to have been adversely affected by the conduct; or
a person who claims to have witnessed the conduct.]
In this Part “conduct matter” means (subject to the following provisions of this section, [F108section 28A and any regulations made under it,]F109... and any regulations made by virtue of section 23(2)(d)) any matter which is not and has not been the subject of a complaint but in the case of which there is an indication (whether from the circumstances or otherwise) that a person serving with the police may have—
committed a criminal offence; or
24	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings.
[F110(2A) In this Part “death or serious injury matter” (or “DSI matter” for short) means [F111(subject to section 28A and any regulations made under it)] any circumstances (other than those which are or have been the subject of a complaint or which amount to a conduct matter)—
in or in consequence of which a person has died or has sustained serious injury; and
in relation to which the requirements of either subsection (2B) or subsection (2C) are satisfied.
(2B) The requirements of this subsection are that at the time of the death or serious injury the person—
had been arrested by a person serving with the police and had not been released from that arrest; or
was otherwise detained in the custody of a person serving with the police.
(2C) The requirements of this subsection are that—
at or before the time of the death or serious injury the person had contact (of whatever kind, and whether direct or indirect) with a person serving with the police who was acting in the execution of his duties; and
there is an indication that the contact may have caused (whether directly or indirectly) or contributed to the death or serious injury.
(2D) In subsection (2A) the reference to a person includes a person serving with the police, but in relation to such a person “contact” in subsection (2C) does not include contact that he has whilst acting in the execution of his duties.]
The complaints that are complaints for the purposes of this Part by virtue of [F112subsection (1B)(b)] do not, except in a case falling within subsection (4), include any [F113where the person in question] claims to have been adversely affected as a consequence only of having seen or heard the conduct, or any of the alleged effects of the conduct.
A case falls within this subsection if—
it was only because the person in question was physically present, or sufficiently nearby, when the conduct took place or the effects occurred that he was able to see or hear the conduct or its effects; or
the adverse effect is attributable to, or was aggravated by, the fact that the person in relation to whom the conduct took place was already known to the person claiming to have suffered the adverse effect.
[F114(4A) In this section, “the person in question” means the person expressing dissatisfaction or the person on whose behalf dissatisfaction is being expressed.]
For the purposes of this section a person shall be taken to have witnessed conduct if, and only if—
he acquired his knowledge of that conduct in a manner which would make him a competent witness capable of giving admissible evidence of that conduct in criminal proceedings; or
he has in his possession or under his control anything which would in any such proceedings constitute admissible evidence of that conduct.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	25
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

[F115For the purposes of this Part a person is not to be taken to have authorised another person to make a complaint on his behalf unless—]
that other person is for the time being designated for the purposes of this Part by the [F116Director General] as a person through whom complaints may be made, or he is of a description of persons so designated; or
the other person has been given, and is able to produce, the written consent to his so acting of the person on whose behalf he acts.
For the purposes of this Part, a person is serving with the police if—
he is a member of a police force;
[F117(aa)	he is a civilian employee of a police force;]
he is an employee of [F118the Common Council of the City of London] who is under the direction and control of a chief officer; F119...
he is a special constable who is under the direction and control of a chief officer[F120; or
he is a person designated as a community support volunteer or a policing support volunteer under section 38.]
[F121(8) The Secretary of State may make regulations providing that, for the purposes of this Part and of any regulations made under this Part—
a contractor,
a sub-contractor of a contractor, or
an employee of a contractor or a sub-contractor, is to be treated as a person serving with the police.]
[F121(9) Regulations under subsection (8) may make modifications to this Part, and to any regulations made under this Part, in its application to those persons.]
[F121(10) In subsection (8) “contractor” means a person who has entered into a contract with a local policing body or a chief officer to provide services to a chief officer.]

26	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Handling of complaints [F122, conduct matters and DSI matters] etc.


Handling of complaints[F123, conduct matters and DSI matters] etc.
Schedule 3 (which makes provision for the handling of complaints[F124, conduct matters and DSI matters] and for the carrying out of investigations) shall have effect
F125....

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	27
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



[F12613A Local policing bodies: functions in relation to complaints
(1) The local policing body that maintains a police force may give notice to the chief officer of the police force that it (rather than the chief officer) is to exercise the functions conferred on the chief officer by the provisions specified in subsection (2) or subsections (2) and (3).
The provisions specified in this subsection are—
paragraph 2(6) to (6D) of Schedule 3, and
paragraph 2(9) and (10) of Schedule 3 in so far as relating to a determination made for the purposes of paragraph 2(6) to (6C) of that Schedule.
The provisions specified in this subsection are—
section 20, and
section 21 in so far as that section relates to complaints.
In relation to any complaint in respect of which the chief officer is the appropriate authority that is made on or after the day on which a notice under subsection (1) is given—
the functions of the chief officer to which the notice relates become functions of the local policing body,
references to the chief officer, including in the chief officer's capacity as an appropriate authority, in the provisions specified in subsection (2) or (as the case may be) subsections (2) and (3) are to be read as references to the local policing body, and
for the purpose of paragraph 6(1) of Schedule 3, the complaint is to be treated as having been recorded by the chief officer.
Where the notice under subsection (1) relates to the functions conferred on the chief officer by the provisions specified in subsections (2) and (3), subsection (4)(b) does not apply to the references to an appropriate authority in sections 20(2)(a) and (3A)
and 21(7)(a) and (8A)(a).
The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision in connection with the giving of notices under subsection (1) and their withdrawal.
Regulations under subsection (6) may (amongst other things) make provision about—
the steps that a local policing body must take before giving a notice;
the circumstances in which a notice may be withdrawn.]

28	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


[F12713B Power of the [F128Director General] to require re-investigation
This section applies where—
a report on an investigation of a complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter carried out under the direction of the [F129Director General] has been submitted to [F130the Director General] under paragraph 22(3) or 24A of Schedule 3, or
a report on an investigation of a complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter carried out by a person designated by the [F129Director General] has been submitted to [F130the Director General][F131(or, in the case of an investigation carried out under paragraph 19 of Schedule 3 by the Director General personally, is otherwise completed by the Director General)] under paragraph 22(5) or 24A of Schedule 3.
The [F129Director General] may at any time determine that the complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter is to be re-investigated if [F132the Director General] is satisfied that there are compelling reasons for doing so.
Where the [F129Director General] makes a determination under subsection (2), [F133the Director General] must determine that the re-investigation is to take the form of an investigation by the [F129Director General] unless subsection (4) applies, in which case the [F129Director General] must determine that the re-investigation is to take the form described in that subsection.
This subsection applies where the [F129Director General] determines that it would be more appropriate for the re-investigation to take the form of an investigation by the appropriate authority under the direction of the [F129Director General].
Where—
the [F129Director General] determines under subsection (3) or (7) that a re- investigation is to take the form of an investigation by the [F129Director General], and
at any time after that the [F129Director General] determines that subsection (4) applies in relation to the re-investigation,
the [F129Director General] may make a further determination under this section (to replace the earlier one) that the re-investigation is instead to take the form of an investigation by the appropriate authority under the direction of the [F129Director General].
Where the [F129Director General] determines under subsection (3) or (5) that a re- investigation is to take the form of an investigation by the appropriate authority under the direction of the [F129Director General], the [F129Director General] must keep under review whether subsection (4) continues to apply in relation to the re-investigation.
If, on such a review, the [F129Director General] Director General determines that subsection (4) no longer applies in relation to a re-investigation, the [F129Director General] must make a further determination under this section (to replace the earlier one) that the re-investigation is instead to take the form of an investigation by the [F129Director General].
Sub-paragraphs (6) and (7) of paragraph 15 of Schedule 3 shall apply in relation to a further determination under subsection (5) or (7) as they apply in the case of a further determination under sub-paragraph (5A) or (5B) of that paragraph.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	29
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

The other provisions of Schedule 3 shall apply in relation to any re-investigation in pursuance of a determination under this section as they apply in relation to any investigation in pursuance of a determination under paragraph 15.
The [F129Director General] shall notify the appropriate authority of any determination that [F134the Director General] makes under this section and of [F135the Director General's] reasons for making the determination.
The [F129Director General] shall also notify the following of any determination that [F136the Director General] makes under this section and of [F137the Director General's] reasons for making the determination—
every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter (as the case may be) under section 21;
where the determination is made in relation to a complaint, the complainant;
the person to whose conduct the re-investigation will relate.
The duty imposed by subsection (11) on the [F129Director General] shall have effect subject to such exceptions as may be provided for by regulations made by the Secretary of State.
Subsections (6) to (8) of section 20 apply for the purposes of subsection (12) as they apply for the purposes of that section.
In relation to a matter that was formerly a DSI matter but was recorded as a conduct matter in pursuance of paragraph 21A(5) of Schedule 3, the reference in subsection (10) to the appropriate authority is a reference to the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct was in question.
The reference to a report in subsection (1) includes a report on a re-investigation by virtue of this section or paragraph 25 of Schedule 3.]

30	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



F13814	Direction and control matters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Co-operation, assistance and information

General duties of [F139local policing bodies], chief officers and inspectors
It shall be the duty of—
every [F140local policing body] maintaining a police force,
the chief officer of police of every police force, and
every inspector of constabulary carrying out any of his functions in relation to a police force,
to ensure that it or he is kept informed, in relation to that force, about all matters falling within subsection (2).
[F141(1A) It shall be the duty of the [F142National Crime Agency] to ensure that it is kept informed, in relation to the Agency, about all matters falling within subsection (2).]
F143(1B) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Those matters are—
matters with respect to which any provision of this Part has effect;
anything which is done under or for the purposes of any such provision; and
any obligations to act or refrain from acting that have arisen by or under this Part but have not yet been complied with, or have been contravened.
[F144(2A) Subsection (2B) applies in a case where it appears to a local policing body that—
an obligation to act or refrain from acting has arisen by or under this Part,
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	31
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

that obligation is an obligation of the chief officer of police of the police force which is maintained by the local policing body, and
the chief officer has not yet complied with that obligation, or has contravened it.
(2B) The local policing body may direct the chief officer to take such steps as the local policing body thinks appropriate.
(2C) The chief officer must comply with any direction given under subsection (2B).]
Where—
a [F145local policing body] maintaining any police force requires the chief officer of that force or of any other force to provide a member of his force for appointment under paragraph 16F146... or 18 of Schedule 3,
the chief officer of police of any police force requires the chief officer of police of any other police force to provide a member of that other force for appointment under any of those paragraphs, or
[F147(c) a [F148local policing body] or chief officer requires the Director General of the [F149National Crime Agency] to provide a [F150National Crime Agency officer] for appointment under any of those paragraphs,]
it shall be the duty of the chief officer [F151to whom the requirement is addressed or of the Director General][F152of the Agency] to comply with it.
It shall be the duty of—
every [F153local policing body] maintaining a police force,
the chief officer of police of every police force, [F154 and] [F155(c)  the [F156National Crime Agency],]
to provide the [F157Director General] and every member of the [F158Office's] staff with all such assistance as the [F157Director General] or that member of staff may reasonably require for the purposes of, or in connection with, the carrying out of any investigation by the [F157Director General] under this Part [F159or any review under paragraph 25 of Schedule 3].
It shall be the duty of—
every [F160local policing body] maintaining a police force,
the chief officer of every police force, [F161and] [F162(c)	the [F163National Crime Agency],]
to ensure that a person appointed under paragraph 16F164... or 18 of Schedule 3 to carry out an investigation is given all such assistance and co-operation in the carrying out of that investigation as that person may reasonably require
The duties imposed by subsections (4) and (5) on a [F165local policing body] maintaining a police force and on the chief officer of such a force and on [F166the [F167National Crime Agency]] have effect—
irrespective of whether the investigation [F168or review (as the case may be)] relates to the conduct of a person who is or has been a member of that force or [F169a [F170a National Crime Agency officer]]; F171...
[F172in the case of an investigation,] irrespective of who has the person appointed to carry out the investigation under his direction and control; [F173and
32	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


in the case of a review applied for under paragraph 25(1B) of Schedule 3 in respect of an investigation, irrespective of who had the person appointed to carry out the investigation under his direction and control;]
but a chief officer of a third force may be required to give assistance and co-operation under subsection (5) only with the approval of the chief officer of the force to which the person who requires it belongs F174. . . .
In subsection (6) “third force”, in relation to an investigation, means a police force other than—
the force to which the person carrying out the investigation belongs; or
the force to which the person whose conduct is under investigation belonged at the time of the conduct;
[F175 and where the person whose conduct is under investigation was a [F176National Crime Agency officer] at the time of the conduct, “third force” means any police force other than the force to which the person carrying out the investigation belongs.]
[F177(8) Where the person who requires assistance and co-operation under subsection (5) is a [F178National Crime Agency officer], a chief officer of a third force may be required to give that assistance and co-operation only with the approval of the Director General of the Agency.
F179(8A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F180(8B) In subsections (8) and (8A) “third force”, in relation to an investigation, means any police force other than the force to which the person whose conduct is under investigation belonged at the time of the conduct.]
(9) Where—
the person carrying out an investigation is not a [F181National Crime Agency officer]; and
the person whose conduct is under investigation was not a [F182National Crime Agency officer] at the time of the conduct,
[F183the Agency may be required to give assistance and co-operation under subsection (5) only with the approval of the relevant directing officer.]]
[F184(10) In subsection (9) “the relevant directing officer”—
in a case where the person who requires assistance and co-operation belongs to a police force, means the chief officer of that force; F185...
F186(b)	]

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	33
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F144 S. 15(2A)-(2C) inserted (16.1.2012 for specified purposes, 22.11.2012 in so far as not already in force) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 7; S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1; S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)
F145 Words in s. 15(3)(a) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 281(3); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F146 Word in s. 15(3)(a) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(a)(i); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F147 S. 15(3)(c) substituted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 178,
Sch. 2 para. 5(3)(a); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F148 Words in s. 15(3)(c) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 281(4); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F149 Words in s. 15(3)(c) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 11(4)(a); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F150 Words in s. 15(3)(c) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 11(4)(b); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F151 Words in s. 15(3) substituted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.
55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 5(3)(b); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F152 Words in s. 15(3) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 21(2); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F153 Words in s. 15(4)(a) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 281(5); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F154 Word in s. 15(4)(b) inserted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.
55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 5(4); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F155 S. 15(4)(c) substituted for s. 15(4)(c)(d) (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 5(4); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F156 Words in s. 15(4)(c) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 11(5); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F157 Words in s. 15(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 21(3)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F158 Word in s. 15(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 21(3)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F159 Words in s. 15(4) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 42(a); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F160 Words in s. 15(5)(a) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 281(5); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F161 Word in s. 15(5)(b) inserted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.
55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 5(5); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F162 S. 15(5)(c) substituted for s. 15(5)(c)(d) (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 5(5); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F163 Words in s. 15(5)(c) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 11(5); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F164 Word in s. 15(5) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(a)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F165 Words in s. 15(6) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),
s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 281(5); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F166 Words in s. 15(6) substituted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.
55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 5(6)(a); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
34	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F167 Words in s. 15(6) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.
11(6)(a); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F168 Words in s. 15(6)(a) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 42(b)(i); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F169 Words in s. 15(6)(a) substituted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),
ss. 55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 5(6)(b); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F170 Words in s. 15(6)(a) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 11(6)(b); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F171 Word in s. 15(6)(a) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 42(b)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F172 Words in s. 15(6)(b) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 42(b)(iii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F173 S. 15(6)(c) and word inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 42(b)(iv); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F174 Words in s. 15(6) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 174, 178, Sch. 2 para. 5(6)(c), Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 8, 12, 13(oo) (subject
to art. 4(2)-(7))
F175 Words in s. 15(7) substituted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.
55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 5(7); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F176 Words in s. 15(7) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.
11(7); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F177 S. 15(8)(9) inserted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 178,
Sch. 2 para. 5(8); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F178 Words in s. 15(8) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.
11(8); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F179 S. 15(8A) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.
11(9); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F180 S. 15(8A)(8B) substituted for words in s. 15(8) (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 1, 53, Sch. 1 para. 84(3); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(a) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
F181 Words in s. 15(9)(a) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 11(10)(a); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F182 Words in s. 15(9)(b) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 11(10)(b); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F183 Words in s. 15(9) substituted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 1, 53, Sch. 1 para.
84(4); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(a) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
F184 S. 15(10) inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 1, 53, Sch. 1 para. 84(5); S.I.
2007/709, art. 3(a) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
F185 Word in s. 15(10)(a) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch.
6 para. 11(11); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F186 S. 15(10)(b) omitted (7.10.2013) by virtue of Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.
11(11); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)

Modifications etc. (not altering text)
C33 S. 15 applied (with modifications) (E.W.) (28.12.2005) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(2)(6), Sch. 1
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	35
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

Payment for assistance with investigations
This section applies where—
one police force is required to provide assistance to another in connection with an investigation under this Part; or
a police force is required to provide assistance [F187to the [F188Director General] in connection with an investigation under this Part or a review under paragraph 25 of Schedule 3].
For the purposes of this section—
assistance is required to be provided by one police force to another in connection with an investigation under this Part if the chief officer of the first force (“the assisting force”) complies with a requirement under section 15 (3) or (5) that is made in connection with
[F189(ai) an investigation of a complaint where the complainant expressed dissatisfaction with the other force,]
[F190(i) an investigation [F191of a recordable conduct matter] relating to the conduct of a person who, at the time of the conduct, was a member of the other force, or
an investigation of a DSI matter in relation to which the relevant officer was, at the time of the death or serious injury, a member of the other force; and]
assistance is required to be provided [F192by a police force (“the assisting force”) to the [F188Director General] in connection with an investigation under this Part or a review under paragraph 25 of Schedule 3] if the chief officer of that force complies with a requirement under section 15(4) that is made in connection with
[F193(ai) an investigation of a complaint where the complainant expressed dissatisfaction with a force other than that force,]
[F194(i) an investigation [F195of a recordable conduct matter] relating to the conduct of a person who, at the time of the conduct, was not a member of that force, F196...
an investigation of a DSI matter in relation to which the relevant officer was, at the time of the death or serious injury, not a member of that force][F197, or
a review under paragraph 25 of Schedule 3 of the outcome of a complaint where the complainant expressed dissatisfaction with a force other than that force.]
Where the assistance is required to be provided by one police force to another, the [F198local policing body] maintaining that other police force shall pay to the [F198local policing body] maintaining the assisting force such contribution (if any) towards the costs of the assistance—
as may be agreed between them; or
in the absence of an agreement, as may be determined in accordance with any arrangements which—
have been agreed to by [F199local policing bodies] generally; and
are for the time being in force with respect to the making of contributions towards the costs of assistance provided, in connection with investigations under this Part, by one police force to another; or
36	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


in the absence of any such arrangements, as may be determined by the Secretary of State.
Where the assistance is required to be provided by a police force to the [F188Director General], [F200Office] shall pay to the [F201local policing body] maintaining the assisting force such contribution (if any) towards the costs of the assistance—
as may be agreed between the [F188Director General] and [F202that body]; or
in the absence of an agreement, as may be determined in accordance with any arrangements which—
have been agreed to by [F203local policing bodies] generally and by the [F188Director General]; and
are for the time being in force with respect to the making of contributions towards the costs of assistance provided, in connection with investigations under this Part, to the [F188Director General]; or
in the absence of any such arrangements, as may be determined by the Secretary of State.
[F204(5) In this section (subject to subsection (6))—
references to a police force and to a [F205local policing body] maintaining a police force include references to the [F206National Crime Agency]; and
in relation to that Agency, references to the chief officer are references to the Director General [F207of that Agency].
This section shall have effect in relation to cases in which assistance is required to be provided by the [F208National Crime Agency] as if—
the reference in subsection (3)(b) to [F209local policing bodies] generally included a reference to the Agency; and
the reference in subsection (4)(b) to [F209local policing bodies] generally were a reference to the Agency.]
This section is without prejudice to the application of section 24 of the 1996 Act (assistance given voluntarily by one force to another) in a case in which assistance is provided, otherwise than in pursuance of any duty imposed by section 15 of this Act, in connection with an investigation under this Part.

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	37
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F192 Words in s. 16(2)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 43(b)(i); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F193 S. 16(2)(b)(ai) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 3(3)(a); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F194 S. 16(2)(b)(i)(ii) substituted for words (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 5(3); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F195 Words in s. 16(2)(b)(i) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 3(3)(b); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F196 Word in s. 16(2)(b)(i) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 43(b)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F197 S. 16(2)(b)(iii) and word inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 43(b)(iii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F198 Words in s. 16(3) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),
s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 282(2)(a); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F199 Words in s. 16(3)(b)(i) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 282(2)(b); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F200 Word in s. 16(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 22(3); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F201 Words in s. 16(4) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),
s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 282(3)(a); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F202 Words in s. 16(4)(a) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 282(3)(b); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F203 Words in s. 16(4)(b)(i) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 282(3)(c); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F204 S. 16(5)(6) substituted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 178,
Sch. 2 para. 6; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F205 Words in s. 16(5) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),
s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 282(4); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F206 Words in s. 16(5)(a) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 12(2); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F207 Words in s. 16(5)(b) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 22(4); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F208 Words in s. 16(6) substituted (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para.
12(3); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F209 Words in s. 16(6) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),
s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 282(5); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1

Modifications etc. (not altering text)
C34 S. 16 applied (with modifications) (E.W.) (28.12.2005) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(2)(6), Sch. 1


F21016A Investigations: National Policing Improvement Agency involvement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Provision of information to the [F211Director General]
It shall be the duty of—
every [F212local policing body], and
every chief officer,
at such times, in such circumstances and in accordance with such other requirements as may be set out in regulations made by the Secretary of State, to provide the [F211Director General] with all such information and documents as may be specified or described in regulations so made.
It shall also be the duty of every [F213local policing body] and of every chief officer—
to provide the [F211Director General] with all such other information and documents specified or described in a notification given by the [F211Director General] to [F214that body] or chief officer, and
to produce or deliver up to the [F211Director General] all such evidence and other things so specified or described,
as appear to the [F211Director General] to be required by [F215the Director General] for the purposes of the carrying out of any of [F216the Director General's] functions.
Anything falling to be provided, produced or delivered up by any person in pursuance of a requirement imposed under subsection (2) must be provided, produced or delivered up in such form, in such manner and within such period as may be specified in—
the notification imposing the requirement; or
in any subsequent notification given by the [F211Director General] to that person for the purposes of this subsection.
Nothing in this section shall require a [F217local policing body] or chief officer—
to provide the [F211Director General] with any information or document, or to produce or deliver up any other thing, before the earliest time at which it is practicable for [F218that body] or chief officer to do so; or
to provide, produce or deliver up anything at all in a case in which it never becomes practicable for [F218that body] or chief officer to do so.
A requirement imposed by any regulations or notification under this section may authorise or require information or documents to which it relates to be provided to the [F211Director General] electronically.
F219(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	39
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Inspections of police premises on behalf of the [F220Director General]
Where—
the [F220Director General] requires—
a [F221local policing body] maintaining any police force, or
the chief officer of police of any such force,
to allow a person nominated for the purpose by the [F220Director General] to have access to any premises occupied for the purposes of that force and to documents and other things on those premises, and
the requirement is imposed for any of the purposes mentioned in subsection (2),
it shall be the duty of [F222the body] or, as the case may be, of the chief officer to secure that the required access is allowed to the nominated person.
Those purposes are—
the purposes of any examination by the [F220Director General] of the efficiency and effectiveness of the arrangements made by the force in question for handling complaints or dealing with recordable conduct matters [F223or DSI matters];
the purposes of any investigation by the [F220Director General] under this Part or of any investigation carried out under [F224the Director General's]F225... [F226direction].
40	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


[F227(c)	the purposes of any review by the [F220Director General] under paragraph 25 of Schedule 3.]
A requirement imposed under this section for the purposes mentioned in subsection (2)
must be notified to [F228the body] or chief officer at least 48 hours before the time at which access is required.
Where—
a requirement imposed under this section for the purposes mentioned in subsection (2)(a) requires access to any premises, document or thing to be allowed to any person, but
there are reasonable grounds for not allowing that person to have the required access at the time at which he seeks to have it,
the obligation to secure that the required access is allowed shall have effect as an obligation to secure that the access is allowed to that person at the earliest practicable time after there cease to be any such grounds as that person may specify.
The provisions of this section are in addition to, and without prejudice to—
the rights of entry, search and seizure that are or may be conferred on—
a person designated for the purposes of paragraph 19 of Schedule 3, or
any person who otherwise acts on behalf of the [F220Director General],
in his capacity as a constable or as a person with the powers and privileges of a constable; or
the obligations of [F229local policing bodies] and chief officers under sections 15 and 17.

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	41
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Use of investigatory powers by or on behalf of the [F230Director General]
The Secretary of State may by order make such provision as he thinks appropriate for the purpose of authorising—
the use of directed and intrusive surveillance, and
the conduct and use of covert human intelligence sources,
for the purposes of, or for purposes connected with, the carrying out of the [F231Director General's] functions.
An order under this section may, for the purposes of or in connection with any such provision as is mentioned in subsection (1), provide for—
Parts 2 and 4 the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (c. 23) (surveillance and covert human intelligence sources and scrutiny of investigatory powers), and
Part 3 of the 1997 Act (authorisations in respect of property), to have effect with such modifications as may be specified in the order.
The Secretary of State shall not make an order containing (with or without any other provision) any provision authorised by this section unless a draft of that order has been laid before Parliament and approved by a resolution of each House.
Expressions used in this section and in Part 2 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 have the same meanings in this section as in that Part.
[F232(5) But the reference in subsection (1)(b) to the conduct of covert human intelligence sources does not include conduct which may be authorised under section 29B of that Act (criminal conduct authorisations).]

42	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Duty to keep the complainant informed
In any case in which there is an investigation of a complaint in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3—
by the [F233Director General], or
under [F234the Director General's][F235direction],
it shall be the duty of the [F233Director General] to provide the complainant with all such information as will keep him properly informed, while the investigation is being carried out and subsequently, of all the matters mentioned in subsection (4).
In any case in which there is an investigation of a complaint in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3—
by the appropriate authority on its own behalf, F236... F237(b)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to provide the complainant with all such information as will keep him properly informed, while the investigation is being carried out and subsequently, of all the matters mentioned in subsection (4).
Where subsection (2) applies, it shall be the duty of the [F233Director General] to give the appropriate authority all such directions as [F238the Director General] considers appropriate for securing that that authority complies with its duty under that subsection; and it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to comply with any direction given to it under this subsection.
[F239(3A) In any case in which a complaint is being handled—
in accordance with paragraph 6(2A) of Schedule 3 otherwise than by the appropriate authority making arrangements for the complaint to be investigated by the authority on its own behalf, or
otherwise than in accordance with Schedule 3 (as to which see paragraph 2(6C) of that Schedule),
it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to provide the complainant with all such information as will keep him properly informed, while the complaint is being handled and subsequently, of all the matters mentioned in subsection (4).]
[F240(4) The matters of which the complainant must be kept properly informed are—
the progress of the handling of the complaint;
the outcome of the handling of the complaint;
any right to apply for a review conferred on the complainant by paragraph 6A or 25 of Schedule 3 (as the case may be);
such other matters as may be specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	43
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

(4A) The generality of subsection (4)(a) and (b) is not affected by any requirement to notify the complainant that is imposed by any other provision of this Part.]
The duties imposed by this section on the [F233Director General] and the appropriate authority in relation to any complaint shall be performed in such manner, and shall have effect subject to such exceptions, as may be provided for by regulations made by the Secretary of State.
The Secretary of State shall not by regulations provide for any exceptions from the duties imposed by this section except so far as he considers it necessary to do so for the purpose of—
preventing the premature or inappropriate disclosure of information that is relevant to, or may be used in, any actual or prospective criminal proceedings;
preventing the disclosure of information in any circumstances in which it has been determined in accordance with the regulations that its non-disclosure—
is in the interests of national security;
is for the purposes of the prevention or detection of crime, or the apprehension or prosecution of offenders;
is required on proportionality grounds; or
is otherwise necessary in the public interest.
The non-disclosure of information is required on proportionality grounds if its disclosure would cause, directly or indirectly, an adverse effect which would be disproportionate to the benefits arising from its disclosure.
Regulations under this section may include provision framed by reference to the opinion of, or a determination by, the [F233Director General] or any [F241local policing body] or chief officer.
[F242(8A) In any case in which there is an investigation of a complaint, the [F233Director General] or the appropriate authority may comply with [F243their] duty under subsection (1) or
(2) (as the case may be) so far as relating to the findings of a report submitted [F244(or finalised)] under provision made by virtue of paragraph 20A(4)(b) of Schedule 3, or a report of the investigation submitted [F245(or completed)] under paragraph 22 of Schedule 3, by sending the complainant a copy of the report.
(8B) Subsection (8A) applies notwithstanding any obligation of secrecy imposed by any rule of law or otherwise but is subject to—
regulations made under subsection (5), and
section 21A.]
It shall be the duty of a person appointed to carry out an investigation under this Part [F246, or who is otherwise involved in the handling of a complaint under this Part,] to provide the [F233Director General] or, as the case may be, the appropriate authority with all such information as the [F233Director General] or that authority may reasonably require for the purpose of performing [F247their] duty under this section.

44	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F234 Words in s. 20(1)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 26(3); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F235 Word in s. 20(1)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(c)(i); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F236 Word in s. 20(2)(a) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(c)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F237 S. 20(2)(b) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(c)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F238 Words in s. 20(3) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 26(4); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F239 S. 20(3A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(2), 183(1)(5)(e)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F240 S. 20(4)(4A) substituted for s. 20(4) (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(3), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F241 Words in s. 20(8) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),
s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 286; S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F242 S. 20(8A)(8B) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(4), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F243 Word in s. 20(8A) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 26(5)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F244 Words in s. 20(8A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 26(5)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F245 Words in s. 20(8A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 26(5)(c); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F246 Words in s. 20(9) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(5), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2) (4))
F247 Word in s. 20(9) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 26(6); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)

Modifications etc. (not altering text)
C43 S. 20 applied (with modifications) (28.12.2005) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(2)(6), Sch. 1

Commencement Information
I4  S. 20 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; s. 20 not in force at Royal Assent, see s. 108(2); s. 20(5)-(8) in force for certain purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(b); s. 20 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(a)
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	45
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

Duty to provide information for other persons
A person has an interest in being kept properly informed about the handling of a complaint [F248, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter] if—
it appears to the [F249Director General] or to an appropriate authority that he is a person falling within subsection (2) [F250or (2A)]; and
that person has indicated that he consents to the provision of information to him in accordance with this section and that consent has not been withdrawn.
A person falls within this subsection if [F251(in the case of a [F252complaint that relates to conduct of a person serving with the police or a] recordable conduct matter)]—
he is a relative of a person whose death is the alleged result from the conduct complained of or to which the recordable conduct matter relates;
he is a relative of a person whose serious injury is the alleged result from that conduct and that person is incapable of making a complaint;
he himself has suffered serious injury as the alleged result of that conduct.
[F253(2A) A person falls within this subsection if (in the case of a DSI matter)—
he is a relative of the person who has died;
he is a relative of the person who has suffered serious injury and that person is incapable of making a complaint;
he himself is the person who has suffered serious injury.]
A person who does not fall within subsection (2) [F254or (2A)] has an interest in being kept properly informed about the handling of a complaint [F255, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter] if—
the [F249Director General] or an appropriate authority considers that he has an interest in the handling of the complaint [F255, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter] which is sufficient to make it appropriate for information to be provided to him in accordance with this section; and
he has indicated that he consents to the provision of information to him in accordance with this section.
In relation to a complaint, this section confers no rights on the complainant.
A person who has an interest in being kept properly informed about the handling of a complaint [F256, conduct matter or DSI matter] is referred to in this section as an “interested person”.
In any case in which there is an investigation of the complaint [F257, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter] in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3—
by the [F249Director General], or
under [F258the Director General's][F259direction],
it shall be the duty of the [F249Director General] to provide the interested person with all such information as will keep him properly informed, while the investigation is being carried out and subsequently, of all the matters mentioned in subsection (9).
In any case in which there is an investigation of the complaint [F257, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter] in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3—
by the appropriate authority on its own behalf, F260... F261(b)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to provide the interested person with all such information as will keep him properly informed, while the investigation is being carried out and subsequently, of all the matters mentioned in subsection (9).
Where subsection (7) applies, it shall be the duty of the [F249Director General] to give the appropriate authority all such directions as [F262the Director General] considers appropriate for securing that that authority complies with its duty under that subsection; and it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to comply with any direction given to it under this subsection.
[F263(8A) In any case in which—
the complaint is being handled in accordance with paragraph 6(2A) of Schedule 3 otherwise than by the appropriate authority making arrangements for the complaint to be investigated by the authority on its own behalf, or
the recordable conduct matter or DSI matter is being handled in a manner determined by the appropriate authority in accordance with paragraph 10(4D), 11(3E), 14(2) or 14D(2) of Schedule 3 otherwise than by the appropriate authority making arrangements for the matter to be investigated by the authority on its own behalf,
it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to provide the interested person with all such information as will keep him properly informed, while the complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter is being handled and subsequently, of all the matters mentioned in subsection (9).]
[F264(9) The matters of which the interested person must be kept properly informed are—
the progress of the handling of the complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter;
the outcome of the handling of the complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter;
such other matters as may be specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State.
(9A) The generality of subsection (9)(a) and (b) is not affected by any requirement to notify an interested person that is imposed by any other provision of this Part.]
The duties imposed by this section on the [F249Director General] and the appropriate authority in relation to any complaint [F265, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter] shall be performed in such manner, and shall have effect subject to such exceptions, as may be provided for by regulations made by the Secretary of State.
Subsections (6) to (9) of section 20 apply for the purposes of this section as they apply for the purposes of that section.
[F266(11A) In any case in which there is an investigation of a complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter, the [F249Director General] or the appropriate authority may comply with [F267their] duty under subsection (6) or (7) (as the case may be) so far as relating to the findings of a report submitted [F268(or finalised)] under provision made by virtue of paragraph 20A(4)(b) of Schedule 3, or a report of the investigation submitted [F269(or completed)] under paragraph 22 or 24A of Schedule 3, by sending an interested person a copy of the report.
(11B) Subsection (11A) applies notwithstanding any obligation of secrecy imposed by any rule of law or otherwise but is subject to—
regulations made under subsection (10), and
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	47
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

section 21A.]
In this section “relative” means a person of a description prescribed in regulations made by the Secretary of State.


Textual Amendments
F248 Words in s. 21(1) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.
160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 7(2); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F249 Words in s. 21 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 27(2); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F250 Words in s. 21(1)(a) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.
160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 7(3); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F251 Words in s. 21(2) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 7(4); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F252 Words in s. 21(2) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 4; S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F253 S. 21(2A) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178,
Sch. 12 para. 7(5); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F254 Words in s. 21(3) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 7(6)(a); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F255 Words in s. 21(3) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.
160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 7(6)(b); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F256 Words in s. 21(5) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.
160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 7(7); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F257 Words in s. 21(6)(7) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),
ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 7(8); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F258 Words in s. 21(6)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 27(3); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F259 Word in s. 21(6)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(d)(i); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F260 Word in s. 21(7)(a) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(d)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F261 S. 21(7)(b) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(d)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F262 Words in s. 21(8) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 27(4); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F263 S. 21(8A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(6), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F264 S. 21(9)(9A) substituted for s. 21(9) (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(7), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F265 Words in s. 21(10) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.
160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 7(11); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
48	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



[F27021A Restriction on disclosure of sensitive information
Where the [F271Director General] receives information within subsection (3), the [F271Director General] must not disclose (whether under section 11, 20 or 21 or otherwise) the information, or the fact that it has been received, unless the relevant authority consents to the disclosure.
Where a person appointed under paragraph 18 of Schedule 3 to investigate a complaint or matter (a “paragraph 18 investigator”) receives information within subsection (3), the paragraph 18 investigator must not disclose the information, or the fact that it has been received, to any person other than the [F271Director General] unless the relevant authority consents to the disclosure.
The information is—
intelligence service information;
protected information relating to a relevant warrant;
information obtained from a government department which, at the time it is provided to the [F271Director General] or the paragraph 18 investigator, is identified by the department as information the disclosure of which may, in the opinion of the relevant authority—
cause damage to national security, international relations or the economic interests of the United Kingdom or any part of the United Kingdom, or
jeopardise the safety of any person.
Where the [F271Director General] or a paragraph 18 investigator discloses to another person information within subsection (3), or the fact that the [F271Director General] or the paragraph 18 investigator has received it, the other person must not disclose that information or that fact unless the relevant authority consents to the disclosure.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	49
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

In this section—
“government department” means a department of Her Majesty's Government but does not include—
the Security Service,
the Secret Intelligence Service, or
the Government Communications Headquarters (“GCHQ”); “intelligence service information” means information that was obtained
(directly or indirectly) from or that relates to—
the Security Service,
the Secret Intelligence Service,
GCHQ, or
any part of Her Majesty's forces, or of the Ministry of Defence, which engages in intelligence activities;
“Minister of the Crown” includes the Treasury;
“paragraph 18 investigator” has the meaning given by subsection (2); “protected information”, in relation to a relevant warrant, means
information relating to any of the matters mentioned in section 57(4) of the
Investigatory Powers Act 2016 in relation to the warrant; “relevant authority” means—
in the case of intelligence service information obtained (directly or indirectly) from or relating to the Security Service, the Director-General of the Security Service;
in the case of intelligence service information obtained (directly or indirectly) from or relating to the Secret Intelligence Service, the Chief of the Secret Intelligence Service;
in the case of intelligence service information obtained (directly or indirectly) from or relating to GCHQ, the Director of GCHQ;
in the case of intelligence service information obtained (directly or indirectly) from or relating to Her Majesty's forces or the Ministry of Defence, the Secretary of State;
in the case of protected information relating to a relevant warrant, the person to whom the relevant warrant is or was addressed;
in the case of information within subsection (3)(c)—
the Secretary of State, or
the Minister of the Crown in charge of the government department from which the information was obtained (if that Minister is not a Secretary of State);
“relevant warrant” means—
a warrant under Chapter 1 of Part 2 of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016, or
a warrant under Chapter 1 of Part 6 of that Act.

50	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



21B	Provision of sensitive information to the [F272Director General] and certain investigators
A person who provides information that is intelligence service information or protected information relating to a relevant warrant to the [F272Director General] or a paragraph 18 investigator (whether under a provision of this Part or otherwise) must—
make the [F272Director General] or the paragraph 18 investigator aware that the information is intelligence service information or (as the case may be) protected information relating to a relevant warrant, and
provide the [F272Director General] or the paragraph 18 investigator with such additional information as will enable the [F272Director General] or the paragraph 18 investigator to identify the relevant authority in relation to the information.
In this section, “intelligence service information”, “protected information relating to a relevant warrant”, “paragraph 18 investigator” and “relevant authority” have the same meaning as in section 21A.]


Guidance and regulations

Power of the [F273Director General] to issue guidance
The [F273Director General] may issue guidance—
to [F274local policing bodies],
to chief officers, and
to persons who are serving with the police otherwise than as chief officers,
concerning the exercise or performance, by the persons to whom the guidance is issued, of any of the powers or duties specified in subsection (2).
Those powers and duties are—
those that are conferred or imposed by or under this Part; and
those that are otherwise conferred or imposed but relate to—
the handling of complaints;
the means by which recordable conduct matters [F275or DSI matters] are dealt with; or
the detection or deterrence of misconduct by persons serving with the police.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	51
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

Before issuing any guidance under this section, the [F273Director General] shall consult with—
[F276[F277(a)	such persons as appear to the [F273Director General] to represent the views of police and crime commissioners;
(aa)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime; (ab)	the Common Council;]
[F278the National Police Chiefs' Council]; and]
such other persons as [F279the Director General] thinks fit.
The approval of the Secretary of State shall be required for the issue by the [F273Director General] of any guidance under this section.
Without prejudice to the generality of the preceding provisions of this section, the guidance that may be issued under this section includes—
guidance about the handling of complaints which have not yet been recorded and about dealing with recordable conduct matters [F280or DSI matters] that have not been recorded;
guidance about the procedure to be followed by the appropriate authority when recording a complaint or any recordable conduct matter [F281or DSI matter];
F282(c)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
guidance about how to protect the scene of an incident or alleged incident which—
is or may become the subject-matter of a complaint; or
is or may involve a recordable conduct matter [F281or DSI matter];
guidance about the circumstances in which it is appropriate (where it is lawful to do so)—
to disclose to any person, or to publish, any information about an investigation of a complaint [F283, conduct matter or DSI matter]; or
to provide any person with, or to publish, any report or other document relating to such an investigation;
F284(f)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nothing in this section shall authorise the issuing of any guidance about a particular case.
It shall be the duty of every person to whom any guidance under this section is issued to have regard to that guidance in exercising or performing the powers and duties to which the guidance relates.
A failure by a person to whom guidance under this section is issued to have regard to the guidance shall be admissible in evidence in any disciplinary proceedings or on any appeal from a decision taken in any such proceedings.

52	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F275 Words in s. 22(2)(b)(ii) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),
ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 8(2); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F276 S. 22(3)(a)(b) substituted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 6, 53, Sch. 4 para. 11;
S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(d) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
F277 S. 22(3)(a)-(ab) substituted for s. 22(3)(a) (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 287(3); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1 (with Sch. 2 para. 65)
F278 Words in s. 22(3)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 14 paras. 6, 7(e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 41
F279 Words in s. 22(3)(c) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 30(3); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F280 Words in s. 22(5)(a) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.
160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 8(3)(a); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F281 Words in s. 22(5)(b)(d)(ii) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 8(3)(b); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F282 S. 22(5)(c) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(e)(i); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F283 Words in s. 22(5)(e)(i) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),
ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 8(3)(c); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F284 S. 22(5)(f) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(e)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))

Modifications etc. (not altering text)
C45 S. 22 applied (with modifications) (28.12.2005) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(2)(6), Sch. 1
C46 S. 22 applied (with modifications) (5.8.2009) by The UK Border Agency (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2009 (S.I. 2009/2133), reg. 4
C47 S. 22 applied (with modifications) (7.4.2010) by The UK Border Agency (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2010 (S.I. 2010/782), reg. 4
C48 S. 22 applied (with modifications) (5.8.2010) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2010 (S.I. 2010/1813), reg. 5 (with reg. 11)
C49 S. 22 applied (with modifications) (16.1.2012) by The Elected Local Policing Bodies (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2012 (S.I. 2012/62), regs. 1, 4 (with reg. 3(6))
C50 S. 22 applied (with modifications) (7.10.2013) by The National Crime Agency (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2013 (S.I. 2013/2325), regs. 1(1), 5
C51 S. 22 applied (with modifications) (30.4.2017) by The Gangmasters and Labour Abuse Authority (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2017 (S.I. 2017/521), regs. 1, 5


Regulations
The Secretary of State may make regulations as to the procedure to be followed under any provision of this Part.
Without prejudice to the generality of the power conferred by subsection (1) or of any other power to make regulations conferred by any provision of this Part, the Secretary of State may also by regulations provide—
for the appropriate authority, in the case of a complaint [F285that relates to conduct of a person serving with the police], to be required, in accordance with procedures provided for in the regulations—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	53
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

to supply the person complained against with a copy of the complaint; and
to supply the complainant with a copy of the record made of that complaint;
for the matters to be taken into account in making any determination as to which procedure to adopt for handling complaints and dealing with recordable conduct matters [F286and DSI matters];
for any procedure for the purposes of this Part to be discontinued where—
a complaint is withdrawn;
the complainant indicates that he does not wish any further steps to be taken; or
the whole or part of the investigation of the complaint has been postponed until the conclusion of criminal proceedings and the complainant fails to indicate after the conclusion of those proceedings that he wishes the investigation to be resumed;
and for the manner in which any such withdrawal or indication is to be effected or given, and for the circumstances in which it is to be taken as effected or given;
for requiring the subject-matter of a complaint that has been withdrawn to be treated for the purposes of this Part, in the cases and to the extent specified in the regulations, as a recordable conduct matter;
for the manner in which any procedure for the purposes of this Part is to be discontinued in a case where it is discontinued in accordance with the regulations, and for the consequences of any such discontinuance;
for the circumstances in which any investigation or other procedure under this Part may be or must be suspended to allow any other investigation or proceedings to continue, and for the consequences of such a suspension;
for the regulation of the appointment of persons to carry out investigations under this Part or to assist with the carrying out of such investigations, for limiting the persons who may be appointed and for the regulation of the carrying out of any such investigation;
[F287(h) for combining into a single investigation the investigation of any complaint, conduct matter or DSI matter with the investigation or investigations of any one or more, or any combination, of the following—
complaints (whether or not relating to the same conduct),
conduct matters, or
DSI matters,
and for splitting a single investigation into two or more separate investigations;]
for the procedure to be followed in cases in which the [F288Director General] relinquishes the F289...[F290direction] of any investigation and for the consequences of [F291the Director General] doing so;
for the manner in which any reference of a complaint [F292, conduct matter or DSI matter] to the [F288Director General] is to be made;
for applying the provisions of this Part with such modifications as the Secretary of State thinks fit in cases where a complaint or recordable conduct matter relates to the conduct of a person who has ceased to be a person serving with the police since the time of the conduct;
54	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


for applying the provisions of this Part with such modifications as the Secretary of State thinks fit in cases where a complaint or conduct matter relates to the conduct of a person—
whose identity is unascertained at the time at which a complaint is made or a conduct matter is recorded;
whose identity is not ascertained during, or subsequent to, the investigation of a complaint or recordable conduct matter;
F293(m)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
for the records to be kept by [F294local policing bodies] and chief officers—
with respect to complaints and purported complaints;
with respect to recordable conduct matters [F295or DSI matters]; and
with respect to the exercise and performance of their powers and duties under this Part;
for the [F288Director General] to be required to establish and maintain a register of such information provided to [F296the Director General or the Office] in accordance with this Part as may be of a description specified in the regulations and for regulating the extent to which information stored on that register may be published or otherwise disclosed to any person by the [F288Director General];
for chief officers to have power to delegate the exercise or performance of powers and duties conferred or imposed on them by or under this Part;
[F297(pa) for local policing bodies to have power to delegate the exercise or performance of powers and duties conferred or imposed on them by or under this Part (including powers and duties that are acquired by virtue of giving a notice under section 13A);]
for the manner in which any notification for the purposes of any provision of this Part is to be given and the time at which, or period within which, any such notification must be given.
[F298(r) for enabling representations on behalf of a person to whose conduct an investigation relates to be made to the [F288Director General] by a person who is not that person's legal representative but is of a description specified in the regulations.]

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	55
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F290 Word in s. 23(2)(i) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(f)(i)(b); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F291 Words in s. 23(2)(i) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 31(3); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F292 Words in s. 23(2)(j) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss.
160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 9(4); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F293 S. 23(2)(m) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(f)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F294 Words in s. 23(2)(n) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 288; S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F295 Words in s. 23(2)(n)(ii) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),
ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 9(5); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F296 Words in s. 23(2)(o) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 31(4); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F297 S. 23(2)(pa) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 23(1), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(j) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F298 S. 23(2)(r) inserted (3.11.2008) by Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4), ss. 127, 153,
Sch. 23 para. 2; S.I. 2008/2712, art. 2, Sch. para. 17(a) (subject to arts. 3, 4)

Modifications etc. (not altering text)
C52 S. 23 applied (with modifications) (28.12.2005) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(2)(6), Sch. 1
C53 S. 23 applied (with modifications) (5.8.2009) by The UK Border Agency (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2009 (S.I. 2009/2133), reg. 4
C54 S. 23 applied (with modifications) (7.4.2010) by The UK Border Agency (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2010 (S.I. 2010/782), reg. 4
C55 S. 23 applied (with modifications) (5.8.2010) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2010 (S.I. 2010/1813), reg. 5 (with reg. 11)


Consultation on regulations
Before making any regulations under this Part, the Secretary of State shall consult with—
[F299(a)	the Office;
(aa)	the Director General;]
[F300[F301(b)	such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners;
(ba)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime; (bb)	the Common Council;]
[F302the National Police Chiefs' Council]; and]
such other persons as he thinks fit.

56	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Conduct of persons in other forms of police service

NCIS and NCS
F303. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Forces maintained otherwise than by [F304local policing bodies]
Notwithstanding any provision made by or under any enactment passed or made before this Act—
the [F305Director General], and
an authority other than a [F306local policing body] which maintains a body of constables,
shall each have power to enter into an agreement with the other for the establishment and maintenance in relation to that body of constables of procedures corresponding or similar to any of those provided for by or under this Part.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	57
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

If it appears to the Secretary of State appropriate to do so in relation to any body of constables maintained otherwise than by a [F307local policing body] to establish any such corresponding or similar procedures, he may by order—
provide for the establishment and maintenance of such procedures in relation to that body of constables; and
in a case in which procedures in relation to that body of constables have effect by virtue of subsection (9) or have previously been established by virtue of this section—
provide for those procedures to be superseded by the provision made by the order; and
make transitional provision in connection with the replacement of the superseded procedures.
It shall be the duty of the Secretary of State to secure that procedures are established and maintained under subsection (2) in relation to each of the following—
the Ministry of Defence Police; and
the British Transport Police Force.
An agreement under this section shall not be made, varied or terminated except with the approval of the Secretary of State.
An agreement or order under this section in relation to any body of constables may contain provision for enabling the [F305Director General] to bring and conduct, or otherwise participate or intervene in, any proceedings which are identified by the agreement or order as disciplinary proceedings in relation to members of that body of constables.
An agreement or order under this section in relation to any body of constables may provide for the application of procedures in relation to persons who are not themselves constables but are employed for the purposes of that body of constables and in relation to the conduct of such persons, as well as in relation to members of that body of constables and their conduct.
Before making an order under this section the Secretary of State shall consult with both—
the [F305Director General]; and
the authority maintaining the body of constables to whom the order relates.
Procedures established in accordance with any agreement or order under this section shall have no effect in relation to anything done outside England and Wales by any constable or any person employed for the purposes of a body of constables.
Where, immediately before the coming into force of this section, any procedures have effect in relation to any body of constables by virtue of—
section 78 of the 1996 Act (which made provisions similar to that made by this section), or
paragraph 13 of Schedule 8 to that Act (transitional provisions),
those procedures shall continue to have effect thereafter (notwithstanding the repeal by this Act of Chapter 1 of Part 4 of the 1996 Act and of that paragraph) until superseded by procedures established by virtue of any agreement or order under this section.
Subsection (9) has effect subject to the provisions of any order made under section 28.
58	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



F30826A Serious Organised Crime Agency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


F30926B National Policing Improvement Agency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


[F31026BACollege of Policing
The [F311Director General] and the College of Policing must enter into an agreement for the establishment, in relation to members of the College's staff, of procedures corresponding or similar to those provided for by or under this Part.
An agreement under this section—
must not be made or varied except with the approval of the Secretary of State; and
must not be terminated unless—
it is replaced by another such agreement, and
the Secretary of State approves.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	59
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

An agreement under this section may contain provision for enabling the [F311Director General] to bring and conduct, or otherwise participate or intervene in, any proceedings that are identified by the agreement as disciplinary hearings in relation to members of the College's staff.
Procedures established in accordance with an agreement under this section shall have no effect in relation to anything done outside England and Wales by any member of the College's staff.]


[F31226C The National Crime Agency
The Secretary of State must make regulations conferring functions on the [F313Director General] in relation to the exercise of functions by the Director General [F314of the National Crime Agency] and other National Crime Agency officers.
Regulations under this section may, in particular—
apply (with or without modifications), or make provision similar to, any provision of or made under this Part of this Act;
make provision for payment by the National Crime Agency to, or in respect of, the [F315the Office or in respect of its Director General].
Regulations under this section must relate only to the exercise of functions in, or in relation to, England and Wales.
The [F316Director General] and the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration may jointly investigate a matter in relation to which—
the [F316Director General] has functions by virtue of this section, and
the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration has functions by virtue of the Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967.
A National Crime Agency officer may disclose information to the [F317Director General], or to a person acting on the [F318Director General's] behalf, for the purposes of the exercise by the [F319Director General], or by any person acting on the [F318Director General's] behalf, of an NCA complaints function.
The [F320Director General] and the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration may disclose information to each other for the purposes of the exercise of a function—
by virtue of this section, or
under the Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967.
Regulations under this section may, in particular, make—
further provision about the disclosure of information under subsection (5) or (6);
60	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


provision about the further disclosure of information that has been so disclosed;
including provision which applies (with or without modifications), or is similar to, any provision of Schedule 7 to the Crime and Courts Act 2013.
Except as provided for in regulations under this section, that Schedule to that Act does not apply to—
the disclosure of information under subsection (5) or (6), or
the further disclosure of information so disclosed.
In this section “NCA complaints function” means a function in relation to the exercise of functions by the Director General [F321of the National Crime Agency] or any other National Crime Agency officer.]


Textual Amendments
F312 S. 26C inserted (8.5.2013 for specified purposes, 7.10.2013 in so far as not already in force) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), ss. 11(6), 61(2); S.I. 2013/1042, art. 2(d); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(p)
F313 Words in s. 26C(1) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 35(2)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F314 Words in s. 26C(1) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 35(2)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F315 Words in s. 26C(2) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 35(3); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F316 Words in s. 26C(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 35(4); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F317 Words in s. 26C(5) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 35(5)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F318 Words in s. 26C(5) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 35(5)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F319 Words in s. 26C(5) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 35(5)(c); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F320 Words in s. 26C(6) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 35(6); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F321 Words in s. 26C(9) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 35(7); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)


[F32226D Labour abuse prevention officers
The Secretary of State may make regulations conferring functions on the [F323Director General] in relation to the exercise of functions by officers of the Gangmasters and Labour Abuse Authority (the “Authority”) in their capacity as labour abuse prevention
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	61
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

officers (see section 114B of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE powers for labour abuse prevention officers)).
Regulations under this section may, in particular—
apply (with or without modifications), or make provision similar to, any provision of or made under this Part;
make provision for payment by the Authority to, or in respect of, the
[F324Office or in respect of the Director General].
The [F323Director General] and the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration may jointly investigate a matter in relation to which—
the [F323Director General] has functions by virtue of this section, and
the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration has functions by virtue of the Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967.
An officer of the Authority may disclose information to the [F323Director General], or to a person acting on the [F325Director General's] behalf, for the purposes of the exercise by the [F323Director General], or by any person acting on the [F325Director General's] behalf, of an Authority complaints function.
The [F323Director General] and the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration may disclose information to each other for the purposes of the exercise of a function—
by virtue of this section, or
under the Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967.
Regulations under this section may, in particular, make—
further provision about the disclosure of information under subsection (4) or (5);
provision about the further disclosure of information that has been so disclosed.
In this section “Authority complaints function” means a function in relation to the exercise of functions by officers of the Authority.]

62	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


[F32626E Food crime officers
The Secretary of State may make regulations conferring functions on the Director General in relation to officers of the Food Standards Agency (the “Agency”) acting in the exercise of functions conferred on them by virtue of—
section 114C of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE powers for food crime officers), or
section 39A of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 (powers for food crime officers: inferences from silence).
Regulations under this section may, in particular—
apply (with or without modifications), or make provision similar to, any provision of or made under this Part;
make provision for payment by the Agency to, or in respect of, the Office or in respect of the Director General.
The Director General and the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration may jointly investigate a matter in relation to which—
the Director General has functions by virtue of this section, and
the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration has functions by virtue of the Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967.
An officer of the Agency may disclose information to the Director General or to a person acting on the Director General’s behalf, for the purposes of the exercise by the Director General or by any person acting on the Director General’s behalf, of an Agency complaints function.
The Director General and the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration may disclose information to each other for the purposes of the exercise of a function—
by virtue of this section, or
under the Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967.
Regulations under this section may, in particular, make—
further provision about the disclosure of information under subsection (4) or (5);
provision about the further disclosure of information that has been so disclosed.
A disclosure of information authorised by this section does not breach—
any obligation of confidence owed by the person making the disclosure, or
any other restriction on the disclosure of information (however imposed).
But this section does not authorise a disclosure of information that—
would contravene the data protection legislation (but in determining whether a disclosure would do so, the power conferred by this section is to be taken into account), or
is prohibited by any of Parts 1 to 7 or Chapter 1 of Part 9 of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016.
In this section—
“Agency complaints function” means a function in relation to the exercise of functions by officers of the Agency;
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	63
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

“data protection legislation” has the same meaning as in the Data Protection Act 2018 (see section 3 of that Act).]


[F32726F The Independent Commission for Reconciliation and Information Recovery
The Director General and the ICRIR may enter into an agreement for the establishment, in relation to ICRIR officers, of procedures corresponding or similar to those provided for by or under this Part.
Where no such agreement is in force, the Secretary of State may by regulations establish such procedures.
An agreement under this section must not be made, varied or terminated except with the approval of the Secretary of State.
Before making regulations under this section the Secretary of State must consult—
the Director General; and
the ICRIR.
Nothing in any other statutory provision prevents the ICRIR from carrying into effect procedures established by virtue of this section.
An agreement or regulations under this section may contain provision for enabling the Director General to bring and present, or otherwise participate or intervene in, any proceedings that are identified by the agreement as disciplinary proceedings in relation to ICRIR officers.
Procedures established in accordance with an agreement under this section, or by regulations under this section, have no effect in relation to anything done outside England and Wales by any ICRIR officer.
In this section—
“ICRIR” means the Independent Commission for Reconciliation and Information Recovery;
“ICRIR officer” has the same meaning as in the Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and Reconciliation) Act 2023.]


Conduct of the [F328Office's] staff
The Secretary of State shall by regulations make provision for the manner in which the following cases are to be handled or dealt with—
64	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


cases in which allegations of misconduct are made against members of the
[F328Office's] staff; and
cases in which there is otherwise an indication that there may have been misconduct by a member of the [F328Office's] staff.
Regulations under this section may apply, with such modifications as the Secretary of State thinks fit, any provision made by or under this Part.
Regulations under this section may provide for it to be the duty of any person on whom functions are conferred by the regulations to have regard, in the carrying out of those functions, to any guidance given by such persons and in such manner as may be specified in the regulations.
Before making any regulations under this section the Secretary of State shall consult with the [F329Office and the Director General].


Transitional provisions

F33028	Transitional arrangements connected with establishing the Commission etc.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	65
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

[F33128A Application of Part 2 to old cases
The [F332Director General] may, if [F333the Director General] considers that there are exceptional circumstances—
direct that a relevant transitional provision does not apply in relation to a pre- commencement matter, and
direct the appropriate authority to record the matter under this Part.
A “pre-commencement matter” means a matter which—
is a complaint or a conduct matter,
relates to conduct which took place, or circumstances which occurred, before 1 April 2004, and
(apart from this section) is prevented by a relevant transitional provision from being recorded under this Part as a complaint or a conduct matter.
“Relevant transitional provision” means article 2, 3 or 4 of the Independent Police Complaints Commission (Transitional Provisions) Order 2004 (S.I. 2004/671).
The [F332Director General] may, if [F334the Director General] considers that there are exceptional circumstances, direct that a matter to which subsection (5) applies should be treated as a conduct matter or a DSI matter.
This subsection applies to a matter which—
relates to conduct which took place, or circumstances which occurred, before 1 April 2004,
has been the subject of a relevant complaint, and
would be a conduct matter or a DSI matter if it had not been the subject of a relevant complaint.
“Relevant complaint” means—
a complaint made before 1 April 2004, or
a complaint made on or after that date to which a relevant transitional provision applied.
[ On and after the day on which section 45 of the Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy
F335(6A) and Reconciliation) Act 2023 comes into force, this section—
ceases to apply to a pre-commencement matter or a matter to which subsection (5) applies (if the direction under subsection (1) or (4) relating to the matter was given before that day), or
does not apply to a pre-commencement matter or matter to which subsection (5) applies (if the direction under subsection (1) or (4) relating to the matter is given on or after that day),
insofar as the matter relates to conduct forming part of the Troubles.
(6B) In subsection (6A) “conduct forming part of the Troubles” has the same meaning as in the Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and Reconciliation) Act 2023 (see section 1 of that Act).]
Where under subsection (1)(a) the [F332Director General] directs that a relevant transitional provision does not apply in relation to a pre-commencement matter, that provision does not apply in relation to that matter.
The appropriate authority must comply with a direction under subsection (1)(b).
66	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Where under subsection (4) the [F332Director General] directs that a matter should be treated as a conduct matter or a DSI matter, the matter is (subject to any regulations under subsection (10)) to be treated as a conduct matter or a DSI matter for the purposes of this Part (including subsections (1) and (2)) and any provision made under it.
The Secretary of State may by regulations provide for this Part or any provision made under it to apply with such modifications as the Secretary of State thinks fit to a matter in relation to which the [F332Director General] has made a direction under subsection (1) or (4).]


Interpretation of Part 2

29	Interpretation of Part 2
In this Part—
[F336“the appropriate authority”—
in relation to a person serving with the police or in relation to any complaint, conduct matter or investigation relating to the conduct of such a person, means—
if that person is [F337the chief officer or an acting chief officer, the local policing body] for the area of the police force of which he is a member; and
if he is not [F338the chief officer or an acting chief officer], the chief officer under whose direction and control he is; F339...
(aa) [F340in relation to any other complaint, means the chief officer of the police force with which dissatisfaction is expressed by the complainant; and]
in relation to a death or serious injury matter, means—
if the relevant officer is [F341the chief officer or an acting chief officer, the local policing body] for the area of the police force of which he is a member; and
if he is not [F342the chief officer or an acting chief officer], the chief officer under whose direction and control he is;]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	67
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

[F343and, for the purposes of this definition, “acting chief officer” means a person exercising or performing functions of a chief constable in accordance with section 41 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011; a person exercising powers or duties of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis in accordance with section 44 or 45(4) of that Act; or a person exercising duties of the Commissioner of Police for the City of London in accordance with section 25 of the City of London Police Act 1839;]
“chief officer” means the chief officer of police of any police force;
F344...
“complainant” shall be construed in accordance with subsection (2); “complaint” has the meaning given by section 12;
“conduct” includes acts, omissions[F345, statements and decisions] (whether actual, alleged or inferred);
“conduct matter” has the meaning given by section 12;
[F346“death or serious injury matter” and “DSI matter” have the meaning given by section 12;]
[F347“the Director General” means (unless otherwise specified) the Director General of the Office;]
“disciplinary proceedings” means—
in relation to a member of a police force or a special constable, proceedings under any regulations made by virtue of section 50 or 51 of the 1996 Act and identified as disciplinary proceedings by those regulations; and
in relation to a person serving with the police who is not a member of a police force or a special constable, proceedings identified as such by regulations made by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this Part;
“document” means anything in which information of any description is recorded;
“information” includes estimates and projections, and statistical analyses;
F348...
[F349“the Office” means the Independent Office for Police Conduct;] “person complained against”, in relation to a complaint [F350that relates to
conduct of a person serving with the police], means the person whose conduct
is the subject-matter of the complaint;
“recordable conduct matter” means (subject to any regulations under section 23(2)(d))—
a conduct matter that is required to be recorded by the appropriate authority under paragraph 10 [F351, 11 or 13A] of Schedule 3 or has been so recorded; or
(aa) [F352a conduct matter that is required to be recorded by the appropriate authority under section 28A(8) or has been so recorded;]
F353. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
“relevant force”, in relation to the appropriate authority, means—
[F354if that authority is a local policing body, the police force which the body is responsible for maintaining; and]
if that authority is the chief officer of police of a police force, his force;
F355. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


“serious injury” means a fracture, a deep cut, a deep laceration or an injury causing damage to an internal organ or the impairment of any bodily function; “serving with the police”, in relation to any person, shall be construed in
accordance with section [F35612(7) to (10)] .
[F357(1A) In this Part “the relevant officer”, in relation to a DSI matter, means the person serving with the police (within the meaning of section [F35812(7) to (10)] )—
who arrested the person who has died or suffered serious injury,
in whose custody that person was at the time of the death or serious injury, or
with whom that person had the contact in question;
and where there is more than one such person it means, subject to subsection (1B), the one who so dealt with him last before the death or serious injury occurred.
(1B) Where it cannot be determined which of two or more persons serving with the police dealt with a person last before a death or serious injury occurred, the relevant officer is the most senior of them.]
References in this Part, in relation to anything which is or purports to be a complaint, to the complainant are references—
[F359(a)  to the person by whom the complaint or purported complaint was made, or
(b) in a case where the complaint or purported complaint was made on behalf of someone else, to the person on whose behalf it was made;]
but where any person is acting on another’s behalf for the purposes of any complaint or purported complaint, anything that is to be or may be done under this Part by or in relation to the complainant may be done, instead, by or in relation to the person acting on the complainant’s behalf.
Subject to subsection (4), references in this Part, in relation to any conduct or anything purporting to be a complaint about any conduct, to a member of the public include references to any person falling within any of the following paragraphs (whether at the time of the conduct or at any subsequent time)—
a person serving with the police;
[F360(ca)	a National Crime Agency officer; or]
a person engaged on relevant service, within the meaning of section 97(1)(a)
F361... or (d) of the 1996 Act [F362(temporary service of various kinds)].
In this Part references, in relation to any conduct or to anything purporting to be a complaint about any conduct, to a member of the public do not include references to—
a person who, at the time when the conduct is supposed to have taken place, was under the direction and control of the same chief officer as the person whose conduct it was; or
a person who—
at the time when the conduct is supposed to have taken place, in relation to him, or
at the time when he is supposed to have been adversely affected by it, or to have witnessed it,
was on duty in his capacity as a person falling within subsection (3)(a) to (d).
[F363(4A) In this Part references, in relation to anything purporting to be a complaint other than a complaint about any conduct, to a member of the public include references to any person falling within subsection (3)(a) to (d) other than a person who is—
a member of the police force with which dissatisfaction is expressed,
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	69
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

a civilian employee of that police force,
a special constable who is under the direction and control of the chief officer of that police force, or
where dissatisfaction is expressed with the City of London police force, an employee of the Common Council of the City of London who is under the direction and control of the chief officer of that force.]
For the purposes of this Part a person is adversely affected if he suffers any form of loss or damage, distress or inconvenience, if he is put in danger or if he is otherwise unduly put at risk of being adversely affected.
References in this Part to the investigation of any complaint or matter by the appropriate authority on its own behalf, F364... under the [F365direction] of the [F366Director General] or by the [F366Director General]F367... shall be construed as references to its investigation in accordance with paragraph 16, F368... 18 or, as the case may be, 19 of Schedule 3.
The Commissioner of Police for the City of London shall be treated for the purposes of this Part as if he were a member of the City of London police force.
[F369(8) References in sections 26, 26BA and 26C to England and Wales include the sea and other waters within the seaward limits of the territorial sea adjacent to England and Wales.]

70	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2 – Complaints and Misconduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F345 Words in s. 29(1) substituted (22.11.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 5(1); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)
F346 S. 29(1): definition of "death or serious injury matter" and "DSI matter" inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 10(2)(b); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F347 Words in s. 29(1) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 40(2)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F348 Words in s. 29(1) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(g)(i); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F349 Words in s. 29(1) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 40(2)(c); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F350 Words in s. 29(1) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 6(3); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F351 Words in s. 29(1) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 17(10), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(e) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F352 Words in s. 29(1)(aa) inserted (19.12.2012) by Police (Complaints and Conduct) Act 2012 (c. 22), ss.
2(4), 3(3)
F353 Words in s. 29(1) omitted (22.11.2012) by virtue of Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 8(6)(b); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)
F354 Words in s. 29(1) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),
s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 291(b); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F355 Words in s. 29(1) omitted (22.11.2012) by virtue of Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 291(c); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(i)
F356 Words in s. 29(1) substituted (1.10.2014) by Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12), s. 185(1), Sch. 11 para. 93(2) (with ss. 21, 33, 42, 58, 75, 93); S.I. 2014/2454, art. 3(c)(i)
F357 S. 29(1A)(1B) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 10(3); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F358 Words in s. 29(1A) substituted (1.10.2014) by Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12), s. 185(1), Sch. 11 para. 93(3) (with ss. 21, 33, 42, 58, 75, 93); S.I. 2014/2454, art. 3(c)(i)
F359 S. 29(2)(a)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 6(4); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F360 S. 29(3)(ca) substituted for s. 29(3)(b)(c) (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2),
Sch. 6 para. 16; S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F361 Word in s. 29(3)(d) repealed (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 15 Pt.
1(A); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(q) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
F362 Words in s. 29(3)(d) substituted (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),
ss. 55, 178, Sch. 2 para. 9(b); S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. para. 8 (subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F363 S. 29(4A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 6(5); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F364 Words in s. 29(6) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(g)(ii)(a); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F365 Word in s. 29(6) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(g)(ii)(b); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	71
Part 2A – Super-complaints
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




[F370PART 2A

Super-complaints


29A	Power to make super-complaints
A designated body may make a complaint to Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Constabulary that a feature, or combination of features, of policing in England and Wales by one or more than one police force is, or appears to be, significantly harming the interests of the public.
See section 29B for the meaning of “designated body”.
In this section-
“England and Wales” includes the adjacent United Kingdom waters within the meaning of section 30 of the Police Act 1996,
“police force” means any of the following—
the metropolitan police force,
a police force maintained under section 2 of the Police Act 1996 (police forces in England and Wales outside London),
the National Crime Agency,
the City of London police force,
the Ministry of Defence Police,
the Civil Nuclear Constabulary,
the British Transport Police.
72	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2A – Super-complaints
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

[	Bodies who may make super-complaints
F37129B
In this Part “designated body” means a body designated in regulations made by the Secretary of State.
The Secretary of State—
may make or revoke such a designation if the Secretary of State considers it appropriate to do so, and
must make or revoke such a designation if asked to do so by an authorised person.
The Secretary of State must, in deciding whether to act under subsection (2)(a), apply criteria specified or described in regulations made by the Secretary of State.
The authorised person must, in deciding whether to ask the Secretary of State to act under subsection (2)(b), apply criteria specified or described in regulations made by the Secretary of State.
The Secretary of State must, before making regulations under subsection (3) or (4), consult such persons as the Secretary of State considers appropriate.
In this section “authorised person” means any person specified or described in regulations made by the Secretary of State.]


[	Regulations about super-complaints
F37229C
The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision about complaints under section 29A.
Such provision may, in particular, include provision about—
the procedure for dealing with a matter before a complaint is made under section 29A (including who is to deal with the matter),
the procedure for dealing with a complaint under section 29A (including who is to deal with the matter),
whether, or the extent to which, a matter is to be dealt with under this Part or Part 2.
Regulations under this section may—
confer (or enable the conferring of) functions on Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Constabulary, the [F373Director General of the Independent Office for Police Conduct], the College of Policing or any other person,
apply (with or without modifications), in relation to any matter to be dealt with by the [F373Director General of the Independent Office for Police Conduct] under this Part, any provision made by or under Part 2.]]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	73
Part 2B – Investigation of concerns raised by whistle-blowers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




[F374PART 2B

Investigation of concerns raised by whistle-blowers


29D	Power to investigate concerns raised by whistle-blowers
The [F375Director General] may investigate any concern raised by a whistle-blower of which [F376the Director General] becomes aware (whether because the whistle-blower has contacted the [F375Director General] or for any other reason) but only if the whistle- blower informs the [F375Director General], before the beginning of the investigation, that he or she consents to an investigation taking place.
In deciding whether to investigate, the [F375Director General] must take into account the public interest.
For the purposes of this Part, a person is a “whistle-blower” if—
the person is, or was at any time, under the direction and control of a chief officer of police,
the person raises a concern that is about a police force or a person serving with the police,
the matter to which the concern relates is not—
about the conditions of service of persons serving with the police, or
a matter that is, or could be, the subject of a complaint by the person under Part 2, and
at the time the [F375Director General] first becomes aware of the concern, the matter to which it relates is not—
under investigation under the direction of the [F375Director General] in accordance with paragraph 18 of Schedule 3,
under investigation by the [F375Director General] in accordance with paragraph 19 of that Schedule,
being dealt with as a complaint under section 29A under regulations under section 29C (regulations about super-complaints), or
under investigation under this Part.
74	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2B – Investigation of concerns raised by whistle-blowers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Subsection (1) is subject to section 29F (which deals with the position where the concern is a conduct matter for the purposes of Part 2) and to section 29G (which deals with the position where the concern is a DSI matter for the purposes of that Part).
Schedule 3A (which makes provision about the procedure etc where the [F375Director General] decides to investigate under subsection (1)) has effect.


29E	[F377Director General's] powers and duties [F378on decision] not to investigate
If the [F379Director General] decides not to carry out an investigation under section 29D(1), the [F379Director General] must inform the whistle-blower of the decision.
In such a case, the [F379Director General] may, with the consent of the whistle-blower—
disclose the nature of the concern to the appropriate authority, and
make recommendations in the light of the concern.
In this Part, except where otherwise provided, “appropriate authority” means—
if the concern relates to a chief officer or an acting chief officer, the local policing body for the area of the police force of which he or she is a member;
if the concern relates to any other person, the chief officer under whose direction and control that person is;
if the concern does not relate to any particular persons, the chief officer of the police force to which the concern relates.
The Secretary of State may by regulations make further provision about recommendations under subsection (2).
The regulations may (amongst other things)—
describe the kinds of recommendations that the [F379Director General] may make under subsection (2);
specify the persons to whom the recommendations may be made;
authorise the [F379Director General] to require a response to any recommendation made by the [F379Director General] under subsection (2).

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	75
Part 2B – Investigation of concerns raised by whistle-blowers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



29F	Special provision for “conduct matters”
Before deciding whether to carry out an investigation under section 29D(1), the [F380Director General] must consider whether the concern is about a conduct matter for the purposes of Part 2 (see section 12(2)).
If the [F380Director General] determines that the concern is about a conduct matter for the purposes of Part 2—
[F381the Director General] may not carry out an investigation under section 29D(1), and
[F381the Director General] must notify the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question of [F382the] determination.
Where the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question is notified under subsection (2), it must record the matter under paragraph 11 of Schedule 3 to this Act as a conduct matter.
The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision modifying Schedule 3 in relation to a conduct matter that, in accordance with subsection (3), is recorded under paragraph 11 of that Schedule but only for the purpose of making provision for the protection of the anonymity of whistle-blowers.


29G	Special provision for “DSI matters”
Before deciding whether to carry out an investigation under section 29D(1), the [F383Director General] must consider whether the concern is about a death or serious injury matter (“a DSI matter”) for the purposes of Part 2 (see section 12(2A)).
If the [F383Director General] determines that the concern is about a DSI matter for the purposes of Part 2—
[F384the Director General] may not carry out an investigation under section 29D(1), and
76	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2B – Investigation of concerns raised by whistle-blowers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


[F384the Director General] must notify the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter.
Where the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter is notified under subsection (2), it must record the matter under paragraph 14A of Schedule 3 to this Act as a DSI matter.
The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision modifying Schedule 3 in relation to a DSI matter that, in accordance with subsection (3), is recorded under paragraph 14A of that Schedule but only for the purpose of making provision for the protection of the anonymity of whistle-blowers.
In this section, references to the appropriate authority in relation to a DSI matter have the same meaning as in Part 2 (see section 29).


29H	[F385Director General's] powers and duties where whistle-blower is deceased
The power of the [F386Director General] to carry out an investigation under section 29D(1) applies where the whistle-blower dies before the [F386Director General] becomes aware of the concern (or before [F387the Director General] decides to investigate).
Any investigation begun by the [F386Director General] under section 29D(1) before the death of the whistle-blower may be continued after the death.
Where a whistle-blower dies—
any requirement under this Part to obtain the consent of the whistle- blower may be satisfied by obtaining the consent of that person's approved representative;
any requirement under this Part to give any document or other information to the whistle-blower may be satisfied by giving the document or other information to the person's approved representative;
any requirement under this Part not to disclose the identity of the whistle- blower does not apply or (where the [F386Director General] became aware of the concern before the death) ceases to apply.
For the purpose of this section, “approved representative” means a person who has been approved by the [F386Director General] for the purposes of this Part.
The [F386Director General] may only approve a person who is—
the widow or widower (or surviving civil partner) of the deceased whistle- blower,
a personal representative (within the meaning of section 55(1)(xi) of the Administration of Estates Act 1925) of the deceased whistle-blower, or
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	77
Part 2B – Investigation of concerns raised by whistle-blowers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

any other person appearing to the [F386Director General] to have, by reason of a family or similar relationship with the deceased whistle-blower, a relevant interest in the outcome of the concern.


29I	Duty to keep whistle-blowers informed
Where the [F388Director General] carries out an investigation under section 29D(1), [F389the Director General] must keep the whistle-blower properly informed about the progress of the investigation and its outcome.
The Secretary of State may by regulations provide for exceptions to the duty under subsection (1).
The power conferred by subsection (2) may be exercised only to the extent that the Secretary of State considers necessary for any of the permitted non-disclosure purposes.
“The permitted non-disclosure purposes” are—
preventing the premature or inappropriate disclosure of information that is relevant to, or may be used in, any actual or prospective criminal proceedings;
preventing the disclosure of information in any circumstances in which it has been determined in accordance with the regulations that its non-disclosure—
is in the interests of national security,
is for the purposes of the prevention or detection of crime or the apprehension or prosecution of offenders,
is for the purposes of the investigation of an allegation of misconduct against the whistle-blower or the taking of disciplinary proceedings or other appropriate action in relation to such an allegation,
is for the purposes of an investigation under Part 2 that relates to the whistle-blower,
is required on proportionality grounds, or
is otherwise necessary in the public interest.
The non-disclosure of information is required on proportionality grounds if its disclosure would cause, directly or indirectly, an adverse effect which would be disproportionate to the benefits arising from its disclosure.
78	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2B – Investigation of concerns raised by whistle-blowers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



29J	Protection of anonymity of whistle-blowers
The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision setting out the circumstances in which the [F390Director General] is required or authorised to disclose information falling within subsection (2) (or any particular description of such information) to persons specified, or of a description specified, in the regulations.
The information falling within this subsection is—
the identity of a whistle-blower or information that might (whether alone or with other information) tend to reveal that identity;
the nature of a concern raised by a whistle-blower.
The power conferred by subsection (1) may be exercised only to the extent that the Secretary of State considers necessary for any of the permitted disclosure purposes.
“The permitted disclosure purposes” are—
the protection of the interests of national security;
the prevention or detection of crime or the apprehension of offenders;
the institution or conduct of criminal proceedings;
the investigation of allegations of misconduct against whistle-blowers and the taking of disciplinary proceedings or other appropriate action in relation to such allegations;
investigations under Part 2 that relate to whistle-blowers;
investigations under this Part;
any other purpose that is for the protection of the public interest.
Except as provided by regulations under subsection (1) or by any other provision of this Part, the [F390Director General] may not disclose information falling within subsection (2) unless the whistle-blower consents to the disclosure.


29K	Other restrictions on disclosure of information
The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision setting out the circumstances in which the [F391Director General] is required or authorised to disclose
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	79
Part 2B – Investigation of concerns raised by whistle-blowers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

information falling within subsection (2) (or any particular description of such information) to persons specified, or of a description specified, in the regulations.
The information falling within this subsection is—
information relating to an investigation under section 29D;
information relating to the outcome of any such investigation.
The power conferred by subsection (1) may be exercised only to the extent that the Secretary of State considers necessary for any of the permitted disclosure purposes.
In this section, “the permitted disclosure purposes” has the same meaning as in section 29J.
Except as provided by regulations under subsection (1) or by any other provision of this Part, the [F391Director General] may not disclose information falling within subsection (2).


29L	Application of provisions of Part 2
The following provisions of Part 2 apply in relation to the functions of the [F392Director General] under this Part as they apply in relation to the functions of the [F392Director General] under Part 2—
section 15 (general duties of local policing bodies, chief officers and inspectors);
section 16 (payment for assistance with investigation);
section 17 (provision of information to the [F392Director General]);
section 18 (inspection of police premises on behalf of the [F392Director General]);
section 19 (use of investigatory powers by or on behalf of the [F392Director General]);
section 21A (restriction on disclosure of sensitive information);
section 21B (provision of sensitive information to the [F392Director General]);
section 22 (power of the [F392Director General] to issue guidance);
section 26 (forces maintained otherwise than by local policing bodies);
section 26BA (College of Policing);
section 26C (the National Crime Agency).
Except as provided by subsection (1), the provision made by sections 15 to 29 of Part 2 does not apply in relation to the functions of the [F392Director General] under this Part.
80	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 2B – Investigation of concerns raised by whistle-blowers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



29M	Regulation-making powers: consultation
Before making regulations under this Part, the Secretary of State must consult—
the [F393Director General],
such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners,
the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;
the Common Council,
the National Police Chiefs' Council, and
such other persons as the Secretary of State thinks fit.


29N	Interpretation
In this Part—
F394...
“appropriate authority” has the meaning given by section 29E(3);
“chief officer” means the chief officer of police of any police force; and “acting chief officer” means (as appropriate)—
a person exercising or performing functions of a chief constable in accordance with section 41 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011,
a person exercising powers or duties of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis in accordance with section 44 or 45(4) of that Act, or
a person exercising duties of the Commissioner of Police for the City of London in accordance with section 25 of the City of London Police Act 1839;
“conduct” has the same meaning as in Part 2 (see section 29(1));
[F395“the Director General” means the Director General of the Independent Office for Police Conduct;]
“whistle-blower” has the meaning given by section 29D(3).
References in this Part to a person serving with the police have the same meaning as in Part 2 (see section 12(7)).]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	81
Part 3 – Removal, suspension and disciplining of police officers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes




Part 3

Removal, suspension and disciplining of police officers

Removal and suspension of senior officers

Resignation in the interests of efficiency and effectiveness
In section 9E of the 1996 Act (removal of Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis)—
in subsection (1), for “to retire in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness” there shall be substituted “ in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness, to retire or to resign ”; and
in subsection (3), for the words from “retire”, in the first place where it occurs, to “earlier date” there shall be substituted “ retire or resign under subsection (1), he shall retire or resign with effect from such date as the Metropolitan Police Authority may specify, or with effect from such earlier date ”.
In section 11 of that Act (removal of chief constables)—
in subsection (2), for “to retire in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness” there shall be substituted “ in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness, to retire or to resign ”; and
in subsection (4), for the words from “retire”, in the first place where it occurs, to “earlier date” there shall be substituted “ retire or resign under subsection (2), shall retire or resign with effect from such date as the police authority may specify, or with effect from such earlier date ”.

Procedural requirements for removal of senior officers
In subsection (2) of section 9E of the 1996 Act (removal of Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis) for the words from “an opportunity” to the end there shall be substituted “—
an explanation in writing of the Authority’s grounds for calling upon him, in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness, to retire or to resign; and
an opportunity to make representations;
and the Authority shall consider any representations made by or on behalf of the Commissioner.
82	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 3 – Removal, suspension and disciplining of police officers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


The opportunity given to the Commissioner to make representations must include the opportunity to make them in person.”
In subsection (3) of section 11 of the 1996 Act (removal of chief constable), for the words from “an opportunity” to the end there shall be substituted “—
an explanation in writing of the authority’s grounds for calling upon him, in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness, to retire or to resign; and
an opportunity to make representations;
and the authority shall consider any representations made by or on behalf of the chief officer.
The opportunity given to the chief constable to make representations must include the opportunity to make them in person.”

Suspension of senior officers
In section 9E of the 1996 Act (removal of Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis), after subsection (2) there shall be inserted—
“(2A) The Metropolitan Police Authority, acting with the approval of the Secretary of State, may suspend the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis from duty if—
it is proposing to consider whether to exercise its power under subsection (1) to call upon the Commissioner to retire or to resign and is satisfied that, in the light of the proposal, the maintenance of public confidence in the metropolitan police force requires the suspension; or
having been notified by the Secretary of State that he is proposing to consider whether to require the Authority to exercise that power, it is satisfied that, in the light of the Secretary of State’s proposal, the maintenance of public confidence in that force requires the suspension; or
it has exercised that power or been sent under section 42(2A) a copy of a notice of the Secretary of State’s intention to require it to exercise that power, but the retirement or resignation has not yet taken effect;
and it shall be the duty of the Metropolitan Police Authority (without reference to the preceding provisions of this subsection) to suspend the Commissioner from duty if it is required to do so by the Secretary of State under section 42(1A).”
In section 11 of that Act (appointment and removal of chief constables), after subsection (3) there shall be inserted—
“(3A) A police authority maintaining a police force under section 2, acting with the approval of the Secretary of State, may suspend from duty the chief constable of that force if—
it is proposing to consider whether to exercise its power under subsection (2) to call upon the chief constable to retire or to resign and is satisfied that, in the light of the proposal, the maintenance of public confidence in that force requires the suspension; or
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	83
Part 3 – Removal, suspension and disciplining of police officers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

having been notified by the Secretary of State that he is proposing to consider whether to require the police authority to exercise that power, it is satisfied that, in the light of the Secretary of State’s proposal, the maintenance of public confidence in that force requires the suspension; or
it has exercised that power or been sent under section 42(2A) a copy of a notice of the Secretary of State’s intention to require it to exercise that power, but the retirement or resignation has not yet taken effect;
and it shall be the duty of a police authority maintaining such a force (without reference to the preceding provisions of this subsection) to suspend the chief constable of that force from duty if it is required to do so by the Secretary of State under section 42(1A).”
In each of sections 9F(3), 9FA(3) and 9G(3) of that Act (application of sections 9E(1) to (3) in the case of Assistant Commissioners, Deputy Assistant Commissioners and Commanders), at the end there shall be inserted “but with the omission in subsection (2A)—
of paragraph (b);
in paragraph (c), of the words from “or been sent” to “exercise that power”; and
of the words after paragraph (c).”
In section 11A(3) of that Act (application of section 11(2) to (4) in the case of deputy chief constables), at the end there shall be inserted “but with the omission in subsection (3A)—
of paragraph (b);
in paragraph (c), of the words from “or been sent” to “exercise that power”; and
of the words after paragraph (c).”
In section 12(3) of that Act (application of section 11(2), (3) and (4) in the case of assistant chief constables)—
for “, (3) and” there shall be substituted “ to ”; and
at the end there shall be inserted “but with the omission in subsection (3A) —
of paragraph (b);
in paragraph (c), of the words from “or been sent” to “exercise that power”; and
of the words after paragraph (c).”

Removal etc. of senior officers at the instance of the Secretary of State
Section 42 of the 1996 Act (role of the Secretary of State as respects removal of chief constables etc.) shall be amended as follows.
For subsections (1) and (2) there shall be substituted— “(1) The Secretary of State may—
require the Metropolitan Police Authority to exercise its power under section 9E to call upon the Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner, in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness, to retire or to resign; or
require a police authority maintaining a police force under section 2 to exercise its power under section 11 to call upon the chief constable
84	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 3 – Removal, suspension and disciplining of police officers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


of that force, in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness, to retire or to resign.
(1A) The Secretary of State may also, in any case falling within subsection (1B) in which he considers that it is necessary for the maintenance of public confidence in the force in question—
require the Metropolitan Police Authority to suspend the Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner from duty; or
require a police authority maintaining a police force under section 2 to suspend the chief constable of that force from duty.
(1B) The cases falling within this subsection are—
where the Secretary of State is proposing to exercise his power under subsection (1) in relation to the Metropolitan Police Authority or, as the case may be, the other police authority in question, or is proposing to consider so exercising that power;
where the Metropolitan Police Authority or the other police authority in question is itself proposing to exercise its power to call upon the Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner or, as the case may be, the chief constable of the force in question to retire or to resign, or is proposing to consider so exercising that power; and
where the power mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b) has been exercised but the retirement or resignation has not yet taken effect.
(2) Before requiring the exercise by the Metropolitan Police Authority or any other police authority of its power to call upon the Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner or the chief constable of the force in question to retire or to resign, the Secretary of State shall—
give the officer concerned a notice in writing—
informing him of the Secretary of State’s intention to require the exercise of that power; and
explaining the Secretary of State’s grounds for requiring the exercise of that power; and
give that officer an opportunity to make representations to the Secretary of State.
(2A) Where the Secretary of State gives a notice under subsection (2)(a), he shall send a copy of the notice to the Metropolitan Police Authority or other police authority concerned.
(2B) The Secretary of State shall consider any representations made to him under subsection (2).”
In subsection (3) (inquiries), for the words from the beginning to “subsection (1)” there shall be substituted—
“(3) Where the Secretary of State proposes to require the exercise of a power mentioned in subsection (1), he”.
After subsection (3) there shall be inserted— “(3A) At an inquiry held under subsection (3)—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	85
Part 3 – Removal, suspension and disciplining of police officers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

the Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner or, as the case may be, the chief constable in question shall be entitled, in accordance with any regulations under section 42A, to make representations to the inquiry;
the Metropolitan Police Authority or, as the case may be, the police authority concerned shall be entitled, in accordance with any regulations made under section 42A, to make representations to the inquiry.
(3B) The entitlement of the Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner or, as the case may be, the chief constable in question to make representations shall include the entitlement to make them in person.”
In subsection (4) (expenses of inquiry), for the words “a chief constable, deputy chief constable or assistant chief constable” there shall be substituted “ the Commissioner, the Deputy Commissioner or a chief constable ”.
After subsection (4) there shall be inserted—
“(4A) If the Secretary of State exercises the power conferred by subsection (1) in relation to the Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner or a chief constable, the Metropolitan Police Authority or other police authority concerned—
shall not be required to seek the Secretary of State’s approval before calling upon the Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner or chief constable in question, in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness, to retire or to resign; and
shall not be required to give the Commissioner, the Deputy Commissioner or the chief constable a written explanation of the authority’s grounds for calling upon him to retire or to resign, to give him an opportunity to make representations to it or to consider any representations made by him.
(4B) In this section “the Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis and “the Deputy Commissioner” means the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis.
(4C) In this section a reference to the police authority concerned, in relation to a chief constable, is to the police authority which maintains the police force of which he is chief constable.”
Subsection (5) (application to senior officers in the metropolitan police) shall cease to have effect.

Regulations concerning procedure for removal of senior officers
After section 42 of the 1996 Act, there shall be inserted—

“42A Procedure in relation to removal of senior officers
The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision as to the procedure to be followed in the exercise of any power conferred or duty imposed by section 9E, 11 or 42.
86	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 3 – Removal, suspension and disciplining of police officers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Before making any regulations under this section, the Secretary of State shall consult with—
persons whom he considers to represent the interests of police authorities;
persons whom he considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police; and
such other persons as he thinks fit.
Regulations under this section may make different provision for different cases and circumstances.
A statutory instrument containing regulations under this section shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”

Disciplinary proceedings and protected disclosures

Disciplinary regulations for special constables
In section 51 of the 1996 Act (regulations for special constables), in subsection (2), after paragraph (b) there shall be inserted—
“(ba)	the conduct of special constables and the maintenance of discipline;”.

Conduct of disciplinary proceedings
Without prejudice to the generality of any of the powers conferred by sections 50 and 51 of the 1996 Act (regulations for police forces and for special constables), regulations under each of those sections may make provision—
for conferring a right to bring and conduct, or otherwise participate or intervene in, any disciplinary proceedings on the [F396Director General of the Independent Office for Police Conduct];
for conferring a right to participate in, or to be present at, disciplinary proceedings on such persons as may be specified or described in the regulations; and
for section 34 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 (c. 33) (inferences to be drawn from a failure to mention a fact when questioned or charged) to apply, with such modifications and in such cases as may be provided for in the regulations, to disciplinary proceedings.
In this section “disciplinary proceedings” means any proceedings under any regulations made under section 50 or, as the case may be, section 51 of 1996 Act which are identified as disciplinary proceedings by those regulations.

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	87
Part 3 – Removal, suspension and disciplining of police officers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

Protected disclosures by police officers
After section 43K of the Employment Rights Act 1996 (c. 18), there shall be inserted—

“43KA Application of this Part and related provisions to police
For the purposes of—
this Part,
section 47B and sections 48 and 49 so far as relating to that section, and
section 103A and the other provisions of Part 10 so far as relating to the right not to be unfairly dismissed in a case where the dismissal is unfair by virtue of section 103A,
a person who holds, otherwise than under a contract of employment, the office of constable or an appointment as a police cadet shall be treated as an employee employed by the relevant officer under a contract of employment; and any reference to a worker being “employed” and to his “employer” shall be construed accordingly.
In this section “the relevant officer” means—
in relation to a member of a police force or a special constable appointed for a police area, the chief officer of police;
in relation to a person appointed as a police member of the NCIS, the Director General of NCIS;
in relation to a person appointed as a police member of the NCS, the Director General of NCS;
in relation to any other person holding the office of constable or an appointment as police cadet, the person who has the direction and control of the body of constables or cadets in question.”
In section 200(1) of that Act (provisions which do not apply to persons engaged in police service under a contract of employment)—
the words “, Part IVA” and “, 47B” shall be omitted;
after “sections 100” there shall be inserted “ , 103A ”; and
after “section 100” there shall be inserted “ or 103A ”.
Section 13 of the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 (c. 23) (exclusion of police service from provisions about protected disclosures) shall cease to have effect.
88	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

Part 4

Police powers etc.


Chapter 1

Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians

F39838	Police powers for [F397civilian staff][F398and volunteers]
[F399(1) The chief officer of police of any police force may designate a relevant employee as either or both of the following—
a community support officer;
a policing support officer.
(1A) The chief officer of police of any police force may designate a police volunteer as either or both of the following—
a community support volunteer;
a policing support volunteer.]
F400. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A chief officer of police F401. . . shall not designate a person under this section unless he is satisfied that that person—
is a suitable person to carry out the functions for the purposes of which he is designated;
is capable of effectively carrying out those functions; and
has received adequate training in the carrying out of those functions and in the exercise and performance of the powers and duties to be conferred [F402or imposed] on him by virtue of the designation.
A person designated under this section shall have the powers and duties conferred or imposed on him by the designation.
F403(5A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F403(5B) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F403(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F403(6A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F404(6B) The powers and duties that may be conferred or imposed on a person designated under this section are—
any power or duty of a constable, other than a power or duty specified in Part 1 of Schedule 3B (excluded powers and duties);
where the person is designated as a community support officer or a community support volunteer, any power or duty that is described in Schedule 3C as a power or duty of a community support officer or community support volunteer.
(6C) The Secretary of State may by regulations amend Part 1 of Schedule 3B so as to add to the list of powers and duties specified in it.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	89
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

(6D) Part 2 of Schedule 3B makes provision about the application of legislation in relation to powers or duties of a constable that may be exercised or performed by a person designated under this section.
(6E) Any power or duty of a constable that is conferred or imposed on a person designated under this section by a chief officer of police of a police force may (subject to provision included in the designation under subsection (6F)) be exercised or performed by the person—
in the area of that police force, and
in any cases or circumstances in which it could be exercised or performed by a constable who is a member of that force.
(6F) A designation under this section may provide that any power or duty of a constable that is conferred or imposed by the designation may be exercised or performed by the person designated—
in such areas outside the area of the police force in question as are specified in the designation (as well as within the area of the police force);
only in such parts of the area of that police force as are specified in the designation;
only in cases or circumstances so specified.]
[F405A relevant employee]F406. . . authorised or required to do anything by virtue of a designation under this section—
shall not be authorised or required by virtue of that designation to engage in any conduct otherwise than in the course of that employment; and
shall be so authorised or required subject to such restrictions and conditions (if any) as may be specified in his designation.
[F407(7A) A police volunteer authorised or required to do anything by virtue of a designation under this section —
shall not be authorised or required by virtue of that designation to engage in any conduct otherwise than while acting as a police volunteer;
shall be so authorised or required subject to such restrictions and conditions (if any) as may be specified in the designation.]
Where any power exercisable by any person in reliance on his designation under this section is a power which, in the case of its exercise by a constable, includes or is supplemented by a power to use reasonable force, any person exercising that power in reliance on that designation shall have the same entitlement as a constable to use reasonable force.
Where any power exercisable by any person in reliance on his designation under this section includes power to use force to enter any premises, that power shall not be exercisable by that person except—
in the company, and under the supervision, of a constable; or
for the purpose of saving life or limb or preventing serious damage to property.
[F408(9A) The chief officer of police of a police force must ensure that no person designated by the chief officer under this section is authorised to use a firearm, within the meaning given by section 57(1) of the Firearms Act 1968, in carrying out functions for the purposes of the designation.
(9B) However, subsection (9A) does not apply to—
90	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

the use of a weapon, designed or adapted for the discharge of either of the following substances, for the purpose of discharging either of those substances—
the substance, commonly known as “CS spray”, that is produced by the use of 2-chlorobenzalmalononitrile;
the substance, commonly known as PAVA spray, that is produced by the use of pelargonic acid vanillylamide;
the use of a weapon for a purpose specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State;
the use of a weapon of a description specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State, whether generally or for a purpose so specified.]
[F409(9C) A statutory instrument containing regulations under subsection (6C) or (9B)(b) or (c) may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.]
[F410(11) In this section “relevant employee” means—
in the case of—
a police force maintained for a police area in accordance with section 2 of the Police Act 1996, or
the police force maintained for the metropolitan police district in accordance with section 5A of that Act,
a member of the civilian staff of that police force (within the meaning of Part 1 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011);
in the case of any other police force, a person who—
is employed by the police authority maintaining that force, and
is under the direction and control of the chief officer making a designation under subsection (1).]
[F411(11A) In the case of a police force maintained for a police area in England in accordance with section 2 of the Police Act 1996, the following are also relevant employees for the purposes of this section—
any member of staff transferred to the chief constable of the police force under a scheme made under section 4I(1) of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004 (transfer of property, rights and liabilities to chief constable to whom fire functions of a fire and rescue authority may be delegated);
any member of staff appointed by that chief constable under section 4I(4) of that Act (appointment of staff by chief constable to whom fire functions of a fire and rescue authority may be delegated).
[
F412(c)
any member of staff transferred to that chief constable under a scheme made by virtue of section 107EC(1) of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009 (transfer of property, rights and liabilities to chief constable to whom fire functions of combined authority may be delegated);
(d)  any member of staff appointed by that chief constable under section 107EC(2) of that Act (appointment of staff by chief constable to whom fire functions of combined authority may be delegated).]]
[F413(12) In this section, “police volunteer” means a person who is under the direction and control of the chief officer making a designation under subsection (1A) otherwise than because the person is a constable, a special constable or a relevant employee.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	91
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

For the purpose of subsection (12), a person is to be treated as a relevant employee only in relation to times when the person is acting in the course of the person's employment.]


Textual Amendments
F397 Words in s. 38 title substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 292(2); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F398 Words in s. 38 heading inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 38(9), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(d) (with regs. 4, 5) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)
F399 S. 38(1)(1A) substituted for s. 38(1)(2) (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 38(2), s. 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(d) (with regs. 4, 5) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)
F400 S. 38(3) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 59, 174, 178,
Sch. 4 para. 181(2), Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 10, 12, 13(oo) (subject to art.
4(2)-(7))
F401 Words in s. 38(4) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 59, 174, 178, Sch. 4 para. 181(3), Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 10, 12, 13(oo)
(subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F402 Words in s. 38(4)(c) inserted (1.12.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 9, 53, Sch. 5 para.
2(2); S.I. 2007/3203, art. 2(c)
F403 S. 38(5A)-(6A) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 38(3), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(d) (with regs. 4, 5) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)
F404 S. 38(6B)-(6F) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 38(4), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(d) (with regs. 4, 5) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)
F405 Words in s. 38(7) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),
s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 292(4); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F406 Words in s. 38(7) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 59, 174, 178, Sch. 4 para. 181(4), Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 10, 12, 13(oo)
(subject to art. 4(2)-(7))
F407 S. 38(7A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 38(5), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(d) (with regs. 4, 5) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)
F408 S. 38(9A)(9B) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 38(6), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(d) (with regs. 4, 5) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)
F409 S. 38(9C) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 38(7), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(d) (with regs. 4, 5) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)
F410 S. 38(11) inserted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1),
Sch. 16 para. 292(5); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F411 S. 38(11A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 1 para. 82; S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 38
F412 S. 38(11A)(c)(d) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 17.7.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 8(7), s. 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/726, reg. 2(a)
F413 S. 38(12)(13) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 38(8), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(d) (with regs. 4, 5) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)
92	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F41438A Standard powers and duties of community support officers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


[F41538B Police powers for civilian employees under collaboration agreements
The chief officer of police of a police force (the “assisted force”) may designate a person (“C”) who—
is a civilian employee of [F416, or a police volunteer with,] another police force (the “assisting force”),
is designated under section 38 by the chief officer of police of the assisting police force (the “section 38 designation”), and
is permitted, under relevant police collaboration provision, to discharge powers and duties specified in that provision for the purposes of the assisted force.
The designation under subsection (1) (the “collaboration designation”) must designate C as an officer of [F417either or both of the descriptions specified in section 38(1) (if C is a civilian employee of the assisting force) or section 38(1A) (if C is a police volunteer with the assisting force)].
The collaboration designation may designate C as an officer of a particular description specified in [F418section 38(1) or (as the case may be) section 38(1A)] only if the section 38 designation designates C as an officer of that description.
C shall have the powers and duties conferred or imposed on C by the collaboration designation.
A power or duty may be conferred or imposed on C by the collaboration designation only if C is permitted, under the relevant police collaboration provision, to discharge that power or duty for the purposes of the assisted force.
C shall not be authorised or required by virtue of the collaboration designation to engage in any conduct otherwise than in the course of discharging a power or duty conferred or imposed on C by the collaboration designation.
The collaboration designation must specify the restrictions and conditions to which C is subject in the discharge of the powers and duties conferred or imposed by the collaboration designation.
Those restrictions and conditions must include the restrictions and conditions specified in the relevant police collaboration provision.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	93
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

C is authorised or required to discharge any power or duty conferred or imposed by the collaboration designation subject to the restrictions and conditions specified in the collaboration designation.
References in this section to the discharge of functions by [F419persons designated under section 38 by the chief officer of police of the assisting force] for the purposes of the assisted force have the same meaning as in [F420section 23AA] of the Police Act 1996.
In this section—
“civilian employee” has the meaning given by section 23I of the Police Act 1996;
“relevant police collaboration provision” means provision, contained in a collaboration agreement under section 22A of the Police Act 1996, which is of the kind referred to in section 23AA of that Act.


38C	Designations under section 38B: supplementary provision
The collaboration designation of C must be in accordance with the relevant police collaboration provision.
Subsection (1) is in addition to section 38B(5) and (8).
Subsections (8) and (9) of section 38 apply to any power exercisable by C in reliance on the collaboration designation as they apply to a power exercisable by a person in reliance on a designation under section 38.
In exercising or performing any power or duty in reliance on the collaboration designation, C is to be taken—
as exercising or performing that power or duty in reliance on that collaboration designation (and not in reliance on any designation under section 38); and
94	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

accordingly, as not being a designated person (within the meaning of section 46(1)) by virtue of any designation under section 38.
Expressions used in this section and section 38B have the same meanings in this section as in section 38B.]


Police powers for contracted-out staff
This section applies if a [F421local policing body] has entered into a contract with a person (“the contractor”) for the provision of services relating to the detention or escort of persons who have been arrested or are otherwise in custody.
The chief officer of police of the police force maintained by that [F421local policing body] may designate any person who is an employee of the contractor as either or both of the following—
a detention officer; or
an escort officer.
A person designated under this section shall have the powers and duties conferred or imposed on him by the designation.
A chief officer of police shall not designate a person under this section unless he is satisfied that that person—
is a suitable person to carry out the functions for the purposes of which he is designated;
is capable of effectively carrying out those functions; and
has received adequate training in the carrying out of those functions and in the exercise and performance of the powers and duties to be conferred on him by virtue of the designation.
A chief officer of police shall not designate a person under this section unless he is satisfied that the contractor is a fit and proper person to supervise the carrying out of the functions for the purposes of which that person is designated.
Powers and duties may be conferred or imposed on a designated person by means only of the application to him by his designation of provisions of the applicable Part of Schedule 4 that are to apply to the designated person; and for this purpose the applicable Part of that Schedule is—
in the case of a person designated as a detention officer, Part 3; and
in the case of a person designated as an escort officer, Part 4.
An employee of the contractor authorised or required to do anything by virtue of a designation under this section—
shall not be authorised or required by virtue of that designation to engage in any conduct otherwise than in the course of that employment; and
shall be so authorised or required subject to such restrictions and conditions (if any) as may be specified in his designation.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	95
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

Where any power exercisable by any person in reliance on his designation under this section is a power which, in the case of its exercise by a constable, includes or is supplemented by a power to use reasonable force, any person exercising that power in reliance on that designation shall have the same entitlement as a constable to use reasonable force.
F422(9) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F422(10) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F422(11) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A designation under this section, unless it is previously withdrawn or ceases to have effect in accordance with subsection (13), shall remain in force for such period as may be specified in the designation; but it may be renewed at any time with effect from the time when it would otherwise expire.
A designation under this section shall cease to have effect—
if the designated person ceases to be an employee of the contractor; or
if the contract between the [F423local policing body] and the contractor is terminated or expires.


Community safety accreditation schemes
The chief officer of police of any police force may, if he considers that it is appropriate to do so for the purposes specified in subsection (3), establish and maintain a scheme (“a community safety accreditation scheme”).
A community safety accreditation scheme is a scheme for the exercise in the chief officer’s police area by persons accredited by him under section 41 of the powers conferred by their accreditations under that section.
Those purposes are—
contributing to community safety and security; and
96	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

in co-operation with the police force for the area, combatting crime and disorder, public nuisance and other forms of anti-social behaviour.
Before establishing a community safety accreditation scheme for his police area, a chief officer of any police force (other than the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis) must consult with—
the [F424local policing body] maintaining that force, and
every local authority any part of whose area lies within the police area.
Before establishing a community safety accreditation scheme for the metropolitan police district, the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis must consult with— [F425(a)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;]
the Mayor of London; and
every local authority any part of whose area lies within the metropolitan police district.
In subsections (4)(b) and (5)(c) “local authority” means—
in relation to England, a district council, a London borough council, the Common Council of the City of London or the Council of the Isles of Scilly; and
in relation to Wales, a county council or a county borough council.
Every [F426police and crime plan under section 5 or 6 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011] which is issued after the commencement of this section, F427... must set out—
whether a community safety accreditation scheme is maintained for the police area in question;
if not, whether there is any proposal to establish such a scheme for that area during the period to which the plan relates;
particulars of any such proposal or of any proposal to modify during that period any community safety accreditation scheme that is already maintained for that area;
the extent (if any) of any arrangements for provisions specified in Schedule 4 to be applied to designated persons employed by the [F428local policing body]; and
the respects in which any community safety accreditation scheme that is maintained or proposed will be supplementing those arrangements during the period to which the plan relates.
A community safety accreditation scheme must contain provision for the making of arrangements with employers who—
are carrying on business in the police area in question, or
are carrying on business in relation to the whole or any part of that area or in relation to places situated within it,
for those employers to supervise the carrying out by their employees of the community safety functions for the purposes of which powers are conferred on those employees by means of accreditations under section 41.
It shall be the duty of a chief officer of police who establishes and maintains a community safety accreditation scheme to ensure that the employers of the persons on whom powers are conferred by the grant of accreditations under section 41 have established and maintain satisfactory arrangements for handling complaints relating
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	97
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

to the carrying out by those persons of the functions for the purposes of which the powers are conferred.


Accreditation under community safety accreditation schemes
This section applies where a chief officer of police has, for the purposes of a community safety accreditation scheme, entered into any arrangements with any employer for or with respect to the carrying out of community safety functions by employees of that employer.
The chief officer of police may, on the making of an application for the purpose by such person and in such manner as he may require, grant accreditation under this section to any employee of the employer.
Schedule 5 (which sets out the powers that may be conferred on accredited persons) shall have effect.
A chief officer of police shall not grant accreditation to a person under this section unless he is satisfied—
that that person’s employer is a fit and proper person to supervise the carrying out of the functions for the purposes of which the accreditation is to be granted;
that the person himself is a suitable person to exercise the powers that will be conferred on him by virtue of the accreditation;
that that person is capable of effectively carrying out the functions for the purposes of which those powers are to be conferred on him; and
that that person has received adequate training for the exercise of those powers.
[F429(4A) A chief officer of police may not grant accreditation under this section to a weights and measures inspector.]
A chief officer of police may charge such fee as he considers appropriate for one or both of the following—
98	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

considering an application for or for the renewal of an accreditation under this section;
granting such an accreditation.
A person authorised or required to do anything by virtue of an accreditation under this section—
shall not be authorised or required by virtue of that accreditation to engage in any conduct otherwise than in the course of his employment by the employer with whom the chief officer of police has entered into the arrangements mentioned in subsection (1); and
shall be so authorised or required subject to such other restrictions and conditions (if any) as may be specified in his accreditation.
An accreditation under this section, unless it is previously withdrawn or ceases to have effect in accordance with subsection (8), shall remain in force for such period as may be specified in the accreditation; but it may be renewed at any time with effect from the time when it would otherwise expire.
An accreditation under this section shall cease to have effect—
if the accredited person ceases to be an employee of the person with whom the chief officer of police has entered into the arrangements mentioned in subsection (1); or
if those arrangements are terminated or expire.


[F43041A Accreditation of weights and measures inspectors
The chief officer of police of any police force may, on the making of an application for the purpose by such person and in such manner as he may require, grant accreditation under this section to a weights and measures inspector.
A weights and measures inspector to whom an accreditation under this section is granted by a chief officer of police may exercise the powers conferred by the accreditation in the chief officer's police area.
Schedule 5A (which sets out the powers that may be conferred on inspectors accredited under this section) shall have effect.
A chief officer of police shall not grant accreditation to a weights and measures inspector under this section unless he is satisfied that—
the inspector is a suitable person to exercise the powers that will be conferred on him by virtue of the accreditation; and
the inspector has received adequate training for the exercise of those powers.
A chief officer of police may charge such fee as he considers appropriate for one or both of the following—
considering an application for or for the renewal of an accreditation under this section;
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	99
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

granting an accreditation under this section.
A weights and measures inspector authorised or required to do anything by virtue of an accreditation under this section—
shall not be authorised or required by virtue of that accreditation to engage in any conduct otherwise than in the course of his duties as a weights and measures inspector; and
shall be so authorised or required subject to such other restrictions and conditions (if any) as may be specified in his accreditation.
An accreditation under this section, unless it is previously withdrawn or ceases to have effect in accordance with subsection (8), shall remain in force for such period as may be specified in the accreditation, but it may be renewed at any time with effect from the time when it would otherwise expire.
An accreditation under this section shall cease to have effect if the accredited inspector ceases to hold office as a weights and measures inspector.]


[F43141B Power to apply accreditation provisions
The Secretary of State may by order provide for section 41A and any other provision of this Chapter relating to accredited inspectors to apply (with or without modification) in relation to persons of a description specified in the order.
The provision which may be made by an order under this section includes such modifications of other enactments as appear to the Secretary of State to be necessary or appropriate.
No order shall be made under this section unless a draft of it has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.]


Supplementary provisions relating to designations and accreditations
F432(A1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F432(B1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F432(C1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A person who exercises or performs any power or duty in relation to any person in reliance on his designation under section 38 [F433, 38B] or 39 or his accreditation under section 41 [F434or 41A], or who purports to do so, shall produce that designation or accreditation to that person, if requested to do so.
100	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

F435(1A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A power exercisable by any person in reliance on his designation by a chief officer of police under section 38 or 39 or his accreditation under section 41 shall [F436, subject to subsection (2A),] be exercisable only by a person wearing such uniform as may be—
determined or approved for the purposes of this Chapter by the chief officer of police who granted the designation or accreditation; and
identified or described in the designation or accreditation;
and, in the case of an accredited person, such a power shall be exercisable only if he is also wearing such badge as may be specified for the purposes of this subsection by the Secretary of State, and is wearing it in such manner, or in such place, as may be so specified.
[F437(2ZA) A power exercisable by any person in reliance on a designation under section 38B by the chief officer of police of the assisted force shall, subject to subsection (2A), be exercisable only by a person wearing such uniform as may be—
determined or approved for the purposes of this Chapter by the chief officer of police of the assisting police force; and
identified or described in the designation.
In this subsection, “assisted force” and “assisting force” have the same meanings as in section 38B.]
[F438(2A) A police officer of or above the rank of inspector may direct a particular [F439policing support officer or policing support volunteer] not to wear a uniform for the purposes of a particular operation; and if he so directs, subsection (2) [F440or (2ZA)] shall not apply in relation to that [F439policing support officer or policing support volunteer] for the purposes of that operation.
(2B) In subsection (2A), [F441 “policing support officer” and “policing support volunteer” mean (respectively) a person designated as a policing support officer or (as the case may be) a policing support volunteer] under section 38 [F442(in relation to subsection (2)) or section 38B (in relation to subsection (2ZA))] by the chief officer of police of the same force as the officer giving the direction.]
A chief officer of police who has granted a designation or accreditation to any person under section 38 [F443, 38B], 39 or 41 [F444or an accreditation to any weights and measures inspector under section 41A] may at any time, by notice to the designated or accredited person [F445or the accredited inspector], modify or withdraw that designation or accreditation.
F446(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Where any person’s designation under section 39 is modified or withdrawn, the chief officer giving notice of the modification or withdrawal shall send a copy of the notice to the contractor responsible for supervising that person in the carrying out of the functions for the purposes of which the designation was granted.
Where any person’s accreditation under section 41 is modified or withdrawn, the chief officer giving notice of the modification or withdrawal shall send a copy of the notice to the employer responsible for supervising that person in the carrying out of the functions for the purposes of which the accreditation was granted.
[F447(6A) Where the accreditation of a weights and measures inspector under section 41A is modified or withdrawn, the chief officer giving notice of the modification or
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
101


withdrawal shall send a copy of the notice to the local weights and measures authority by which the inspector was appointed.]
For the purposes of determining liability for the unlawful conduct of employees of a [F448chief officer of police or local policing body], conduct by such an employee in reliance or purported reliance on a designation under section 38 shall be taken to be conduct in the course of his employment by the [F448chief officer of police or local policing body]; and, in the case of a tort, [F449that chief officer or body] shall fall to be treated as a joint tortfeasor accordingly.
[F450(7A) For the purposes of determining liability for the unlawful conduct of a civilian employee of a police force (within the meaning of section 38B), conduct by such an employee in reliance or purported reliance on a designation under section 38B shall be taken to be conduct in the course of the employee's employment by the employer; and, in the case of a tort, that employer shall fall to be treated as a joint tortfeasor accordingly.]
[F451(7B) For the purposes of determining liability for the unlawful conduct of police volunteers designated under section 38, conduct by such a volunteer in reliance or purported reliance on a designation under that section is to be taken to be conduct by that person in the course of employment by the chief officer of police by whom the designation is made; and, in the case of a tort, that chief officer is to be treated as a joint tortfeasor accordingly.
(7C) For the purposes of determining liability for the unlawful conduct of police volunteers designated under section 38, conduct by such a volunteer in reliance or purported reliance on a designation under section 38B is to be taken to be conduct by that person in the course of employment by the chief officer of police by whom the designation under section 38 is made; and, in the case of a tort, that chief officer is to be treated as a joint tortfeasor accordingly.]
F446(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
For the purposes of determining liability for the unlawful conduct of employees of a contractor (within the meaning of section 39), conduct by such an employee in reliance or purported reliance on a designation under that section shall be taken to be conduct in the course of his employment by that contractor; and, in the case of a tort, that contractor shall fall to be treated as a joint tortfeasor accordingly.
For the purposes of determining liability for the unlawful conduct of employees of a person with whom a chief officer of police has entered into any arrangements for the purposes of a community safety accreditation scheme, conduct by such an employee in reliance or purported reliance on an accreditation under section 41 shall be taken to be conduct in the course of his employment by that employer; and, in the case of a tort, that employer shall fall to be treated as a joint tortfeasor accordingly.
[F452(11) For the purposes of determining liability for the unlawful conduct of weights and measures inspectors, conduct by such an inspector in reliance or purported reliance on an accreditation under section 41A shall be taken to be conduct in the course of his duties as a weights and measures inspector; and, in the case of a tort, the local weights and measures authority by which he was appointed shall fall to be treated as a joint tortfeasor accordingly.]
102	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Textual Amendments
F432 S. 42(A1)-(C1) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 12 para. 2(2)(b); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(k) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)
F433 Word in s. 42(1) inserted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s.
157(1), Sch. 13 para. 4(2); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F434 Words in s. 42(1) inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 14 para.
43(2); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(p) (subject to arts. 6,7)
F435 S. 42(1A) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 12 para. 2(2)(b); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(k) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)
F436 Words in s. 42(2) inserted (1.7.2005 for certain purposes and 1.8.2005 otherwise) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 122(2)(a), 178; S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(h); S.I. 2005/2026, art. 2(d)
F437 S. 42(2ZA) inserted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s.
157(1), Sch. 13 para. 4(3); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F438 S. 42(2A)(2B) inserted (1.7.2005 for certain purposes and 1.8.2005 otherwise) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 122(2)(b), 178; S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(h); S.I. 2005/2026,
art. 2(d)
F439 Words in s. 42(2A) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 12 para. 2(3); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(k) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)
F440 Words in s. 42(2A) inserted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),
s. 157(1), Sch. 13 para. 4(4); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F441 Words in s. 42(2B) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 12 para. 2(4); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(k) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)
F442 Words in s. 42(2B) inserted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),
s. 157(1), Sch. 13 para. 4(5); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F443 Word in s. 42(3) inserted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s.
157(1), Sch. 13 para. 4(6); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F444 Words in s. 42(3) inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 14 para.
43(3)(a); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(p) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
F445 Words in s. 42(3) inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 14 para.
43(3)(b); S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(p) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
F446 S. 42(4)(8) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 59, 174,
178, Sch. 4 para. 182, Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 10, 12, 13(oo) (subject to art.
4(2)-(7))
F447 S. 42(6A) inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 14 para. 43(4);
S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(p) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
F448 Words in s. 42(7) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),
s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 296(a); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F449 Words in s. 42(7) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13),
s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 296(b); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F450 S. 42(7A) inserted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1),
Sch. 13 para. 4(7); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F451 S. 42(7B)(7C) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 15.12.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 12 para. 2(5); S.I. 2017/1139, reg. 2(k) (as amended by S.I. 2017/1162, reg. 2)
F452 S. 42(11) inserted (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 14 para. 43(5);
S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(p) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
103



Railway safety accreditation scheme
The Secretary of State may make regulations for the purpose of enabling the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force to establish and maintain a scheme (“a railway safety accreditation scheme”).
[F453(2) A railway safety accreditation scheme is a scheme for the exercise, within a place specified in section 31(1)(a) to (f) of the Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003 in England and Wales, by persons accredited by the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force under the scheme, of the powers conferred on those persons by their accreditation under that scheme.]
The regulations may make provision—
as to the purposes for which a railway safety accreditation scheme may be established;
as to the procedure to be followed in the establishment of such a scheme; and
as to matters for which such a scheme must contain provision.
The regulations may make provision as to the descriptions of persons who may be accredited under a railway safety accreditation scheme and as to the procedure and criteria to be applied for the grant of any accreditation under such a scheme.
The regulations may make provision as to the powers which may be conferred on a person by an accreditation under such a scheme.
Subject to subsection (7), no regulations made by virtue of subsection (5) shall permit a power to be conferred on a person accredited under a railway safety accreditation scheme which could not be conferred on an accredited person under a community safety accreditation scheme.
The regulations may provide that the powers which may be conferred on a person by an accreditation under a railway safety accreditation scheme include the powers of a constable F454... to give a penalty notice under Chapter 1 of Part 1 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (fixed penalty notices) in respect of the following offences—
an offence under section 55 of the British Transport Commission Act 1949 (c. xxix) (trespassing on a railway);
an offence under section 56 of that Act (throwing stones etc. at trains or other things on railways).
In relation to a person accredited under a railway safety accreditation scheme, the regulations may apply, with such modifications as may be prescribed by them, any provision of this Chapter which applies in relation to an accredited person.
104	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

Before making regulations under this section the Secretary of State shall consult with—
[F455the National Police Chiefs' Council];
the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force;
[F456(c)	such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners;
(ca)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;
(cb)	the Common Council of the City of London; and]
the [F457British Transport Police Authority] ;
persons whom he considers to represent the interests of local authorities;
the Mayor of London; and
such other persons as he thinks fit.
In this section—
“local authorities” means district councils, London borough councils, county councils in Wales, county borough councils and the Common Council of the City of London; and
F458. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


F45944	Removal of restriction on powers conferred on traffic wardens
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

F46045	Code of practice relating to chief officers’ powers under Chapter 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105



Offences against designated and accredited persons etc.
Any person who assaults—
a designated person in the execution of his duty,
an accredited person in the execution of his duty,
[F461(ba)  an accredited inspector in the execution of his duty,] or
a person assisting a designated or accredited person [F462or an accredited inspector] in the execution of his duty,
is guilty of an offence and shall be liable, on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale, or to both.
Any person who resists or wilfully obstructs—
a designated person in the execution of his duty,
an accredited person in the execution of his duty,
[F463(ba)  an accredited inspector in the execution of his duty,] or
a person assisting a designated or accredited person [F462or an accredited inspector] in the execution of his duty,
is guilty of an offence and shall be liable, on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month or to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale, or to both.
Any person who, with intent to deceive—
impersonates a designated person [F464, an accredited person or an accredited inspector] ,
makes any statement or does any act calculated falsely to suggest that he is a designated person [F465, that he is an accredited person or that he is an accredited inspector] , or
makes any statement or does any act calculated falsely to suggest that he has powers as a designated or accredited person [F466or as an accredited inspector] that exceed the powers he actually has,
is guilty of an offence and shall be liable, on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale, or to both.
In this section references to the execution by a designated person [F467, accredited person or accredited inspector] of his duty are references to his exercising any power or performing any duty which is his by virtue of his designation or accreditation.
[F468(5) References in this section to a designated person are to—
a designated person within the meaning given by section 47(1), and
106	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 1 – Exercise of police powers etc. by civilians
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

a person in relation to whom a designation under section 38B is for the time being in force.]


Interpretation of Chapter 1
In this Chapter—
[F469“accredited inspector” means a weights and measures inspector in relation to whom an accreditation under section 41A is for the time being in force;]
“accredited person” means a person in relation to whom an accreditation under section 41 is for the time being in force;
“community safety functions” means any functions the carrying out of which would be facilitated by the ability to exercise one or more of the powers mentioned in Schedule 5;
“conduct” includes omissions and statements;
“designated person” means a person in relation to whom a designation under section 38 or 39 is for the time being in force;
F470. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F471. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F472“weights and measures inspector” means an inspector of weights and measures appointed under section 72(1) of the Weights and Measures Act 1985.]
In this Chapter—
references to carrying on business include references to carrying out functions under any enactment; and
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
107


references to the employees of a person carrying on business include references to persons holding office under a person, and references to employers shall be construed accordingly.



Chapter 2

Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers

Powers of arrest

Offences for which a person may be arrested without a warrant
F473. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Power of arrest in relation to failure to stop a vehicle
F474. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
In section 17(1)(c) of the 1984 Act (power of entry to effect arrest for certain offences), after sub-paragraph (iii) there shall be inserted—
“(iiia) section 163 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) (failure to stop when required to do so by a constable in uniform);”.
This section has no effect in relation to offences committed before its commencement.
108	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Power to require name and address

Persons [F475engaging in anti-social behaviour]
If a constable in uniform has reason to believe that a person [F476has engaged, or is engaging, in anti-social behaviour]F477..., he may require that person to give his name and address to the constable.
[F478(1A) In subsection (1) “anti-social behaviour” has the meaning given by section 2 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (ignoring subsection (2) of that section).]
Any person who—
fails to give his name and address when required to do so under subsection (1), or
gives a false or inaccurate name or address in response to a requirement under that subsection,
is guilty of an offence and shall be liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.


Persons in police detention

Independent custody visitors for places of detention
Every [F479local policing body] shall—
make arrangements for detainees to be visited by persons appointed under the arrangements (“independent custody visitors”); and
keep those arrangements under review and from time to time revise them as they think fit.
[F480(1A) Every [F481local policing body] must ensure—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
109


that the arrangements made by it require independent custody visitors to prepare and submit to it a report of any visit made under the arrangements to a suspected terrorist detainee, and
that a copy of any report submitted under paragraph (a) is given to the person appointed under section 36(1) of the Terrorism Act 2006 (independent reviewer of terrorism legislation).]
The arrangements must secure that the persons appointed under the arrangements are independent of both—
the [F482local policing body]; and
the chief officer of police of the police force maintained by [F483that body].
The arrangements may confer on independent custody visitors such powers as the [F484local policing body] considers necessary to enable them to carry out their functions under the arrangements and may, in particular, confer on them powers—
to require access to be given to each police station;
to examine records relating to the detention of persons there;
[F485(ba)  in relation to suspected terrorist detainees, to listen to the audio recordings and view the video recordings (with or without sound) of interviews with those detainees which have taken place during their detention there and which were conducted by a constable;]
to meet detainees there for the purposes of a discussion about their treatment and conditions while detained; and
to inspect the facilities there including in particular, cell accommodation, washing and toilet facilities and the facilities for the provision of food.
[F486(3A) The arrangements may include provision for access to the whole or part of an audio or video recording of an interview of the kind mentioned in subsection (3)(ba) to be denied to independent custody visitors if—
it appears to an officer of or above the rank of inspector that there are grounds for denying access at the time it is requested;
the grounds are grounds specified for the purposes of paragraph (a) in the arrangements; and
the procedural requirements imposed by the arrangements in relation to a denial of access to such recordings are complied with.
(3B) Grounds are not to be specified in any arrangements for the purposes of subsection (3A)(a) unless they are grounds for the time being set out for the purposes of this subsection in the code of practice issued by the Secretary of State under subsection (6).]
The arrangements may include provision for access to a detainee to be denied to independent custody visitors if—
it appears to an officer of or above the rank of inspector that there are grounds for denying access at the time it is requested;
the grounds are grounds specified for the purposes of paragraph (a) in the arrangements; and
the procedural requirements imposed by the arrangements in relation to a denial of access are complied with.
110	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

Grounds shall not be specified in any arrangements for the purposes of subsection (4)
unless they are grounds for the time being set out for the purposes of this subsection in the code of practice issued by the Secretary of State under subsection (6).
The Secretary of State shall issue, and may from time to time revise, a code of practice as to the carrying out by [F487local policing bodies] and independent custody visitors of their functions under the arrangements.
Before issuing or revising a code of practice under this section, the Secretary of State shall consult with—
[F488[F489(a)	such persons as appear to the Secretary of State to represent the views of police and crime commissioners;
(aa)	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime; (ab)	the Common Council of the City of London;]
[F490the National Police Chiefs' Council]; and]
such other persons as he thinks fit.
The Secretary of State shall lay any code of practice issued by him under this section, and any revisions of any such code, before Parliament.
[F491Local policing bodies] and independent custody visitors shall have regard to the code of practice for the time being in force under subsection (6) in the carrying out of their functions under the preceding provisions of this section.
[F492(10) In this section—
“detainee”, in relation to arrangements made under this section, means a person detained in a police station in the police area of the [F493local policing body];
“suspected terrorist detainee” means a detainee detained under section 41 of the Terrorism Act 2000.]

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
111



Detention reviews for detained persons who are asleep
In section 40 of the 1984 Act (review of police detention), in subsection (8) for the words from “the substitution” to the end there shall be substituted “ the modifications specified in subsection (8A) ”.
After that subsection there shall be inserted— “(8A) The modifications are—
the substitution of references to the person whose detention is under review for references to the person arrested;
the substitution of references to the review officer for references to the custody officer; and
in subsection (6), the insertion of the following paragraph after paragraph (a)—
(“) asleep;””
In subsection (10) of that section—
for “(6)” there shall be substituted “ (6B) ”; and
for the words from “the substitution” to the end there shall be substituted “ the modifications specified in subsection (10A) ”.
After that subsection there shall be inserted— “(10A) The modifications are—
the substitution of a reference to the person whose detention is under review for any reference to the person arrested or to the person charged; and
in subsection (5), the insertion of the following paragraph after paragraph (a)—
(“) asleep;””

Persons suspected of offences connected with transport systems
In section 34(6) of the 1984 Act (persons treated as arrested for an offence), after “1988” there shall be inserted “ or section 30(2) of the Transport and Works Act 1992 (c. 42) ”.
112	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

In section 62(11) of that Act (provisions of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) relating to the taking of specimens not to be affected by provisions of that section)—
for “affects” there shall be substituted “ applies to the taking of a specimen for the purposes of any of the provisions of ”; and
after “Road Traffic Act 1988” there shall be inserted “ or of sections 26 to 38 of the Transport and Works Act 1992 ”.

Blood specimens

Persons authorised to take intimate samples from persons in police detention
For subsection (9) of section 62 of the 1984 Act (persons who may take intimate samples) there shall be substituted—
“(9) In the case of an intimate sample which is a dental impression, the sample may be taken from a person only by a registered dentist.
(9A) In the case of any other form of intimate sample, except in the case of a sample of urine, the sample may be taken from a person only by—
a registered medical practitioner; or
a registered health care professional.”
In section 65 of the 1984 Act (interpretation of Part 5 of that Act), in subsection (1) after the definition of “registered dentist” there shall be inserted—
““registered health care professional” means a person (other than a medical practitioner) who is—
a registered nurse; or
a registered member of a health care profession which is designated for the purposes of this paragraph by an order made by the Secretary of State;”.
After that subsection, there shall be inserted—
“(1A) A health care profession is any profession mentioned in section 60(2) of the Health Act 1999 (c. 8) other than the profession of practising medicine and the profession of nursing.
(1B) An order under subsection (1) shall be made by statutory instrument and shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”


Extension of role of health care professionals
In subsection (4) of section 7 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (constable to decide if specimen is of blood or urine) for the words from “shall be decided” onwards there
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
113


shall be substituted “ and, in the case of a specimen of blood, the question who is to be asked to take it shall be decided (subject to subsection (4A)) by the constable making the requirement ”.
After that subsection there shall be inserted—
“(4A) Where a constable decides for the purposes of subsection (4) to require the provision of a specimen of blood, there shall be no requirement to provide such a specimen if—
the medical practitioner who is asked to take the specimen is of the opinion that, for medical reasons, it cannot or should not be taken; or
the registered health care professional who is asked to take it is of that opinion and there is no contrary opinion from a medical practitioner;
and, where by virtue of this subsection there can be no requirement to provide a specimen of blood, the constable may require a specimen of urine instead.”
In subsection (2) of section 11 of that Act (interpretation of sections 3A to 10 of that Act), after the definition of “prescribed limit” there shall be inserted—
““registered health care professional” means a person (other than a medical practitioner) who is—
a registered nurse; or
a registered member of a health care profession which is designated for the purposes of this paragraph by an order made by the Secretary of State.”
After that subsection there shall be inserted—
“(2A) A health care profession is any profession mentioned in section 60(2) of the Health Act 1999 (c. 8) other than the profession of practising medicine and the profession of nursing.
(2B) An order under subsection (2) shall be made by statutory instrument; and any such statutory instrument shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”
For subsection (4) of that section there shall be substituted— “(4) A person provides a specimen of blood if and only if—
he consents to the taking of such a specimen from him; and
the specimen is taken from him by a medical practitioner or, if it is taken in a police station, either by a medical practitioner or by a registered health care professional.”


Specimens taken from persons incapable of consenting
After section 7 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) there shall be inserted—
114	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

“7A Specimens of blood taken from persons incapable of consenting
A constable may make a request to a medical practitioner for him to take a specimen of blood from a person (“the person concerned”) irrespective of whether that person consents if—
that person is a person from whom the constable would (in the absence of any incapacity of that person and of any objection under section 9) be entitled under section 7 to require the provision of a specimen of blood for a laboratory test;
it appears to that constable that that person has been involved in an accident that constitutes or is comprised in the matter that is under investigation or the circumstances of that matter;
it appears to that constable that that person is or may be incapable (whether or not he has purported to do so) of giving a valid consent to the taking of a specimen of blood; and
it appears to that constable that that person’s incapacity is attributable to medical reasons.
A request under this section—
shall not be made to a medical practitioner who for the time being has any responsibility (apart from the request) for the clinical care of the person concerned; and
shall not be made to a medical practitioner other than a police medical practitioner unless—
it is not reasonably practicable for the request to made to a police medical practitioner; or
it is not reasonably practicable for such a medical practitioner (assuming him to be willing to do so) to take the specimen.
It shall be lawful for a medical practitioner to whom a request is made under this section, if he thinks fit—
to take a specimen of blood from the person concerned irrespective of whether that person consents; and
to provide the sample to a constable.
If a specimen is taken in pursuance of a request under this section, the specimen shall not be subjected to a laboratory test unless the person from whom it was taken—
has been informed that it was taken; and
has been required by a constable to give his permission for a laboratory test of the specimen; and
has given his permission.
A constable must, on requiring a person to give his permission for the purposes of this section for a laboratory test of a specimen, warn that person that a failure to give the permission may render him liable to prosecution.
A person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to give his permission for a laboratory test of a specimen of blood taken from him under this section is guilty of an offence.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
115


In this section “police medical practitioner” means a medical practitioner who is engaged under any agreement to provide medical services for purposes connected with the activities of a police force.”
In section 9 of that Act (protection of hospital patients), for subsection (2) there shall be substituted—
“(1A) While a person is at a hospital as a patient, no specimen of blood shall be taken from him under section 7A of this Act and he shall not be required to give his permission for a laboratory test of a specimen taken under that section unless the medical practitioner in immediate charge of his case—
has been notified of the proposal to take the specimen or to make the requirement; and
has not objected on the ground specified in subsection (2).
(2) The ground on which the medical practitioner may object is—
in a case falling within subsection (1), that the requirement or the provision of the specimen or (if one is required) the warning required by section 7(7) of this Act would be prejudicial to the proper care and treatment of the patient; and
in a case falling within subsection (1A), that the taking of the specimen, the requirement or the warning required by section 7A(5) of this Act would be so prejudicial.”
In section 34(3) of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (disqualification for certain offences where offender has previous conviction)—
the word “and” at the end of paragraph (b) shall be omitted; and
after paragraph (c) there shall be inserted—
“(d) section 7A(6) (failing to allow a specimen to be subjected to laboratory test) where that is an offence involving obligatory disqualification;”.
In Schedule 1 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (offences to which sections 1, 11 and 12(1) of that Act apply), in the Table, after the entry beginning “RTA section 7” there shall be inserted—


“RTA section 7A	Failing to allow specimen of blood to be subjected to laboratory test
Sections 11 and 12(1).”


In Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (prosecution and punishment of offences under the Traffic Acts), after the entry beginning “RTA section 7” there shall be inserted—


“RTA
section 7A
Failing to allow specimen to be
subjected to laboratory test
Summarily	(a) Where
the test would be for
ascertaining ability to drive or proportion
(a) Obligatory in the case mentioned in column 4(a)
(b) Discretionary
Obligatory	3-11, in
case ment- ioned in column 4(a) 10, in any other case.”
116	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

of alcohol at the time offender was driving or attempting to drive, 6 months or level 5 on
the standard scale or both.
(b) In any other case, 3 months or
level 4 on the standard scale or both
F494(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
in any other case



Use of specimens taken from persons incapable of consenting
In subsection (2) of section 15 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (evidence of blood alcohol level)—
after “provided by” there shall be inserted “ or taken from ”; and
after the word “provided”, in the second place where it occurs, there shall be inserted “ or taken ”.
In subsection (3)(a) of that section (rebutting the assumption in subsection (2)), after “provided the specimen” there shall be inserted “ or had it taken from him ”.
In subsection (4) of that section (circumstances in which a specimen of blood is to be disregarded), for the words from “unless” to the end there shall be substituted “unless
—
it was taken from the accused with his consent and either—
in a police station by a medical practitioner or a registered health care professional; or
elsewhere by a medical practitioner;
or
it was taken from the accused by a medical practitioner under section 7A of the Road Traffic Act 1988 and the accused subsequently gave his permission for a laboratory test of the specimen.”
After subsection (5) of that section, there shall be inserted—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
117


“(5A) Where a specimen of blood was taken from the accused under section 7A of the Road Traffic Act 1988, evidence of the proportion of alcohol or any drug found in the specimen is not admissible on behalf of the prosecution unless—
the specimen in which the alcohol or drug was found is one of two parts into which the specimen taken from the accused was divided at the time it was taken; and
any request to be supplied with the other part which was made by the accused at the time when he gave his permission for a laboratory test of the specimen was complied with.”
In subsection (1) of section 16 of that Act (documentary evidence as to specimens), after “15(5)” there shall be inserted “ and (5A) ”.
In subsection (2) of that section (documentary evidence as to consent), after the words “medical practitioner”, in both places where they occur, there shall be inserted “ or a registered health care professional ”.


Equivalent provision for offences connected with transport systems
In subsection (6) of section 31 of the Transport and Works Act 1992 (c. 42) (constable to decide if specimen is of blood or urine), for the words from “shall be decided” onwards there shall be substituted “ and, in the case of a specimen of blood, the question who is to be asked to take it shall be decided (subject to subsection (6A)) by the constable making the requirement ”.
After that subsection there shall be inserted—
“(6A) Where a constable decides for the purposes of subsection (6) to require the provision of a specimen of blood, there shall be no requirement to provide such a specimen if—
the medical practitioner who is asked to take the specimen is of the opinion that, for medical reasons, it cannot or should not be taken; or
the registered health care professional who is asked to take it is of that opinion and there is no contrary opinion from a medical practitioner,
and, where by virtue of this subsection there can be no requirement to provide a specimen of blood, the constable may require a specimen of urine instead.”
After subsection (9) of that section there shall be inserted—
“(9A) In this section “health care professional” means a person (other than a medical practitioner) who is—
a registered nurse; or
a registered member of a health care profession which is designated for the purposes of this paragraph by an order made by the Secretary of State.
118	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

(9B) A health care profession is any profession mentioned in section 60(2) of the Health Act 1999 (c. 8) other than the profession of practising medicine and the profession of nursing.
(9C) An order under subsection (9A)(b) shall be made by statutory instrument; and any such statutory instrument shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”
After section 31 of that Act there shall be inserted—

“31A Specimens of blood taken from persons incapable of consenting
A constable may make a request to a medical practitioner for him to take a specimen of blood from a person (“the person concerned”) irrespective of whether that person consents if—
that person is a person from whom the constable would (in the absence of any incapacity of that person and of any objection under section 33) be entitled under section 31 to require the provision of a specimen of blood for a laboratory test;
it appears to that constable that that person has been involved in—
an accident that constitutes or is comprised in the matter that is under investigation or the circumstances of that matter; or
a dangerous incident (within the meaning given by section 29(3)) that constitutes or is comprised in that matter or those circumstances;
it appears to that constable that that person is or may be incapable (whether or not he has purported to do so) of giving a valid consent to the taking of a specimen of blood; and
it appears to that constable that that person’s incapacity is attributable to medical reasons.
A request under this section—
shall not be made to a medical practitioner who for the time being has any responsibility (apart from the request) for the clinical care of the person concerned; and
shall not be made to a medical practitioner other than a police medical practitioner unless—
it is not reasonably practicable for the request to made to a police medical practitioner; or
it is not reasonably practicable for such a medical practitioner (assuming him to be willing to do so) to take the specimen.
It shall be lawful for a medical practitioner to whom a request is made under this section, if he thinks fit—
to take a specimen of blood from the person concerned irrespective of whether that person consents; and
to provide the sample to a constable.
If a specimen is taken in pursuance of a request under this section, the specimen shall not be subjected to a laboratory test unless the person from whom it was taken—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
119


has been informed that it was taken; and
has been required by a constable to give his permission for a laboratory test of the specimen; and
has given his permission.
A constable must, on requiring a person to give his permission for the purposes of this section for a laboratory test of a specimen, warn that person that a failure to give the permission, may render him liable to prosecution.
A person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to give his permission for a laboratory test of a specimen of blood taken from him under this section is guilty of an offence.
In this section “police medical practitioner” means a medical practitioner who is engaged under any agreement to provide medical services for purposes connected with the activities of a police force.”
In section 33 of that Act (protection of hospital patients), for subsection (2) there shall be substituted—
“(1A) While a person is at a hospital as a patient, no specimen of blood shall be taken from him under section 31A of this Act and he shall not be required to give his permission for a laboratory test of a specimen taken under that section unless the medical practitioner in immediate charge of his case—
has been notified of the proposal to take the specimen or to make the requirement; and
has not objected on the ground specified in subsection (2).
(2) The ground on which the medical practitioner may object is—
in a case falling within subsection (1), that the requirement or the provision of the specimen or (if one is required) the warning required by section 31(9) of this Act would be prejudicial to the proper care and treatment of the patient; and
in a case falling within subsection (1A), that the taking of the specimen, the requirement or the warning required by section 31A(5) of this Act would be so prejudicial.”
In subsection (1)(a) of section 34 of that Act (evidence of blood alcohol level) after “provided by” there shall be inserted “ or taken from ”.
In subsection (2)(a) of that section (rebutting the assumption in subsection (1)(b)), after “provided the specimen” there shall be inserted “ or had it taken from him ”.
After subsection (3) of that section there shall be substituted—
“(3A) Where a specimen of blood was taken from the accused under section 31A, evidence of the proportion of alcohol or any drug found in the specimen is not admissible on behalf of the prosecution in the proceedings unless—
the specimen in which the alcohol or drug was found is one of two parts into which the specimen taken from the accused was divided at the time it was taken; and
any request to be supplied with the other part which was made by the accused at the time when he gave his permission for a laboratory test of the specimen was complied with.”
120	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

In section 35(3) of that Act (documentary evidence as to consent) after the words “practitioner”, in both places where it occurs, there shall be inserted “ or a registered health care professional ”.
After subsection (2) of section 38 of that Act (interpretation of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of that Act) there shall be inserted—
“(2A) In this Chapter “registered health care professional” means a person (other than a medical practitioner) who is—
a registered nurse; or
a registered member of a health care profession which is designated for the purposes of this paragraph by an order made by the Secretary of State.
(2B) A health care profession is any profession mentioned in section 60(2) of the Health Act 1999 (c. 8) other than the profession of practising medicine and the profession of nursing.
(2C) An order under subsection (2A)(b) shall be made by statutory instrument; and any such statutory instrument shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”
For subsection (5) of that section there shall be substituted—
“(5) For the purposes of this Chapter, a person provides a specimen of blood if and only if—
he consents to the taking of such a specimen from him; and
the specimen is taken from him by a medical practitioner or, if it is taken in a police station, either by a medical practitioner or by a registered health care professional.”


Seizure of motor vehicles

Vehicles used in manner causing alarm, distress or annoyance
Where a constable in uniform has reasonable grounds for believing that a motor vehicle is being used on any occasion in a manner which—
contravenes section 3 or 34 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) (careless and inconsiderate driving and prohibition of off-road driving), and
is causing, or is likely to cause, alarm, distress or annoyance to members of the public,
he shall have the powers set out in subsection (3).
A constable in uniform shall also have the powers set out in subsection (3) where he has reasonable grounds for believing that a motor vehicle has been used on any occasion in a manner falling within subsection (1).
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
121


Those powers are—
power, if the motor vehicle is moving, to order the person driving it to stop the vehicle;
power to seize and remove the motor vehicle;
power, for the purposes of exercising a power falling within paragraph (a) or (b), to enter any premises on which he has reasonable grounds for believing the motor vehicle to be;
power to use reasonable force, if necessary, in the exercise of any power conferred by any of paragraphs to (a) to (c).
A constable shall not seize a motor vehicle in the exercise of the powers conferred on him by this section unless—
he has warned the person appearing to him to be the person whose use falls within subsection (1) that he will seize it, if that use continues or is repeated; and
it appears to him that the use has continued or been repeated after the warning.
Subsection (4) does not require a warning to be given by a constable on any occasion on which he would otherwise have the power to seize a motor vehicle under this section if—
the circumstances make it impracticable for him to give the warning;
the constable has already on that occasion given a warning under that subsection in respect of any use of that motor vehicle or of another motor vehicle by that person or any other person;
the constable has reasonable grounds for believing that such a warning has been given on that occasion otherwise than by him; or
the constable has reasonable grounds for believing that the person whose use of that motor vehicle on that occasion would justify the seizure is a person to whom a warning under that subsection has been given (whether or not by that constable or in respect the same vehicle or the same or a similar use) on a previous occasion in the previous twelve months.
A person who fails to comply with an order under subsection (3)(a) is guilty of an offence and shall be liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.
Subsection (3)(c) does not authorise entry into a private dwelling house.
The powers conferred on a constable by this section shall be exercisable only at a time when regulations under section 60 are in force.
In this section—
“driving” has the same meaning as in the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52); “motor vehicle” means any mechanically propelled vehicle, whether or not
it is intended or adapted for use on roads; and
“private dwelling house” does not include any garage or other structure occupied with the dwelling house, or any land appurtenant to the dwelling house.

Retention etc. of vehicles seized under section 59
The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision as to—
122	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

the removal and retention of motor vehicles seized under section 59; and
the release or disposal of such motor vehicles.
Regulations under subsection (1) may, in particular, make provision—
for the giving of notice of the seizure of a motor vehicle under section 59 to a person who is the owner of that vehicle or who, in accordance with the regulations, appears to be its owner;
for the procedure by which a person who claims to be the owner of a motor vehicle seized under section 59 may seek to have it released;
for requiring the payment of fees, charges or costs in relation to the removal and retention of such a motor vehicle and to any application for its release;
as to the circumstances in which a motor vehicle seized under section 59 may be disposed of;
as to the destination—
of any fees or charges payable in accordance with the regulations; and
of the proceeds (if any) arising from the disposal of a motor vehicle seized under section 59;
for the delivery to a local authority, in circumstances prescribed by or determined in accordance with the regulations, of any motor vehicle seized under section 59.
Regulations under subsection (1) must provide that a person who would otherwise be liable to pay any fee or charge under the regulations shall not be liable to pay it if—
the use by reference to which the motor vehicle in question was seized was not a use by him; and
he did not know of the use of the vehicle in the manner which led to its seizure, had not consented to its use in that manner and could not, by the taking of reasonable steps, have prevented its use in that manner.
In this section—
“local authority”—
in relation to England, means the council of a county, metropolitan district or London borough, the Common Council of the City of London or Transport for London; and
in relation to Wales, means the council of a county or county borough; “motor vehicle” has the same meaning as in section 59.

Anti-social behaviour

F49561	Anti-social behaviour orders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

F49562	Power of Secretary of State to add to relevant authorities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123



F49563	Orders in county court proceedings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


F49564	Orders on conviction in criminal proceedings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


F49565	Interim orders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


F49566	Consultation requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

124	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Sex offenders

Sex offenders: England and Wales
F496. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Interim orders for sex offenders: England and Wales
F497. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Sex offender orders made in Scotland or Northern Ireland
F498. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Sex offenders: Scotland
F499. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Sex offender orders made in England and Wales or Northern Ireland
F500. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
125



Sex offenders: Northern Ireland
F501. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Interim orders for sex offenders: Northern Ireland
F502. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Sex offender orders made in England and Wales or Scotland
F503. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


The British Transport Police

Removal of truants to designated places
In section 16 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (c. 37) (removal of truants to designated place), after subsection (3) there shall be inserted—
“(3A) The power of a police officer of or above the rank of superintendent under subsection (2) to specify any area falling within a police area shall be exercisable by such an officer who is a member of the British Transport Police as if the reference in that subsection to an area in the police area were a reference to—
any area in or in the vicinity of any policed premises; or
the whole or any part of any such premises;
and references in subsection (3) to the specified area shall have effect accordingly.”
126	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 4 – Police powers etc.
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

In subsection (5) of that section (interpretation)—
before the definition of “local authority” there shall be inserted—
““British Transport Police” means the force of constables appointed under section 53 of the British Transport Commission Act 1949 (c. xxix);”
and
after the definition of “local authority” there shall be inserted—
““policed premises” has the meaning given by section 53(3) of the British Transport Commission Act 1949;”.

Amendments to Part 3 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988
Part 3 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (fixed penalties) shall be amended as follows.
F504(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(3) In section 75(1) (conditional offers in England and Wales), at the end there shall be inserted “or, if the constable is a member of the British Transport Police, by or on behalf of the chief constable of the British Transport Police.”
F505(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(5) In section 87 (guidance from the Secretary of State), after “areas” there shall be inserted “ and to the chief constable of the British Transport Police ”.
(6) In section 89 (interpretation of Part 3), after the definition of “authorised person” there shall be inserted—
““British Transport Police” means the force of constables appointed under the British Transport Commission Act 1949 (c. xxix);”.


Property in possession of NCS

Application of the Police (Property) Act 1897 to NCS
After section 2 of the Police (Property) Act 1897 (c. 30) there shall be inserted—

“2A Application to NCS
This Act applies to property which has come into the possession of the National Crime Squad as it applies to property that has come into the possession of the police.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 5 – The Ministry of Defence Police
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
127


In relation to property that has come into the possession of the National Crime Squad—
the reference in section 1(1) to an officer of police is a reference to a member of that Squad; and
references in section 2 to the property remaining in the possession of the police are references to its remaining in the possession of that Squad.
The power to make regulations under section 2 has effect in relation to property that has come into the possession of the National Crime Squad as if—
the relevant authority for the purposes of subsection (2A) of that section were the Service Authority for that Squad; and
the reference in subsection (2A)(c) of that section to police purposes were a reference to the purposes of that Squad.”
In section (2) of that Act (regulations), for subsection (2B) there shall be substituted—
“(2B) The relevant authority for the purposes of subsection (2A) is the police authority.”

Part 5

The Ministry of Defence Police

Ministry of Defence police serving with other forces
After section 2A of the Ministry of Defence Police Act 1987 (c. 4) (provision of assistance to other forces) there shall be inserted—

“2B Constables serving with other forces
This section applies where a member of the Ministry of Defence Police serves with a relevant force under arrangements made between the chief officer of that force and the chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police.
The member of the Ministry of Defence Police—
shall be under the direction and control of the chief officer of the relevant force; and
shall have the same powers and privileges as a member of that force.
In this section—
“British Transport Police Force” has the same meaning as in section 2 above;
“chief officer” means—
any chief officer of police of a police force for a police area in Great Britain;
the chief constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland;
the Director General of the National Criminal Intelligence Service;
the Director General of the National Crime Squad;
128	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 5 – The Ministry of Defence Police
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force; or
the chief constable of the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority Constabulary;
“relevant force” means—
any police force for a police area in Great Britain;
the Police Service of Northern Ireland;
the National Criminal Intelligence Service;
the National Crime Squad;
the British Transport Police Force; or
the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority Constabulary; “United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority Constabulary” has the
same meaning as in section 2 above.”

Disciplinary matters
After section 3 of the Ministry of Defence Police Act 1987 (c. 4) there shall be inserted—

“3A Regulations relating to disciplinary matters
The Secretary of State shall by regulations made by statutory instrument establish, or make provision for the establishment of, procedures for cases in which a member of the Ministry of Defence Police may be dealt with by suspension, dismissal, requirement to resign, reduction in rank, reduction in rate of pay, fine, reprimand or caution.
The regulations may provide—
for decisions which would otherwise fall to be taken by the Secretary of State or the chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police to be taken instead—
by a person or persons appointed in accordance with the regulations; or
by the Ministry of Defence Police Committee;
and
for decisions taken by or on behalf of the Secretary of State or the chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police to be reviewed by a person or persons appointed by or in accordance with the regulations.
In relation to any matter as to which provision may be made by regulations under this section, the regulations may—
authorise or require provision to be made by, or confer discretionary powers on, the Secretary of State, the Ministry of Defence Police Committee, the chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police or other persons; or
authorise or require the delegation by any person of functions conferred on that person by or under the regulations.
Any statutory instrument containing regulations under this section shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 5 – The Ministry of Defence Police
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

After section 4 of that Act there shall be inserted—
129

“4A Appeals against dismissal etc.
Subject to subsection (2) below, a member of the Ministry of Defence Police who is dismissed, required to resign or reduced in rank by a decision taken—
in proceedings under regulations made in accordance with section 3A above, or
in proceedings for the purposes of any procedures established in accordance with an agreement or order under section 60 of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (c. 32),
may appeal to an appeals tribunal.
Subsection (1) above does not apply in the case of a person who has a right to apply to some other person for a review of the decision; and in that case that person may appeal to an appeals tribunal from any decision of that other person as a result of which he is dismissed, required to resign or reduced in rank.
The Secretary of State may by regulations made by statutory instrument—
make provision equivalent, subject to such modifications as the Secretary of State thinks fit, to that made in relation to police appeals tribunals by any provision of Schedule 6 to the Police Act 1996 (c. 16) or Schedule 3 to the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 (c. 77);
make provision as to procedure on appeals to appeals tribunals under this section; and
make provision enabling an appeals tribunal to require any person to attend a hearing and to give evidence or produce documents.
Regulations made by virtue of subsection (3)(c) above may, in particular, apply subsections (2) and (3) of section 250 of the Local Government Act 1972 (c. 70) or subsections (4) and (5) of section 210 of the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973 (c. 65) with such modifications as may be set out in the regulations.
Where an appeals tribunal allows an appeal it may, if it considers that it is appropriate to do so, make an order dealing with the appellant in a way which—
appears to the tribunal to be less severe than the way in which he was dealt with by the decision appealed against; and
is a way in which he could have been dealt with by the person who made the decision.
Any statutory instrument containing regulations under subsection (3) above shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
In this section “an appeals tribunal” means a tribunal constituted in accordance with regulations under subsection (3) above.”
In section 1 of that Act (establishment of Ministry of Defence Police), for subsection (5) there shall be substituted—
130	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 5 – The Ministry of Defence Police
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

“(5) The Secretary of State shall appoint a committee, to be known as the Ministry of Defence Police Committee—
to advise him with respect to such matters concerning the Ministry of Defence Police as he may from time to time require; and
to exercise such other functions as may be conferred on it by or under this Act;
and the Secretary of State may make regulations concerning the membership and the procedure of the Committee.”
After section 6 of that Act there shall be inserted—

“6A Powers to make regulations
Any power of the Secretary of State under this Act to make regulations shall include power to make different provision for different purposes.”

Functions of inspectors of constabulary
Before section 5 of the Ministry of Defence Police Act 1987 (c. 4) there shall be inserted—

“4B	Functions of inspectors of constabulary
The inspectors of constabulary shall inspect, and report to the Secretary of State on, the efficiency and effectiveness of the Ministry of Defence Police.
The Secretary of State may at any time require the inspectors of constabulary to carry out an inspection under this section of the Ministry of Defence Police and to report to him on that inspection.
A requirement under subsection (2) may include a requirement for the inspection to be confined to a particular part of the Ministry of Defence Police, to particular matters or to particular activities of the Ministry of Defence Police.
The inspectors of constabulary shall carry out such other duties for the purposes of furthering the efficiency and effectiveness of the Ministry of Defence Police as the Secretary of State may from time to time direct.
Before carrying out any inspection by virtue of subsection (1) in Scotland, the inspectors of constabulary shall consult the Scottish inspectors with respect to the scope and conduct of the proposed inspection.
In this section—
“the inspectors of constabulary” means Her Majesty’s Inspectors of Constabulary appointed under section 54 of the Police Act 1996 (c. 16);
“the Scottish inspectors” means the inspectors of constabulary appointed under section 33 of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 (c. 77).
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 5 – The Ministry of Defence Police
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
131


4C	Publication of reports
Subject to subsection (2) below, the Secretary of State shall arrange for any report received by him under section 4B above to be published in such manner as appears to him to be appropriate.
The Secretary of State may exclude from publication under subsection (1) above any part of a report if, in his opinion, the publication of that part—
would be against the interests of national security; or
might jeopardise the safety of any person.
The Secretary of State shall—
send a copy of the published report to the chief constable of the Ministry of Defence Police; and
invite the chief constable to submit comments on the published report to the Secretary of State before such date as the Secretary of State may specify.
The Secretary of State shall arrange for—
any comments submitted by the chief constable in accordance with subsection (3) above, and
any response that the Secretary of State may prepare to the published report or to any comments submitted by the chief constable,
to be published in such manner as he considers appropriate.”

Exemptions from firearms legislation
After section 16A of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 (c. 45) there shall be inserted—

“16B Possession of firearms on Ministry of Defence Police premises
A person who is being trained or assessed in the use of firearms under the supervision of a member of the Ministry of Defence Police may, without holding a certificate or obtaining the authority of the Secretary of State under section 5 of the principal Act, have in his possession a firearm and ammunition on relevant premises for the purposes of the training or assessment.
In this section “relevant premises” means premises used for any purpose of the Ministry of Defence Police.”
[F506After Article 12A of the Firearms (Northern Ireland) Order 1981 (S.I. 1981/155 (N.I. 2)) there is inserted—

12B	“ Possession of firearms on Ministry of Defence Police premises
A person who is being trained or assessed in the use of firearms under the supervision of a member of the Ministry of Defence Police may, without holding a firearm certificate or obtaining the authority of the Secretary of State under Article 6, have in his possession a firearm and ammunition on relevant premises for the purposes of the training or assessment.
132	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 6 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes

In this Article “relevant premises” means premises used for any purpose of the Ministry of Defence Police.”]



Part 6

Miscellaneous

Appointment and attestation of police officers etc.

Nationality requirements applicable to police officers etc.
Irrespective of his place of birth, a person of any nationality may be—
a member of a police force maintained for any police area in England and Wales F507...;
[F508(aa)	a constable of the Police Service of Scotland;]
a member of the Police Service of Northern Ireland or of the Police Service of Northern Ireland Reserve;
F509. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
a member of the British Transport Police Force;
[F510(e)	a member of the Civil Nuclear Constabulary; [F511or]]
F512. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
a special constable;
and, accordingly, irrespective of his place of birth such a person may be attested or appointed, and hold office, as a constable.
Subsection (1) is subject to any provision falling within subsection which relates to qualification for appointment as a constable or as a special constable or for membership of, or for particular ranks, offices or positions with—
any force or constabulary; F513...
[F514(aa)  the Police Service of Scotland; or]
the Police Service of Northern Ireland or the Police Service of Northern Ireland Reserve; F515. . .
F515. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Provision falls within this subsection if it is—
provision made by regulations made under section 50 or 51 of the 1996 Act (regulations for police constables and for special constables);
provision made by regulations made under [F516section 48 of the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012 (governance and administration of police)];
provision made under section 25 or 26 of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (c. 32) (regulations for police constables and for the constables in the Police Service of Northern Ireland Reserve); [F517and]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 6 – Miscellaneous
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
133


F518. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
provision given effect to by any arrangements made for the purpose of regulating appointment to membership of the British Transport Police Force, [F519or the Civil Nuclear Constabulary], or to particular ranks or positions with that Force or Constabulary.
Without prejudice to the generality of any power conferred apart from this section, the provision falling within subsection (3) that may be made by any such regulations, terms and conditions or arrangements as are mentioned in that subsection may include provision imposing any of the following requirements—
requirements with respect to the competence in written and spoken English of candidates for appointment;
requirements with respect to the immigration status of such candidates;
requirements with respect to nationality in the case of particular ranks, offices or positions;
and, in a case where the power to make provision with respect to qualification for appointment as a constable or as a special constable, or for membership of a force [F520or Service] , is exercisable by any such regulations as are mentioned in that subsection, the regulations made must impose requirements with respect to all the matters mentioned in paragraphs (a) and (b).
F521. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

134	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Attestation of constables
For Schedule 4 to the 1996 Act there shall be substituted—
“SCHEDULE 4 Form of Declaration
’I....................of	do solemnly and sincerely declare and affirm that I will
well and truly serve the Queen in the office of constable, with fairness, integrity, diligence and impartiality, upholding fundamental human rights and according equal respect to all people; and that I will, to the best of my power, cause the peace to be kept and preserved and prevent all offences against people and property; and that while I continue to hold the said office I will, to the best of my skill and knowledge, discharge all the duties thereof faithfully according to law.’”

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F522. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Director General of NCIS
F523. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
135




Police members of NCIS
F524. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Police members of NCS
F525. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Regulations for NCIS
F526. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Regulations for NCS
F527. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

136	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Supplementary provisions about police membership of NCIS
F528. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Supplementary provisions about police membership of NCS
F529. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Bodies with functions in relation to the police

Police authorities to produce three-year strategy plans
After section 6 of the 1996 Act there shall be inserted—

“6A Three-year strategy plans
Every police authority maintaining a police force for a police area in England and Wales shall, before the beginning of every relevant three-year period, issue a plan (“a three-year strategy plan”) which sets out the authority’s medium and long term strategies for the policing of that area during that period.
Before a three-year strategy plan for any period is issued by a police authority, a draft of a plan setting out medium and long term strategies for the policing of the authority’s area during that period must have been—
prepared by the chief officer of police of the police force maintained by that authority; and
submitted by him to the police authority for its consideration.
In preparing the draft plan, the chief officer of police of a police force shall have regard to the views, obtained in accordance with arrangements under section 96, of people in the police area in question.
A police authority which has issued a three-year strategy plan for any period may modify that plan at any time during that period.
It shall be the duty, in issuing, preparing or modifying a three-year strategy plan or a draft of such a plan, of every police authority or chief officer of police to have regard to the National Policing Plan in force at that time.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
137


The Secretary of State —
shall issue guidance to police authorities and chief officers of police as to the matters to be contained in any three-year strategy plan, and as to the form to be taken by any such plan; and
may from time to time revise and modify that guidance;
and it shall be the duty of every police authority and chief officer of police to take account of any guidance under this subsection when issuing, preparing or modifying any such plan or any draft plan prepared for the purposes of subsection (2).
Before issuing or revising any guidance under subsection (6) the Secretary of State shall consult with—
persons whom he considers to represent the interests of police authorities;
persons whom he considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police; and
such other persons as he thinks fit.
A police authority which is proposing to issue or modify any plan under this section shall submit that plan, or the modifications, to the Secretary of State.
Where a police authority issues a three-year strategy plan or modifies such a plan, it shall—
send a copy of the plan or the modified plan to the Secretary of State; and
cause the plan or modified plan to be published;
and the copy of any modified plan sent to the Secretary of State and the publication of any modified plan must show the modifications, or be accompanied by or published with a document which sets them out or describes them.
If the Secretary of State considers that there are grounds for thinking that—
a police authority’s three-year strategy plan, or
any proposals by a police authority for such a plan, or for the modification of such a plan,
may not be consistent with any National Policing Plan applicable to a financial year wholly or partly comprised in the period to which the strategy plan applies, he shall, before informing the police authority of his conclusions on whether or not it is in fact so inconsistent, consult with the persons mentioned in subsection (11).
Those persons are—
the police authority in question;
the chief officer of police of the police force maintained by that authority;
persons whom the Secretary of State considers to represent the interests of police authorities; and
persons whom the Secretary of State considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police.
Before a police authority—
138	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


issues a three-year strategy plan that differs in any material respect from the draft submitted to it by the chief officer of police of the force maintained by that authority, or
modifies its three-year strategy plan, it shall consult with that chief officer.
Any best value performance plan prepared by a police authority under section 6 of the Local Government Act 1999 (c. 27) for any financial year must be consistent with any three-year strategy plan which sets out the authority’s current strategies for policing its area during any period which includes the whole or any part of that financial year.
The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision for—
the procedure to be followed on the submission to him of any plan or modifications for the purposes of this section; and
the periods which are to constitute relevant three-year periods for the purposes of this section;
and those regulations may provide for a period of less than three years to be the first period treated as a relevant three-year period for the purposes of this section.
A statutory instrument containing regulations under this section shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”
In section 8 of that Act (local policing plans), after subsection (2) there shall be inserted—
“(2A) The local policing plan for any financial year must be consistent with any three-year strategy plan under section 6A which sets out the authority’s current strategies for the policing of its area during any period which includes the whole or any part of that financial year.”
In section 9(2) of that Act (annual report by police authorities to include assessment of extent to which local policing plan carried out), for the words from “the local policing plan” onwards there shall be substituted “, during that year proposals have been implemented, and things have been done, in accordance with the following plans
—
the three-year strategy plan issued under section 6A for the period that includes that year; and
the local policing plan issued for that year under section 8.”


Quorum for the Service Authorities under the 1997 Act
F530. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
139




Expenses of members of police authorities etc.
F531. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Duties under the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974
F532. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


F53396	President of ACPO
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Crime and disorder reduction partnerships
The Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (c. 37) shall be amended as follows.
In section 5 (authorities responsible for strategies), in subsection (1), after paragraph (b) there shall be inserted—
“(c)	every police authority any part of whose police area so lies;
every fire authority any part of whose area so lies;
if the local government area is in England, every Primary Care Trust the whole or any part of whose area so lies; and
if the local government area is in Wales, every health authority the whole or any part of whose area so lies.”
After subsection (1) of that section there shall be inserted—
140	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


“(1A) The Secretary of State may by order provide in relation to any two or more local government areas in England—
that the functions conferred by sections 6 to 7 below are to be carried out in relation to those areas taken together as if they constituted only one area; and
that the persons who for the purposes of this Chapter are to be taken to be responsible authorities in relation to the combined area are the persons who comprise every person who (apart from the order) would be a responsible authority in relation to any one or more of the areas included in the combined area.
(1B) The Secretary of State shall not make an order under subsection (1A) above unless—
an application for the order has been made jointly by all the persons who would be the responsible authorities in relation to the combined area or the Secretary of State has first consulted those persons; and
he considers it would be in the interests of reducing crime and disorder, or of combatting the misuse of drugs, to make the order.”
In subsection (2) of that section (consultation)—
for paragraphs (a) and (b) there shall be substituted—
“(b)  every local probation board any part of whose area lies within the area;”
at the end of paragraph (c) there shall be inserted “; and
(d) where they are acting in relation to an area in Wales, every person or body which is of a description which is for the time being prescribed by an order under this subsection of the National Assembly for Wales;”.
In subsection (3) of that section, at the end there shall be inserted “and, in the case of the responsible authorities for an area in Wales, of any person or body of a description for the time being prescribed by an order under this subsection of the National Assembly for Wales.”
After subsection (4) of that section, there shall be inserted— “(5) In this section—
“fire authority” means—
any fire authority constituted by a combination scheme under the Fire Services Act 1947 (c. 41);
any metropolitan county fire and civil defence authority; or
the London Fire and Emergency Planning Authority; and “police authority” means—
any police authority established under section 3 of the Police Act 1996 (c. 16); or
the Metropolitan Police Authority.”
F534. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F534. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F534. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
141


F534. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F534. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F534. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
In section 114—
in subsection (1) (powers of Ministers exercisable by statutory instrument), after “Minister of the Crown” there shall be inserted “ or of the National Assembly for Wales ”; and
in subsection (2) (orders subject to negative resolution procedure), for “5(2) or (3) or 10(6) above, or” there shall be substituted “ 5(1A), (2) or (3), 6A(1) or 10(6) above (other than one made by the National Assembly for Wales), or containing ”.
In section 115(2) (authorities to which information may be disclosed for purposes connected with that Act), in paragraph (d)—
in sub-paragraph (i), after “London borough council” there shall be inserted “ , a parish council ”; and
in sub-paragraph (ii), for “or a county borough council” there shall be substituted “ , a county borough council or a community council ”.
Section 5(1) (as amended by subsection (2) shall have effect in relation to a local government area in England at any time when that area or a part of it comprises or contains an area that is not included in the area of a Primary Care Trust, as if the reference to a Primary Care Trust the whole or part of whose area lies within the local government area included a reference to any health authority or strategic health authority whose area comprises or includes the area for which there is no Primary Care Trust.


Secretary of State’s functions in relation to strategies
F535. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

142	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Power to modify functions and structure of PITO
F536. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Metropolitan Police Authority housing
In section 4(e) of the Housing Act 1985 (c. 68) (which defines local authorities for the purposes of the provisions of that Act, including those relating to secure tenancies), the words “the Metropolitan Police Authority” shall be omitted.
In paragraph 12(2)(g) of Schedule 1 to the Housing Act 1988 (c. 50) (local authority tenancies that cannot be assured tenancies), the words “and the Metropolitan Police Authority” shall be omitted.
Nothing in subsection (1) or in any repeal made by this Act for the purposes of that subsection shall affect—
the operation of Part 5 of the Housing Act 1985 (c. 68) (the right to buy) in relation to any case in which a person who had acquired a right to buy under that Part before the day on which this Act is passed either—
had served a notice under section 122 of that Act (tenant’s notice claiming right to buy) on the Metropolitan Police Authority before that day; or
serves such a notice on that Authority in the period of three months beginning with that day;
or
the extent to which, in any other case, any period falling before the day on which this Act is passed falls at any subsequent time to be treated as a period qualifying under any of the provisions of Schedule 4 to that Act.
A tenancy which becomes an assured tenancy by virtue of this section shall be an assured shorthold tenancy unless (whenever it was entered into) it—
falls within any of paragraphs 1 to 3 of Schedule 2A to the Housing Act 1988 (c. 50); or
was an assured tenancy, but not an assured shorthold tenancy, immediately before it became a secure tenancy.

Provision of goods and services by police authorities
For section 18 of the 1996 Act (supply of goods and services) there shall be substituted—

“18 Supply of goods and services
Subsections (1) to (3) of section 1 of the Local Authorities (Goods and Services) Act 1970 (c. 39) (supply of goods and services by local authorities)—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
143


shall apply, with the modification set out in subsection (2), to a police authority established under section 3 of this Act and to the Metropolitan Police Authority as they apply to a local authority; and
shall also apply with that modification in their application to the Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as the police authority for the City of London police force.
The modification is that references in those subsections to a public body shall be read as references to any person.”

Liability for unlawful acts of constables etc.

Liability for wrongful acts of constables etc.
Each of the enactments specified in subsection (2) shall be amended as follows—
for the words “torts committed by”, in each place where they occur, there shall be substituted “ any unlawful conduct of ”; and
for “in respect of any such tort” there shall be substituted “ , in the case of a tort, ”.
The enactments are—
section 88(1) of the 1996 Act (liability of chief officers);
section 97(9) of that Act (liability of the Secretary of State);
F537. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F537. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
section 27(8) of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (c. 32) (liability of the Secretary of State);
section 29(1) of that Act (liability of the chief constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland);
paragraph 7(3) of Schedule 3 to that Act (liability of the Police Ombudsman); and
F538. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F538. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
In each of the enactments specified in subsection (5), for “a tort committed by” there shall be substituted “ any unlawful conduct of ”.
The enactments are—
section 88(4)(a) of the 1996 Act (payments in respect of tort proceedings against constables and special constables);
F539. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F539. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
section 29(3)(a) of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (payments in respect of tort proceedings against police officers in Northern Ireland); and
paragraph 7(4)(a) of Schedule 3 to that Act (payment in respect of tort proceedings against police officers serving with, or assisting, the Police Ombudsman).
In section 42(6) of the 1997 Act (application to Scotland), paragraph (a) shall be omitted.
144	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


In section 39 (1) of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 (c. 77) (liability for wrongful acts of constables)—
for “in reparation in respect of any wrongful act or omission” there shall be substituted “ for any unlawful conduct ”; and
for “in respect of a wrongful act or omission” there shall be substituted “ for any unlawful conduct ”.
In section 39(4) of that Act, for “wrongful act or omission” there shall be substituted “ unlawful conduct ”.


International joint investigation teams

Liability in respect of members of teams
In section 88 of the 1996 Act (liability for wrongful acts of constables), after subsection (5) there shall be inserted—
“(6) This section shall have effect where an international joint investigation team has been formed under the leadership of a constable who is a member of a police force as if—
any unlawful conduct, in the performance or purported performance of his functions as such, of any member of that team who is neither a constable nor an employee of the police authority were unlawful conduct of a constable under the direction and control of the chief officer of police of that force; and
subsection (4) applied, in the case of the police authority maintaining that force, to every member of that team to whom it would not apply apart from this subsection.
In this section “international joint investigation team” means any investigation team formed in accordance with—
any framework decision on joint investigation teams adopted under Article 34 of the Treaty on European Union;
the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union, and the Protocol to that
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
145


Convention, established in accordance with that Article of that Treaty; or
any international agreement to which the United Kingdom is a party and which is specified for the purposes of this section in an order made by the Secretary of State.
A statutory instrument containing an order under subsection (7) shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”
F540. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F540. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F541(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
In section 29 of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (c. 32) (liability for wrongful acts of constables), after subsection (5) there shall be inserted—
“(6) This section shall have effect where an international joint investigation team has been formed under the leadership of a constable who is a member of the Police Service of Northern Ireland as if any unlawful conduct, in the performance or purported performance of his functions as such, of any member of that team who is neither—
a constable, nor
an employee of the Board,
were unlawful conduct of a constable under the direction and control of the Chief Constable.
In this section “international joint investigation team” means any investigation team formed in accordance with—
any framework decision on joint investigation teams adopted under Article 34 of the Treaty on European Union;
the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union, and the Protocol to that Convention, established in accordance with that Article of that Treaty; or
any international agreement to which the United Kingdom is a party and which is specified for the purposes of this section in an order made by the Secretary of State.
A statutory instrument containing an order under subsection (7) shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”
Where—
any sums are paid by virtue of this section out of a police fund F542. . . or by the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland, and
in pursuance of any international obligation, the Secretary of State receives any sum by way of reimbursement, in whole or in part, of the sums paid out of that fund or by that Chief Constable,
the Secretary of State shall pay into that fund or (as the case may be) to that Chief Constable the sums received by him by way of reimbursement.
146	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F543(7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Assaults on members of teams
In section 89 of the 1996 Act (assaults on constables), after subsection (3) there shall be inserted—
“(4) In this section references to a person assisting a constable in the execution of his duty include references to any person who is neither a constable nor in the company of a constable but who—
is a member of an international joint investigation team that is led by a member of a police force or by a member of the National Criminal Intelligence Service or of the National Crime Squad; and
is carrying out his functions as a member of that team.
In this section “international joint investigation team” means any investigation team formed in accordance with—
any framework decision on joint investigation teams adopted under Article 34 of the Treaty on European Union;
the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union, and the Protocol to that Convention, established in accordance with that Article of that Treaty; or
any international agreement to which the United Kingdom is a party and which is specified for the purposes of this section in an order made by the Secretary of State.
A statutory instrument containing an order under subsection (5) shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”
In section 41 of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 (c. 77) (assaults on constables), after subsection (3) there shall be inserted—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
147


“(4) In this section references to a person assisting a constable in the execution of his duty include references to any person who is neither a constable nor in the company of a constable but who—
is a member of an international joint investigation team that is led by a constable of a police force or by a member of the National Criminal Intelligence Service or of the National Crime Squad; and
is carrying out his functions as a member of that team.
In this section “international joint investigation team” means any investigation team formed in accordance with—
any framework decision on joint investigation teams adopted under Article 34 of the Treaty on European Union;
the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union, and the Protocol to that Convention, established in accordance with that Article of that Treaty; or
any international agreement to which the United Kingdom is a party and which is specified for the purposes of this section in an order made by the Secretary of State with the consent of the Scottish Ministers.
A statutory instrument containing an order under subsection (5) shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”
In section 66 of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (c. 32) (assaults on constables), after subsection (4) there shall be inserted—
“(5) In this section references to a person assisting a constable in the execution of his duty include references to any person who is neither a constable nor in the company of a constable but who—
is a member of an international joint investigation team that is led by a member of the Police Service of Northern Ireland; and
is carrying out his functions as a member of that team.
In this section “international joint investigation team” means any investigation team formed in accordance with—
any framework decision on joint investigation teams adopted under Article 34 of the Treaty on European Union;
the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union, and the Protocol to that Convention, established in accordance with that Article of that Treaty; or
any international agreement to which the United Kingdom is a party and which is specified for the purposes of this section in an order made by the Secretary of State.
A statutory instrument containing an order under subsection (6) shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”
148	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 7 – Supplemental
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Part 7

Supplemental

Powers of Secretary of State to make orders and regulations
Every power conferred by this Act on the Secretary of State to make orders or regulations shall be exercisable by statutory instrument.
A statutory instrument containing an order or regulations made in exercise of any such power, other than an order to which subsection (3) applies, shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
This subsection applies to—
any order under section 9(7) or 108; and
[F544any order or regulations that are] required to be approved in draft by virtue of section 19(3), [F54538(9C),]F546... [F547or 41B]F548... F549... [F550or paragraph
9A(2) of Schedule 5].
Every power of the Secretary of State to make an order or regulations under this Act, other than an order under section 9(7) or 108, shall include power—
to make different provision for different cases;
to make provision subject to such exemptions and exceptions as the Secretary of State thinks fit; and
to make such incidental, supplemental, consequential and transitional provision as the Secretary of State thinks fit.
Every power of the Secretary of State to make provision by regulations under Part 2 [F551or 2B] shall include power to make provision for any of the matters that may be provided for to be determined, in accordance with the regulations, by the [F552Director General of the Independent Office for Police Conduct].

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 7 – Supplemental
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
149



General interpretation
In this Act—
“the 1984 Act” means the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60); “the 1996 Act” means the Police Act 1996 (c. 16);
“the 1997 Act” means the Police Act 1997 (c. 50);
F553...
[F554“the British Transport Police Force” means the force of constables appointed under section 53 of the British Transport Commission Act 1949 (c. xxix);]
“modifications” includes omissions, alterations and additions, and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly.


Consequential amendments and repeals
Schedule 7 (which makes minor and consequential amendments) shall have effect.
The enactments specified in Schedule 8 (which include provisions that are spent or have ceased to be of any practical utility) are hereby repealed to the extent specified in the second column of that Schedule.

150	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Part 7 – Supplemental
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Short title, commencement and extent
This Act may be cited as the Police Reform Act 2002.
This Act, except—
the provisions specified in subsection (3) (which come into force on the day on which this Act is passed), and
the provisions to which subsections (4) and (5) apply,
shall come into force on such day as the Secretary of State may by order appoint; and different days may be appointed under this subsection for different purposes or different areas.
The provisions coming into force on the day on which this Act is passed are—
section 100, the entries in Schedule 8 relating to the Housing Act 1985 (c. 68), the Housing Act 1988 (c. 50), paragraphs 51 and 59 of Schedule 27 to the
Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29) and paragraph 74 of Schedule 6 to the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) and section 107(2) (so far as relating to those entries); and
sections 105 and 106 and this section.
The provisions of sections 97 and 98, so far as they relate to local government areas in Wales, shall come into force on such day as the National Assembly for Wales may by order made by statutory instrument appoint; and different days may be appointed under this subsection for different purposes or different areas.
Sections 70 and 71, and sections 102 to 104 so far as they amend the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 (c. 77), shall come into force on such day as the Scottish Ministers may by order appoint; and different days may be appointed under this subsection for different purposes or different areas.
Subject to subsections (7) to (9), this Act extends to England and Wales only.
This Act extends to the United Kingdom so far as it makes the following provision— [F555(za)	the provision contained in paragraph 19F of Schedule 3 (and any interpretative or other supplementary provision as it has effect for the purposes of that
provision);]
the provision contained in Part 5;
the provision contained in section 82;
F556. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
the provision contained in section 103(6);
F557. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Section 96 also extends to Northern Ireland.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) Part 7 – Supplemental
Chapter 2 – Provisions modifying and supplementing police powers Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
151


Subject to subsection (10), this Act, so far as it amends or repeals any enactment (other than one that extends to England and Wales only), has the same extent as the enactment amended or repealed.
The amendments and repeals made by this Act—
in section 96 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 (c. 27) (traffic wardens),
in sections 103 and 183 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) (driving while disqualified), and
Part 3 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (fixed penalties), do not extend to Scotland.


Subordinate Legislation Made
P1	S. 108(2) power partly exercised: 1.10.2002 and 1.11.2002 appointed for specified provisions by {S.I.
2002/2306}, arts. 2-5;
S. 108(2) power partly exercised: 2.12.2002, 1.1.2003 and 3.2.2003 appointed for specified provisions by {S.I. 2002/2750}, arts. 2-5
P2	S. 108(2) power partly exercised: 1.4.2003 appointed for specified provisions and purposes by {S.I.
2003/808}, art. 2
P3	S. 108(2) power partly exercised: 15.11.2003 appointed for specified provisions and purposes by {S.I.
2003/2593}, art. 2
P4	S. 108(2) power partly exercised: 23.2.2004 appointed for specified provision for E. by {S.I.
2004/119}, art. 2
P5	S. 108(2) power partly exercised: 9.3.2004 appointed for specified provision by {S.I. 2004/636}, art. 2
P6	S. 108(2) power partly exercised: different dates appointed for specified provisions and purposes by
{S.I. 2004/913}, arts. 2, 3
P7	S. 108(2) power partly exercised: 1.6.2004 appointed for specified provisions by {S.I. 2004/1319}, art.
2
P8	S. 108(2) power partly exercised: 23.12.2004 appointed for specified provisions and purposes by {S.I.
2004/3338}, arts. 2, 3
P9	S. 108(4) power fully exercised: 1.4.2003 appointed for specified provisions and purposes by {S.I.
2003/525}, art. 2
P10  S. 108(5) power fully exercised: 1.10.2002 appointed by {S.S.I. 2002/420}, art .2

Textual Amendments
F555 S. 108(7)(za) inserted (19.12.2012) by Police (Complaints and Conduct) Act 2012 (c. 22), ss. 1(4), 3(3)
F556 S. 108(7)(c) repealed (1.4.2007) by Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48), ss. 52, 53, Sch. 15 Pt. 1(A);
S.I. 2007/709, art. 3(q) (subject to arts. 6, 7)
F557 S. 108(7)(e) repealed (1.4.2006) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 55, 174, 178, Sch. 2 para. 10, Sch. 17 Pt. 2; S.I. 2006/378, art. 4(1), Sch. paras. 8, 12, 13(oo) (subject to art.
4(2)-(7))
152	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 1
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes






SCHEDULES 


F558F558SCHEDULE 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .



F559 SCHEDULE 2	Section 9

[F559The Independent Office for Police Conduct]


[F560Director General]
[F561(1) The Director General holds office in accordance with the terms of his or her appointment.
(1A) A person who holds office as Director General must not be an employee of the Office (but may have been such an employee before appointment as the Director General).]
A person who has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of three months or more shall not, at any time in the five years following the day on which he was sentenced, be appointed as [F562Director General]; and an appointment made in contravention of this sub-paragraph shall have no effect.
The appointment of the [F563Director General] shall be for a term not exceeding five years; but the [F564Director General] shall be eligible for re-appointment at the end of his term of office.
The [F565Director General] may be removed from office by Her Majesty either—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
153


at his own request; or
on being advised by the Secretary of State that there are grounds falling with sub-paragraph (5) for the removal of the [F566Director General].
The following are grounds for removing the [F567Director General] from office—
that he has failed without reasonable excuse to carry out the functions of his office for a continuous period of three months;
that he has become a person falling within one or more paragraphs of section 9(3);
that he has, since his appointment, been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of three months or more;
that he is a person who—
has had a bankruptcy order made against him;
has had his estate sequestrated; or
has made a composition or arrangement with, or granted a trust deed for, his creditors;
that he is subject to—
a disqualification order under the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986 (c. 46) or under [F568the Company Directors Disqualification (Northern Ireland) Order 2002] (S.I. 1989/2404 (N.I. 18)); or
an order made under section 429(2)(b) of the Insolvency Act 1986 (c. 45) (failure to pay under county court administration order);
that he has acted improperly in relation to his duties; or
that he is otherwise unable or unfit to perform his duties.
For the purposes of this paragraph a sentence of imprisonment for any term the whole or part of which is suspended shall be taken to be a sentence of imprisonment for the whole term.

154	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Appointment of members
[F5691A(1) The non-executive members of the Office are to be appointed by the Secretary of State.
A person who is a non-executive member must not be an employee of the Office (but may have been such an employee before appointment as a non-executive member).


1B	(1) The employee members of the Office are to be appointed from the staff of the Office by the non-executive members.
If the non-executive members propose to appoint an employee member, the Director General must recommend a person to the non-executive members for appointment.
The Director General may also recommend a person to the non-executive members for appointment as an employee member without any proposal having been made under sub-paragraph (2).
On a recommendation of a person for appointment under sub-paragraph (2) or (3), the non-executive members may—
appoint the person, or
reject the recommendation.
If the non-executive members reject a recommendation they may require the Director General to recommend another person for appointment (in which case this sub- paragraph applies again and so on until somebody is appointed).]

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
155




[F570Terms of appointment etc: non-executive members]
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Schedule, a person shall hold office as [F571a non- executive] member in accordance with the terms of his appointment.
F572(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A person who has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of three months or more shall not, at any time in the five years following the day on which he is sentenced, be appointed as [F573a non-executive] member; and an appointment made in contravention of this sub-paragraph shall have no effect.
A person shall not be appointed to be [F574a non-executive] member for a term of more than [F575three] years; but [F574a non-executive] member shall be eligible for re- appointment at the end of his term of office.
[F576A non-executive] member may at any time resign [F577from being a non-executive member of the Office] by notice in writing to the Secretary of State.
The Secretary of State may at any time remove a person from office as [F578a non- executive] member if he is satisfied that that person—
has failed without reasonable excuse to carry out the functions of his office for a continuous period of three months beginning not earlier than six months before that time;
F579(b)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
has, since his appointment, been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of three months or more;
is a person who—
has had a bankruptcy order made against him;
has had his estate sequestrated; or
has made a composition or arrangement with, or granted a trust deed for, his creditors;
is subject to—
a disqualification order under the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986 (c. 46) or under [F580the Company Directors Disqualification (Northern Ireland) Order 2002](S.I. 1989/2404 (N.I. 18)); or
an order made under section 429(2)(b) of the Insolvency Act 1986 (c. 45) (failure to pay under county court administration order);
has acted improperly in relation to his duties; or
is otherwise unable or unfit to perform his duties.
For the purposes of this paragraph a sentence of imprisonment for any term the whole or part of which is suspended shall be taken to be a sentence of imprisonment for the whole term.
F581(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
156	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Textual Amendments
F570 Sch. 2 para. 2 cross-heading substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 55(4); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F571 Words in Sch. 2 para. 2(1) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(2); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F572 Sch. 2 para. 2(2) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(3); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F573 Words in Sch. 2 para. 2(3) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(4); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F574 Words in Sch. 2 para. 2(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(5)(a); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F575 Word in Sch. 2 para. 2(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(5)(b); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F576 Words in Sch. 2 para. 2(5) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(6)(a); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F577 Words in Sch. 2 para. 2(5) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(6)(b); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F578 Words in Sch. 2 para. 2(6) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(7)(a); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F579 Sch. 2 para. 2(6)(b) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(7)(b); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F580 Words in Sch. 2 para. 2(6)(e)(i) substituted (1.10.2009) by The Companies Act 2006 (Consequential Amendments, Transitional Provisions and Savings) Order 2009 (S.I. 2009/1941), art. 2(1), Sch. 1 para. 197(b) (with art. 10)
F581 Sch. 2 para. 2(8) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 4(8); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 39(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)


Terms of appointment etc: employee members
[F5822A(1) A person holds office as an employee member in accordance with the terms of his or her appointment (subject to the provisions of this Schedule).
Those terms may not include arrangements in relation to remuneration.
An appointment as an employee member may be full-time or part-time.
The appointment of an employee member terminates—
if the terms of the member's appointment provides for it to expire at the end of a period, at the end of that period, and
in any event, when the member ceases to be an employee of the Office.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
157


An employee member may resign by giving written notice to the non-executive members.
The non-executive members may terminate the appointment of an employee member by giving the member written notice if they are satisfied that any of the grounds mentioned in paragraph 2(6)(a) to (g) apply in relation to the employee member.]


Deputy Chairmen
F5833	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Director General: vacancy or incapacity
[F5843A(1) This paragraph applies if—
the office of Director General is vacant, or
it appears to the Office that the ability of the Director General to carry out the Director General's functions is seriously impaired because of ill health (whether mental or physical).
The Office may, with the agreement of the Secretary of State, authorise an employee of the Office to carry out the functions of the Director General during the vacancy or period of ill health.
A person who falls within section 9(3) may not be authorised under this paragraph to carry out the functions of the Director General.
A person who has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of three months or more may not, at any time in the five years following the day of sentence, be authorised under this paragraph to carry out the functions of the Director General.
Paragraph 1(6) applies for the purposes of sub-paragraph (4).
Authorisation of a person under this paragraph ceases to have effect—
at the end of the vacancy or period of ill health,
on the Office revoking the authorisation for any reason, or
on the Secretary of State withdrawing agreement to the authorisation for any reason.]
158	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Remuneration, pensions etc. of members
4  (1) The Secretary of State may pay, or make such payments towards the provision of, such remuneration, pensions, allowances or gratuities to or in respect of [F585the Director General as the Secretary of State may determine].
Where—
a person ceases, otherwise than on the expiry of his term of office, to hold office as [F586Director General], and
it appears to the Secretary of State that there are special circumstances which make it right for that person to receive compensation,
the Secretary of State may direct the [F587Office] to make a payment to that person of such amount as the Secretary of State may determine.
[F588(3) The Secretary of State may make remuneration arrangements in relation to non- executive members of the Office.
Remuneration arrangements under sub-paragraph (3)—
may make provision for a salary, allowances and other benefits but not for a pension, and
may include a formula or other mechanism for adjusting one or more of those elements from time to time.
Amounts payable by virtue of sub-paragraph (4) are to be paid by the Office.]


The Chief Executive
F5895	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
159




Staff
6 [F590(1) The Office may appoint staff.]
The [F591Office] may make arrangements with—
the chief officer of police of any police force maintained for a police area in England and Wales,
the chief constable of [F592the Police Service of Scotland], or
the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland,
under which members of his force are engaged on temporary service with the
[F591Office].
The [F593Office] may make such other arrangements for its staffing [F594(including arrangements in relation to terms and conditions and management of staff)] as [F595the Director General] thinks fit.
A member of a police force on temporary service with the [F596Office] shall be under the direction and control of the [F597Director General].
[F598(4A) The powers under this paragraph are exercisable only by the Director General acting on behalf of the Office (subject to the power under paragraph 6A(1)).]
The approval of the Secretary of State as to numbers and as to the terms and conditions of staff shall be required for the exercise [F599of the] powers under this paragraph.

160	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Delegation of functions
[F6006A(1) The Director General may authorise a person within sub-paragraph (2) to exercise on the Director General's behalf a function of the Director General.
The persons within this sub-paragraph are—
employee members of the Office;
employees of the Office appointed under paragraph 6;
seconded constables within the meaning of paragraph 8.
The reference in sub-paragraph (1) to a function of the Director General is to any function that the Director General has under this Act or any other enactment.
A person (“A”) who is authorised under sub-paragraph (1) to exercise a function may authorise another person within sub-paragraph (2) to exercise that function (but only so far as permitted to do so by the authorisation given to A).
An authorisation under this paragraph may provide for a function to which it relates to be exercisable—
either to its full extent or to the extent specified in the authorisation;
either generally or in cases, circumstances or areas so specified;
either unconditionally or subject to conditions so specified.
Provision under sub-paragraph (5) may (in particular) include provision for restricted persons not to exercise designated functions.
For the purposes of sub-paragraph (6)—
“designated functions” are any functions of the Director General that are designated by the Director General for the purposes of this paragraph (and such functions may in particular be designated by reference to the position or seniority of members of staff);
“restricted persons” are, subject to any determination made under sub- paragraph (8), persons who fall within section 9(3).
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
161


The Director General may, in such circumstances as the Director General considers appropriate, determine that persons are not to be treated as restricted persons so far as relating to the exercise of designated functions (whether generally or in respect of particular functions specified in the determination).
The Director General must publish a statement of policy about how the Director General proposes to exercise the powers conferred by sub-paragraphs (7)(a) and (8).
The statement must in particular draw attention to any restrictions on the carrying out of functions imposed by virtue of their designation under sub-paragraph (7)(a) and explain the reasons for imposing them.
The exercise of the powers conferred by sub-paragraphs (7)(a) and (8) is subject to any regulations under section 23(1) of the kind mentioned in section 23(2)(g) (regulations limiting persons who may be appointed to carry out investigations etc).
An authorisation under this paragraph does not prevent the Director General from exercising the function to which the authorisation relates.
Anything done or omitted to be done by or in relation to a person authorised under this paragraph in, or in connection with, the exercise or purported exercise of the function to which the authorisation relates is to be treated for all purposes as done or omitted to be done by or in relation to the Director General.
Sub-paragraph (13) does not apply for the purposes of any criminal proceedings brought in respect of anything done or omitted to be done by the authorised person.]


Superannuation and insurance
7   (1) Where a person who—
is employed by the [F601Office], and
is by reference to that employment a participant in a scheme under section 1 of the Superannuation Act 1972 (c. 11),
is appointed as the [F602Director General]F603..., the Treasury may determine that his service in that office shall be treated for the purposes of the scheme as service as an employee of the [F601Office]; and his rights under the scheme shall not be affected by anything done under paragraph 4.
(2) The Employers’ Liability (Compulsory Insurance) Act 1969 (c. 57) shall not require insurance to be effected by the [F601Office].

162	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Liability for acts of the Director General
[F6047A(1) A person holding office as the Director General has no personal liability for an act or omission done by the person in the exercise of the Director General's functions unless it is shown to have been done otherwise than in good faith.
The Office is liable in respect of unlawful conduct of the Director General in the carrying out, or purported carrying out, of the Director General's functions in the same way as an employer is liable in respect of any unlawful conduct of employees in the course of their employment.
Accordingly, the Office is to be treated, in the case of any such unlawful conduct which is a tort, as a joint tortfeasor.]


Liability for acts of seconded staff
8   (1) The [F605Office] shall be liable in respect of unlawful conduct of seconded constables in the carrying out, or purported carrying out, of their functions as members of the [F606Office's] staff in the like manner as an employer is liable in respect of any unlawful conduct of his employees in the course of their employment.
Accordingly, the [F605Office] shall be treated in the case of any such unlawful conduct which is a tort, as a joint tortfeasor.
In this paragraph “seconded constables” means persons serving as members of the
[F606Office's] staff without being employed by it.

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
163



Power F607... to set up regional offices
[F6089 (1) The Office may set up regional offices in places in England and Wales.
But the power under sub-paragraph (1) is exercisable only by the Director General acting on behalf of the Office (subject to the power in paragraph 6A(1)).
The power under sub-paragraph (1) may be exercised—
only with the consent of the Secretary of State, and
only if it appears to the Director General necessary to do so for the purpose of ensuring that the functions of the Director General, or those of the Office, are carried out efficiently and effectively.]


Proceedings
(1) The arrangements for the proceedings of the [F609Office] (including the quorum for meetings and the establishment of committees) shall be such as the [F609Office] may determine.
[F610(1A) But the arrangements must include provision for—
the quorum for meetings to be met only if a majority of members present are non-executive members of the Office, and
an audit committee of the Office to be established to perform such monitoring, reviewing and other functions as are appropriate.
(1B) The arrangements must secure that the audit committee consists only of non- executive members of the Office.]
The arrangements may include provision for the committees established under the arrangements to include members of the [F611Office's] staff and other persons who are not members of the [F609Office].
The arrangements may include provision for persons selected by the [F609Office] to attend meetings of the [F609Office] or of any committee established by it.
The [F609Office] may—
pay such remuneration and allowances as it may determine to members of committees established by it who are neither members of the [F609Office] nor members of its staff; and
make such payments for the reimbursement of expenses incurred by persons attending meetings in accordance with arrangements made by virtue of sub- paragraph (3) as it may determine.
The arrangements may provide for the carrying out, under the general direction of the [F609Office], of any of the [F611Office's] functions—
164	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


by a committee established by the [F609Office];
by one or more of the members of the [F609Office]; or
F612... by one or more members of the [F611Office's] staff.
F613(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The validity of any proceedings of the [F614Office] or of any of its committees shall not be affected by—
any defect in the appointment of the [F615Director General] or any member of the [F614Office]; or
any vacancy in the office of [F616Director General] or among the members of the [F614Office].


Authentication of the [F617Office's] seal
The application of the seal of the [F618Office] shall be authenticated by the signature of—
any member of the [F619Office]; or
any other person who has been authorised by the [F620Director General] (whether generally or specially) for that purpose.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
165




Evidence of documents
A document purporting to be—
duly executed by the [F621Office] under its seal, or
signed on its behalf,
shall be received in evidence and shall, unless the contrary is shown, be taken to be so executed or signed.


Payments by the Secretary of State
The Secretary of State may pay to the [F622Office]—
sums equal to any amounts paid or falling to be paid by it under any provision of this Act (other than paragraph 15); and
such other sums as appear to him to be appropriate for enabling it to meet the expenses incurred or to be incurred [F623in the carrying out of its or the Director General's functions].

166	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 2 – The Independent Office for Police Conduct
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Other receipts by the [F624Office]
(1) The [F625Office] shall pay to the Secretary of State all sums received by it (otherwise than under paragraph 14) in the course of, or in connection with, the carrying out of its [F626or the Director General's] functions.
Sub-paragraph (1) shall not apply where the Secretary of State so directs.
Any sums received by the Secretary of State under this paragraph shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund.


Borrowing
The [F627Office] shall not borrow money unless authorised to do so (whether generally or specially) by the Secretary of State.


Accounts
(1) The [F628Office] shall—
keep proper accounts and proper records in relation to the accounts;
prepare in respect of each financial year of the [F628Office] a statement of accounts in such form as the Secretary of State may direct; and
send copies of the statement to the Secretary of State and the Comptroller and Auditor General before the end of August in the financial year of the [F628Office] following that to which the statement relates.
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor General shall—
examine, certify and report on every statement received by him by virtue of this paragraph; and
lay copies of every such statement, and of his report on it, before Parliament.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
167




Financial year of the [F629Office]
The following are financial years of the [F630Office]—
the period beginning with the day on which the [F630Office] is established and ending with 31st March falling next after that day; and
every subsequent period of twelve months ending with 31st March.




SCHEDULE 3	Section 13

Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.



Part 1

Handling of complaints

Duties to preserve evidence relating to complaints
(1) Where a complaint is made about the conduct of a chief officer, it shall be the duty of the [F631local policing body] maintaining his force to secure that all such steps as are appropriate for the purposes of Part 2 of this Act are taken, both initially and from
time to time after that, for obtaining and preserving evidence relating to the conduct complained of.
168	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Where—
a complaint is made to a chief officer about the conduct of a person under his direction and control, or
a chief officer becomes aware that a complaint about the conduct of a person under his direction or control has been made to the [F632Director General] or to a [F633local policing body],
the chief officer shall take all such steps as appear to him to be appropriate for the purposes of Part 2 of this Act for obtaining and preserving evidence relating to the conduct complained of.
The chief officer’s duty under sub-paragraph (2) must be performed as soon as practicable after the complaint is made or, as the case may be, he becomes aware of it.
After that, he shall be under a duty, until he is satisfied that it is no longer necessary to do so, to continue to take the steps from time to time appearing to him to be appropriate for the purposes of Part 2 of this Act for obtaining and preserving evidence relating to the conduct complained of.
It shall be the duty of a [F634local policing body] to comply with all such directions as may be given to it by the [F632Director General] in relation to the performance of its duty under sub-paragraph (1).
It shall be the duty of a chief officer to take all such specific steps for obtaining or preserving evidence relating to F635... the subject-matter of a complaint as he may be directed to take for the purposes of this paragraph by the [F636local policing body] maintaining his force or by the [F632Director General].

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
169




Initial handling and recording of complaints
[F637(1) Where a complaint is made to the [F632Director General], [F638the Director General] shall give notification of the complaint to the appropriate authority.
(1A) But the [F632Director General] need not give that notification if the [F632Director General] considers that there are exceptional circumstances that justify its not being given.]
Where a complaint is made to a [F639local policing body], it shall—
determine whether or not it is itself the appropriate authority; and
if it determines that it is not, give notification of the complaint to the person who is.
Where a complaint is made to a chief officer, he shall—
determine whether or not he is himself the appropriate authority; and
if he determines that he is not, give notification of the complaint to the person who is.
F640(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Where the [F632Director General], a [F641local policing body] or a chief officer gives notification of a complaint under any of sub-paragraphs (1) to (3) F642..., the person who gave the notification F643... shall notify the complainant—
that the notification has been given and of what it contained; or
F644(b)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Where—
a [F645local policing body] determines, in the case of any complaint made to
[F646the body], that it is itself the appropriate authority,
a chief officer determines, in the case of any complaint made to that chief officer, that he is himself the appropriate authority, or
a complaint is notified to a [F647local policing body] or chief officer under this paragraph,
[F648the body] or chief officer shall [F649contact the complainant and seek the complainant's views on how the complaint should be handled].
[F650(6A) A local policing body or chief officer that is subject to the duty in sub-paragraph (6) in relation to a complaint must record the complaint if—
at any time the complainant indicates a wish for the complaint to be recorded, or
the local policing body or chief officer determines that the complaint is to be handled in accordance with this Schedule.
(6B) The local policing body or chief officer must determine that a complaint is to be handled in accordance with this Schedule if—
170	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


the complaint is one alleging that the conduct or other matter complained of has resulted in death or serious injury,
the complaint is one alleging that there has been conduct by a person serving with the police which (if proved) might constitute the commission of a criminal offence or justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings,
the conduct or other matter complained of (if proved) might have involved the infringement of a person's rights under Article 2 or 3 of the Convention (within the meaning of the Human Rights Act 1998), or
the complaint is of a description specified for the purposes of paragraph 4(1)
(b) in regulations made by the Secretary of State.
(6C) Where a local policing body or chief officer determines (for the purposes of sub- paragraph (6A)) that a complaint is to be handled otherwise than in accordance with this Schedule, the local policing body or chief officer must handle the complaint in such other manner as the local policing body or chief officer considers appropriate with a view to resolving the complaint to the complainant's satisfaction.
(The duty in this sub-paragraph ceases to apply if the complaint is recorded in accordance with sub-paragraph (6A)(a).)
(6D) Where a local policing body or chief officer records a complaint under sub- paragraph (6A), or determines that a complaint is to be handled otherwise than in accordance with this Schedule, the local policing body or chief officer must notify the complainant of the recording of the complaint or (as the case may be) of the determination.]
[F651(7) Nothing in this paragraph shall require the taking of any action in relation to a complaint if the complaint has been withdrawn.]
F652(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F653(9) If a local policing body or chief officer decides that it or (as the case may be) he is not required to comply with any of sub-paragraphs (2), (3) and (6) to (6C) on the basis of a determination that what purports to be a complaint is not a complaint, the local policing body or chief officer must notify the complainant of the determination and the grounds on which it was made.
(10) If a local policing body or chief officer determines that part of what has been received (whether directly or by virtue of a notification under this paragraph) is a complaint and part is not, the local policing body or chief officer must proceed under this paragraph as if those two parts had been separately received.]

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
171



F639 Words in Sch. 3 para. 2(2) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 300(3)(a); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F640 Sch. 3 para. 2(4) omitted (16.1.2012 for specified purposes, 22.11.2012 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 8(3); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1; S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)
F641 Words in Sch. 3 para. 2(5) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 300(3)(a); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F642 Words in Sch. 3 para. 2(5) omitted (22.11.2012) by virtue of Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 8(4)(a)(i); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)
F643 Words in Sch. 3 para. 2(5) omitted (22.11.2012) by virtue of Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 8(4)(a)(ii); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)
F644 Sch. 3 para. 2(5)(b) omitted (22.11.2012) by virtue of Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 8(4)(b); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)
F645 Words in Sch. 3 para. 2(6)(a) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 300(3)(b)(i); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F646 Words in Sch. 3 para. 2(6)(a) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 300(3)(b)(ii); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F647 Words in Sch. 3 para. 2(6)(c) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 300(3)(c); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F648 Words in Sch. 3 para. 2(6) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 300(3)(d); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F649 Words in Sch. 3 para. 2(6) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 2(2); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F650 Sch. 3 para. 2(6A)-(6D) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 2(3); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F651 Sch. 3 para. 2(7) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 2(4); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F652 Sch. 3 para. 2(8) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 2(5); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F653 Sch. 3 para. 2(9)(10) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 2(6); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))

Modifications etc. (not altering text)
C89 Sch. 3 para. 2 applied (with modifications) (1.4.2006) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(5)(6), Sch. 3

Commencement Information
I22  Sch. 3 para. 2 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; Sch. 3 para. 2 not in force at Royal Assent see s. 108(2); Sch. 3 para. 2 in force for specified purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(e); Sch. 3 para. 2 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(d)
172	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F654...


F6543	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Reference of complaints to the [F632Director General]
4  (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to refer a complaint to the [F632Director General] if—
the complaint is one alleging that the conduct [F655or other matter] complained of has resulted in death or serious injury;
the complaint is of a description specified for the purposes of this sub- paragraph in regulations made by the Secretary of State; or
the [F632Director General] notifies the appropriate authority that [F638the Director General] requires the complaint in question to be referred to the [F632Director General] for [F656the Director General's] consideration.
In a case where there is no obligation under sub-paragraph (1) to make a reference, the appropriate authority may refer a complaint to the [F632Director General] if that authority considers that it would be appropriate to do so so by reason of—
the gravity of the subject-matter of the complaint; or
any exceptional circumstances.
In a case in which a reference under sub-paragraph (1) or (2) is neither made nor required to be made, a [F657local policing body] may refer a complaint to the [F632Director General] if—
it is one in relation to which the chief officer of police of the police force maintained by [F658that body] is the appropriate authority; and
the [F657local policing body] considers that it would be appropriate to do so reason of—
the gravity of the subject-matter of the complaint; or
any exceptional circumstances.
Where there is an obligation under this paragraph to refer a complaint to the [F632Director General], it must be so referred within such period as may be provided for by regulations made by the Secretary of State.
Subject to sub-paragraph (7), the following powers—
the power of the [F632Director General] by virtue of sub-paragraph (1)(c) to require a complaint to be referred to [F638the Director General], and
the power of a [F659local policing body] or chief officer to refer a complaint to the [F632Director General] under sub-paragraph (2) or (3),
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
173


shall each be exercisable at any time irrespective of whether the complaint is already being investigated by any person or has already been considered by the [F632Director General].
[F660(5A) The power of an appropriate authority to refer a complaint to the [F632Director General] under sub-paragraph (2) is also exercisable after a complaint has been handled in accordance with this Schedule if a recommendation is made under paragraph 6A(6)(a) or 25(4E)(b) (recommendation on a review).]
A [F661local policing body] or chief officer which refers a complaint to the [F632Director General] under this paragraph shall give a notification of the making of the reference—
to the complainant, and
except in a case where it appears to [F662that body] or chief officer that to do so might prejudice [F663an investigation of the complaint (whether an existing investigation or a possible future one)], to the person complained against [F664(if any)].
[F665(6A) A local policing body which refers a complaint to the [F632Director General] under sub-paragraph (3) shall also give a notification of the making of the reference to the appropriate authority.]
A complaint that has already been referred to the [F666Director General] under this paragraph on a previous occasion [F667, or that has been treated as having been so referred by virtue of paragraph 4A]—
shall not be required to be referred again under this paragraph unless the
[F632Director General] so directs; and
shall not be referred in exercise of any power conferred by this paragraph unless the [F632Director General] consents.
F668(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F669(9) The appropriate authority must record any complaint that is referred to the
[F632Director General] under this paragraph that has not already been recorded.]

174	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F660 Sch. 3 para. 4(5A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 30; S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F661 Words in Sch. 3 para. 4(6) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 300(5)(c)(i); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F662 Words in Sch. 3 para. 4(6)(b) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 300(5)(c)(ii); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F663 Words in Sch. 3 para. 4(6)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 4(2); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F664 Words in Sch. 3 para. 4(6)(b) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 7(4); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F665 Sch. 3 para. 4(6A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 4(3); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F666 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(3) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F667 Words in Sch. 3 para. 4(7) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 17(2), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(e) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F668 Sch. 3 para. 4(8) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 4(4); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F669 Sch. 3 para. 4(9) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 4(5); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))

Modifications etc. (not altering text)
C90 Sch. 3 para. 4 applied (with modifications) (1.4.2006) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(5)(6), Sch. 3

Commencement Information
I23  Sch. 3 para. 4 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; Sch. 3 para. 4 not in force at Royal Assent see s. 108(2); Sch. 3 para. 4 in force for specified purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(e); Sch. 3 para. 4 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(d)


[F670Power of [F632Director General] to treat complaint as having been referred

4A (1) The [F632Director General] may treat a complaint that comes to [F656the Director General's] attention otherwise than by having been referred to [F638the Director General] under paragraph 4 as having been so referred.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
175


Where the [F632Director General] treats a complaint as having been referred to [F638the Director General]—
paragraphs 2 and 4 do not apply, or cease to apply, in relation to the complaint except to the extent provided for by paragraph 4(7), and
paragraphs 5, 6, 6A, 15 and 25 apply in relation to the complaint as if it had been referred to the [F632Director General] by the appropriate authority under paragraph 4.
The [F632Director General] must notify the following that [F638the Director General] is treating a complaint as having been referred to [F638the Director General]—
the appropriate authority;
the complainant;
except in a case where it appears to the [F632Director General] that to do so might prejudice an investigation of the complaint (whether an existing investigation or a possible future one), the person complained against (if any).
Where an appropriate authority receives a notification under sub-paragraph (3) in respect of a complaint and the complaint has not yet been recorded, the appropriate authority must record the complaint.]


Duties of [F632Director General] on references under paragraph 4

5  (1) It shall be the duty of the [F632Director General] in the case of every complaint referred to [F638the Director General] by a [F671local policing body] or chief officer, to determine whether or not it is necessary for the complaint to be investigated.
[F672(1A) The Secretary of State may by regulations provide that the [F632Director General] must determine that it is necessary for complaints referred to [F638the Director General] that relate to the conduct of a chief officer or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis to be investigated.
(1B) Regulations under sub-paragraph (1A) may provide that the duty on the [F632Director General] applies only in relation to complaints relating to the conduct of a chief officer or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis that are of a description specified in the regulations.
(1C) Regulations under sub-paragraph (1A) may also provide that, where the [F632Director General] is required by the regulations to determine that it is necessary for a
176	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


complaint to be investigated, paragraph 15 is to apply in relation to the complaint as if sub-paragraphs (4)(a), (4A) and (5A)(b) were omitted.]
Where the [F632Director General] determines under this paragraph that it is not necessary for a complaint to be investigated [F673—
in a case where the complaint is already being investigated by the appropriate authority on its own behalf (and notwithstanding the [F666Director General's] determination), the [F632Director General] must refer the complaint back to the appropriate authority for the investigation to be completed, and
in any other case, the [F632Director General] may, if [F638the Director General] thinks fit, refer the complaint back to the appropriate authority to be dealt with by that authority in accordance with paragraph 6.]
Where the [F632Director General] refers a complaint back under sub-paragraph (2), [F638the Director General] shall give a notification of the making of the reference back—
to the complainant, and
except in a case where it appears to the [F632Director General] that to do so might prejudice [F674an investigation of the complaint (whether an existing investigation or a possible future one)], to the person complained against [F675(if any)].

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
177




Handling of complaints by the appropriate authority
[F6766 (1) This paragraph applies where a complaint has been recorded by the appropriate authority.
(2) But this paragraph does not apply to a complaint if it is one that has been, or must be, referred to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 4, unless the complaint is for the time being—
referred back to the authority under paragraph [F6775(2)(b)], F678... F679(b)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F680(2A) The appropriate authority must handle the complaint in such reasonable and proportionate manner as the authority determines.
(2B) An appropriate authority may handle a complaint in accordance with sub- paragraph (2A) by (amongst other things)—
making arrangements for the complaint to be investigated by the authority on its own behalf;
notifying the complainant that no further action is to be taken in relation to the complaint.
(2C) The appropriate authority must comply with its duty under sub-paragraph (2A) by making arrangements for the complaint to be investigated by the authority on its own behalf if at any time it appears to the authority from the complaint, or from the authority's handling of the complaint to that point, that there is an indication that—
a person serving with the police may have committed a criminal offence or behaved in a manner that would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings, or
there may have been the infringement of a person's rights under Article 2 or 3 of the Convention (within the meaning of the Human Rights Act 1998).
(2D) The Secretary of State may by regulations provide for the duty in sub-paragraph (2C) to be subject to exceptions.
(2E) A statement made by any person for the purposes of the handling of any complaint in accordance with sub-paragraph (2A) otherwise than by the appropriate authority making arrangements for the complaint to be investigated by the authority on its own behalf is not admissible in any subsequent criminal, civil or disciplinary proceedings except to the extent that it consists of an admission relating to a matter that has not been subjected to such handling.]
F681(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F681(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F681(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F681(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
178	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F681(7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F681(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F681(9) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F681(10) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F681(11)	]


[F682Reviews relating to complaints dealt with other than by investigation

6A  (1) This paragraph applies where a complaint is handled by the appropriate authority in accordance with paragraph 6(2A) otherwise than by the authority making arrangements for the complaint to be investigated by the authority on its own behalf.
The complainant has the right to apply to the relevant review body for a review of the outcome of the complaint.
The relevant review body must notify the following of an application for a review under sub-paragraph (2)—
the appropriate authority,
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
179


every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint under section 21, and
the person complained against (if any).
On a review applied for under sub-paragraph (2), the relevant review body must determine whether the outcome is a reasonable and proportionate outcome.
Where the [F632Director General] is the relevant review body and the [F632Director General] finds that the outcome is not a reasonable and proportionate outcome, the [F632Director General] may—
determine that it is necessary for the complaint to be investigated;
make a recommendation under paragraph 28ZA.
Where a local policing body is the relevant review body and the local policing body finds that the outcome is not a reasonable and proportionate outcome, the local policing body may—
where the complaint has not previously been referred to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 4, make a recommendation to the appropriate authority that it refer the complaint to the [F632Director General] under sub- paragraph (2) of that paragraph;
make a recommendation to the appropriate authority that it make arrangements for the complaint to be investigated by the authority on its own behalf;
make a recommendation under paragraph 28ZA.
The Secretary of State may by regulations make further provision about recommendations under sub-paragraph (6)(a) or (b).
The regulations may (amongst other things) authorise the local policing body making the recommendation to require a response to the recommendation.
The relevant review body must give notification of the outcome of a review under this paragraph and of its reasons for the determination made under sub-paragraph (4)—
to the appropriate authority,
to the complainant,
to every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint under section 21, and
except in a case where it appears to the relevant review body that to do so might prejudice any investigation of the complaint, to the person complained against (if any).
In this paragraph references to the outcome of a complaint do not include the outcome of any criminal or disciplinary proceedings brought in relation to any matter which was the subject of the complaint.]

180	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F683...

F6837	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F684...

F6848	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F685...

F6858A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Part 2

Handling of conduct matters

Conduct matters arising in civil proceedings
10   (1) This paragraph applies where—
a [F686local policing body] or chief officer has received notification (whether or not under this paragraph) that civil proceedings relating to any matter have been brought by a member of the public against [F687that body] or chief officer, or it otherwise appears to a [F686local policing body] or chief officer that such proceedings are likely to be so brought; and
it appears to [F687that body] or chief officer (whether at the time of the notification or at any time subsequently) that those proceedings involve or would involve a conduct matter.
[F688The authority] or chief officer—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
181


shall consider whether it or, as the case may be, he is the appropriate authority in relation to the conduct matter in question; and
if it or he is not, shall notify the person who is the appropriate authority about the proceedings, or the proposal to bring them, and about the circumstances that make it appear as mentioned in sub-paragraph (1)(b).
Where a [F689local policing body] or chief officer determines for the purposes of this paragraph that it or, as the case may be, he is the appropriate authority in relation to any conduct matter, it or he shall [F690determine whether the matter is one which it or he is required to refer to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 13 or is one which it would be appropriate to so refer].
[F691(4) In a case where the appropriate authority determines that the matter is one which it or he is required to refer to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 13, or is one which it would be appropriate to so refer, it or he shall record the matter.
(4A) In any other case, the appropriate authority shall determine whether the matter falls within a description of matters specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this sub-paragraph.
(4B) In a case where the appropriate authority determines that the matter does not fall within such a description, it or he shall record the matter.
(4C) In any other case, the appropriate authority may (but need not) record the matter. (4D) In a case where the appropriate authority—
records a matter under this paragraph, and
is not required to refer the matter to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 13 and does not do so,
the appropriate authority may deal with the matter in such other manner (if any) as it or he may determine.]
Nothing in [F692sub-paragraph (4) or (4B)] shall require the appropriate authority to record any conduct matter if it is satisfied that the matter has been, or is already being, dealt with by means of criminal or disciplinary proceedings against the person to whose conduct the matter relates.
For the purposes of this paragraph civil proceedings involve a conduct matter if—
they relate to such a matter; or
they are proceedings that relate to a matter in relation to which a conduct matter, or evidence of a conduct matter, is or may be relevant.
The Secretary of State may by regulations provide for the times at which, or the periods within which, any requirement of this paragraph is to be complied with; and the period from which any such period is to run shall be such time as may be specified in those regulations or as may be determined in a manner set out in the regulations.

182	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Recording etc. of conduct matters in other cases
11   (1) [F693This paragraph applies where—]
a conduct matter comes (otherwise than as mentioned in paragraph 10) to the attention of the [F694local policing body] or chief officer who is the appropriate authority in relation to that matter, and
it appears to the appropriate authority that the conduct involved in that matter falls within sub-paragraph (2),
F695. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(2) Conduct falls within this sub-paragraph if (assuming it to have taken place)—
it appears to have resulted in the death of any person or in serious injury to any person;
a member of the public has been adversely affected by it; or
it is of a description specified for the purposes of this sub-paragraph in regulations made by the Secretary of State.
[F696(3) The appropriate authority must determine whether the matter is one which it or he is required to refer to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 13, or is one which it would be appropriate to so refer.
(3A) In a case where the appropriate authority determines that the matter is one which it or he is required to refer to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 13, or is one which it would be appropriate to so refer, it or he shall record the matter.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
183


(3B) In any other case, the appropriate authority shall determine whether the matter falls within a description of matters specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this sub-paragraph.
(3C) In a case where the appropriate authority determines that the matter does not fall within such a description, it or he shall record the matter.
(3D) In any other case, the appropriate authority may (but need not) record the matter. (3E) In a case where the appropriate authority—
records a matter under this paragraph, and
is not required to refer the matter to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 13 and does not do so,
the appropriate authority may deal with the matter in such other manner (if any) as it or he may determine.]
Nothing in [F697sub-paragraph (3A) or (3C)] shall require the appropriate authority to record any conduct matter if it is satisfied that the matter has been, or is already being, dealt with by means of criminal or disciplinary proceedings against the person to whose conduct the matter relates.
F698(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

184	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Duties to preserve evidence relating to conduct matters
12  (1) Where a recordable conduct matter that relates to the conduct of a chief officer comes to the attention of the [F699local policing body] maintaining his force, it shall be the duty of [F700that body] to secure that all such steps as are appropriate for the purposes of Part 2 of this Act are taken, both initially and from time to time after that, for obtaining and preserving evidence relating to that matter.
Where a chief officer becomes aware of any recordable conduct matter relating to the conduct of a person under his direction and control, it shall be his duty to take all such steps as appear to him to be appropriate for the purposes of Part 2 of this Act for obtaining and preserving evidence relating to that matter.
The chief officer’s duty under sub-paragraph (2) must be performed as soon as practicable after he becomes aware of the matter in question.
After that, he shall be under a duty, until he is satisfied that it is no longer necessary to do so, to continue to take the steps from time to time appearing to him to be appropriate for the purposes of Part 2 of this Act for obtaining and preserving evidence relating to the matter.
It shall be the duty of a [F701local policing body] to comply with all such directions as may be given to it by the [F632Director General] in relation to the performance of any duty imposed on it by virtue of sub-paragraph (1).
It shall be the duty of the chief officer to take all such specific steps for obtaining or preserving evidence relating to any recordable conduct matter as he may be directed to take for the purposes of this paragraph by the [F702local policing body] maintaining his force or by the [F632Director General].

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
185




Reference of conduct matters to the [F632Director General]
13  (1) It shall be the duty of a [F703local policing body] or a chief officer to refer a recordable conduct matter to the [F632Director General] if, in a case (whether or not falling within paragraph 10) in which [F704the body] or chief officer is the appropriate authority—
that matter relates to any incident or circumstances in or in consequence of which any person has died or suffered serious injury;
that matter is of a description specified for the purposes of this sub-paragraph in regulations made by the Secretary of State; or
the [F632Director General] notifies the appropriate authority that [F638the Director General] requires that matter to be referred to the [F632Director General] for [F656the Director General's] consideration.
In any case where there is no obligation under sub-paragraph (1) to make a reference, the appropriate authority may refer a recordable conduct matter to the [F632Director General] if that authority considers that it would be appropriate to do so by reason of—
the gravity of the matter; or
any exceptional circumstances.
In a case in which a reference under sub-paragraph (1) or (2) is neither made nor required to be made, a [F705local policing body] maintaining any police force may refer any recordable conduct matter to the [F632Director General] if—
it is one in relation to which the chief officer of police of that force is the appropriate authority; and
the [F706local policing body] considers that it would be appropriate to do so by reason of—
the gravity of the matter; or
any exceptional circumstances.
Where there is an obligation under this paragraph to refer any matter to the [F632Director General], it must be so referred within such period as may be provided for by regulations made by the Secretary of State.
Subject to sub-paragraph (7), the following powers—
the power of the [F632Director General] by virtue of sub-paragraph (1)(c) to require a matter to be referred to [F638the Director General], and
the power of a [F707local policing body] or chief officer to refer any matter to the [F632Director General] under sub-paragraph (2) or (3),
shall each be exercisable at any time irrespective of whether the matter is already being investigated by any person or has already been considered by the [F632Director General].
Where—
186	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


a [F708local policing body] or chief officer refers a matter to the [F632Director General] under this paragraph, and
[F709that body] or chief officer does not consider that to do so might prejudice [F710an investigation of that matter (whether an existing investigation or a possible future one)],
[F709that body] or chief officer shall give a notification of the making of the reference to the person to whose conduct that matter relates.
A matter that has already been referred to the [F632Director General] under this paragraph on a previous occasion [F711, or that has been treated as having been so referred by virtue of paragraph 13A]—
shall not be required to be referred again under this paragraph unless the
[F632Director General] so directs; and
shall not be referred in exercise of any power conferred by this paragraph unless the [F632Director General] consents.


Textual Amendments
F638 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(4) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F656 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(5) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F703 Words in Sch. 3 para. 13(1) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 301(5)(a)(i); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F704 Words in Sch. 3 para. 13(1) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 301(5)(a)(ii); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F705 Words in Sch. 3 para. 13(3) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 301(5)(b)(i); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F706 Words in Sch. 3 para. 13(3)(b) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 301(5)(b)(ii); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F707 Words in Sch. 3 para. 13(5)(b) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 301(5)(c); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F708 Words in Sch. 3 para. 13(6) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 301(5)(d)(i); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F709 Words in Sch. 3 para. 13(6) substituted (16.1.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 16 para. 301(5)(d)(ii); S.I. 2011/3019, art. 3, Sch. 1
F710 Words in Sch. 3 para. 13(6)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 12; S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F711 Words in Sch. 3 para. 13(7) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 17(5), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(e) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))

Modifications etc. (not altering text)
C97 Sch. 3 para. 13 applied (with modifications) (28.12.2005) by virtue of The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(4)(6), Sch. 3
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
187




[F712Power of [F632Director General] to treat conduct matter as having been referred

13A (1) The [F632Director General] may treat a conduct matter that comes to [F656the Director General's] attention otherwise than by having been referred to [F638the Director General] under paragraph 13 as having been so referred.
Where the [F632Director General] treats a conduct matter as having been referred to
[F638the Director General]—
paragraphs 10, 11 and 13 do not apply, or cease to apply, in relation to the matter except to the extent provided for by paragraph 13(7), and
paragraphs 14 and 15 apply in relation to the matter as if it had been referred to the [F632Director General] by the appropriate authority under paragraph 13.
The [F632Director General] must notify the following that [F638the Director General] is treating a conduct matter as having been referred to [F638the Director General]—
the appropriate authority;
except in a case where it appears to the [F632Director General] that to do so might prejudice an investigation of the matter (whether an existing investigation or a possible future one), the person to whose conduct the matter relates.
Where an appropriate authority receives a notification under sub-paragraph (3) in respect of a conduct matter and the matter has not yet been recorded, the appropriate authority must record the matter.]


Duties of [F632Director General] on references under paragraph 13
14	(1) It shall be the duty of the [F632Director General], in the case of every recordable conduct matter referred to [F638the Director General] by a [F713local policing body]
188	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


or chief officer under paragraph 13, to determine whether or not it is necessary for the matter to be investigated.
[F714(1A) The Secretary of State may by regulations provide that the [F632Director General] must determine that it is necessary for recordable conduct matters referred to [F638the Director General] that relate to the conduct of a chief officer or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis to be investigated.
(1B) Regulations under sub-paragraph (1A) may provide that the duty on the [F632Director General] applies only in relation to recordable conduct matters relating to the conduct of a chief officer or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis that are of a description specified in the regulations.
(1C) Regulations under sub-paragraph (1A) may also provide that, where the [F632Director General] is required by the regulations to determine that it is necessary for a recordable conduct matter to be investigated, paragraph 15 is to apply in relation to the matter as if sub-paragraphs (4)(a), (4A) and (5A)(b) were omitted.]
Where the [F632Director General] determines under this paragraph that it is not necessary for a recordable conduct matter to be investigated [F715—
in a case where the recordable conduct matter is already being investigated by the appropriate authority on its own behalf (and notwithstanding the [F666Director General's] determination), the [F632 Director General] must refer the matter back to the appropriate authority for the investigation to be
completed, and
in any other case, the [F632Director General] may, if [F638the Director General] thinks fit, refer the matter back to the appropriate authority to be dealt with by that authority in such manner (if any) as that authority may determine.]
Where—
the [F632Director General] refers a matter back to the appropriate authority under this paragraph, and
the [F632Director General] does not consider that to do so might prejudice [F716an investigation of that matter (whether an existing investigation or a possible future one)],
the [F632Director General] shall give a notification of the making of the reference to the person to whose conduct that matter relates.

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
189






[F717PART 2A

HANDLING OF DEATH AND SERIOUS INJURY (DSI) MATTERS


Duty to record DSI matters
14A (1) Where a DSI matter comes to the attention of the [F718local policing body] or chief officer who is the appropriate authority in relation to that matter, it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to record that matter.
F719(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Duty to preserve evidence relating to DSI matters
14B	(1) Where—
a DSI matter comes to the attention of a [F720local policing body] , and
190	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


the relevant officer in relation to that matter is the chief officer of the force maintained by [F721that body],
it shall be the duty of [F721that body] to secure that all such steps as are appropriate for the purposes of Part 2 of this Act are taken, both initially and from time to time after that, for obtaining and preserving evidence relating to that matter.
Where—
a chief officer becomes aware of a DSI matter, and
the relevant officer in relation to that matter is a person under his direction and control,
it shall be his duty to take all such steps as appear to him to be appropriate for the purposes of Part 2 of this Act for obtaining and preserving evidence relating to that matter.
The chief officer's duty under sub-paragraph (2) must be performed as soon as practicable after he becomes aware of the matter in question.
After that, he shall be under a duty, until he is satisfied that it is no longer necessary to do so, to continue to take the steps from time to time appearing to him to be appropriate for the purposes of Part 2 of this Act for obtaining and preserving evidence relating to the matter.
It shall be the duty of a [F722local policing body] to comply with all such directions as may be given to it by the [F632Director General] in relation to the performance of any duty imposed on it by virtue of sub-paragraph (1).
It shall be the duty of the chief officer to take all such specific steps for obtaining or preserving evidence relating to any DSI matter as he may be directed to take for the purposes of this paragraph by the [F723local policing body] maintaining his force or by the [F632Director General].

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
191



Reference of DSI matters to the [F632Director General]
14C	(1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to refer a DSI matter to the
[F632Director General].
The appropriate authority must do so within such period as may be provided for by regulations made by the Secretary of State.
A matter that has already been referred to the [F632Director General] under this paragraph on a previous occasion [F724, or that has been treated as having been so referred by virtue of paragraph 14CA,] shall not be required to be referred again under this paragraph unless the [F632Director General] so directs.


[F725Power of [F632Director General] to treat DSI matter as having been referred

14CA (1) The [F632Director General] may treat a DSI matter that comes to [F656the Director General's] attention otherwise than by having been referred to [F638the Director General] under paragraph 14C as having been so referred.
Where the [F632Director General] treats a DSI matter as having been referred to
[F638the Director General]—
paragraphs 14A and 14C do not apply, or cease to apply, in relation to the matter except to the extent provided for by paragraph 14C(3), and
paragraphs 14D and 15 apply in relation to the matter as if it had been referred to the [F632Director General] by the appropriate authority under paragraph 14C.
The [F632Director General] must notify the appropriate authority that [F638the Director General] is treating a DSI matter as having been referred to [F638the Director General].
Where an appropriate authority receives a notification under sub-paragraph (3) in respect of a DSI matter and the matter has not yet been recorded, the appropriate authority must record the matter.]
192	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Duties of [F632Director General] on references under paragraph 14C
14D (1) It shall be the duty of the [F632Director General], in the case of every DSI matter referred to [F638the Director General] by a [F726local policing body] or a chief officer, to determine whether or not it is necessary for the matter to be investigated.
[ The Secretary of State may by regulations provide that the [F632Director General] F727(1A) must determine that it is necessary for DSI matters referred to [F638the Director General] in relation to which the relevant officer is a chief officer or the Deputy
Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis to be investigated.
(1B) Regulations under sub-paragraph (1A) may provide that the duty on the [F632Director General] applies only in relation to DSI matters in relation to which the relevant officer is a chief officer or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis that are of a description specified in the regulations.
(1C) Regulations under sub-paragraph (1A) may also provide that, where the [F632Director General] is required by the regulations to determine that it is necessary for a DSI matter to be investigated, paragraph 15 is to apply in relation to the matter as if sub- paragraphs (4)(a), (4A) and (5A)(b) were omitted.]
Where the [F632Director General] determines under this paragraph that it is not necessary for a DSI matter to be investigated [F728—
in a case where the DSI matter is already being investigated by the appropriate authority on its own behalf (and notwithstanding the [F666Director General's] determination), the [F632Director General] must refer the matter back to the appropriate authority for the investigation to be
completed, and
in any other case, the [F632Director General] may, if [F638the Director General] thinks fit, refer the matter back to the appropriate authority to be dealt with by that authority in such manner (if any) as that authority may determine.]]

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
193





Part 3

Investigations and subsequent proceedings

Power of the [F632Director General] to determine the form of an investigation
15	(1) This paragraph applies where—
a complaint [F729, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter] is referred to the
[F632Director General]; and
the [F632Director General] determines [F730under paragraph 5(1), 14(1) or 14D(1)] that it is necessary for the complaint or matter to be investigated.
[F731(1A) This paragraph also applies where the [F632Director General] determines under paragraph 6A(5)(a) that it is necessary for a complaint to be investigated.]
(2) It shall be the duty of the [F632Director General] to determine the form which the investigation should take.
F732(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(4) The only forms which the investigation may take in accordance with a determination made under this paragraph are—
(a)	an investigation by the appropriate authority on its own behalf;
F733(b)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
an investigation by that authority under the [F734direction] of the [F632Director General];
an investigation by the [F632Director General].
[F735(4A) In making a determination under sub-paragraph (2) the [F632Director General] must first determine whether, having regard to the seriousness of the case and the public interest, it is appropriate for the investigation to take the form of an investigation by the appropriate authority on its own behalf and if it is the [F632Director General] must
determine that the investigation is to take that form.
(4B) Where, in accordance with sub-paragraph (4A), the [F632Director General] determines that it is not appropriate for the investigation to take the form of an investigation by the appropriate authority on its own behalf, the [F632Director General] must determine that the investigation is to take the form of an investigation by the [F632Director General] unless sub-paragraph (4C) applies.
194	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


(4C) This sub-paragraph applies where the [F632Director General] determines that it would be more appropriate for the investigation to take the form of an investigation by the appropriate authority under the direction of the [F632Director General], in which case the [F632Director General] must determine that the investigation is to take that form.]
[F736(5) Where the [F632Director General] determines under sub-paragraph (4C) or (5B) that an investigation is to take the form of an investigation by the appropriate authority under the direction of the [F632Director General], the [F632Director General] must keep under review whether that form of investigation continues to be the most appropriate
form of investigation.
(5A) If, on such a review, the [F632Director General] determines that—
it would be more appropriate for the investigation to take the form of an investigation by the [F632Director General], the [F632Director General] must make a further determination under this paragraph (to replace the earlier one) that the investigation is instead to take that form;
having regard to the seriousness of the case and the public interest, it would be more appropriate for the investigation to take the form of an investigation by the appropriate authority on its own behalf, the [F632Director General] may make a further determination under this paragraph (to replace the earlier one)
that the investigation is instead to take that form.
(5B) Subject to sub-paragraph (5A), if at any time the [F632Director General] determines that, were [F638the Director General] to apply sub-paragraphs (4A) to (4C) again, the form of the investigation would be different, the [F632Director General] may make a further determination under this paragraph (to replace the earlier one) such that the investigation takes that different form.]
Where a determination under this paragraph replaces an earlier determination under this paragraph, or relates to a complaint or matter in relation to which the appropriate authority has already begun an investigation on its own behalf, the [F632Director General] may give—
the appropriate authority, and
any person previously appointed to carry out the investigation,
such directions as [F638the Director General] considers appropriate for the purpose of giving effect to the new determination.
It shall be the duty of a person to whom a direction is given under sub-paragraph (6) to comply with it.
The [F632Director General] shall notify the appropriate authority of any determination that [F638the Director General] makes under this paragraph in relation to a particular complaint [F729, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter][F737and of [F656the Director General's] reasons for making the determination].
[F738(9) The [F632Director General] shall also notify the following of any determination that [F638the Director General] makes under this paragraph in relation to a particular complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter and of [F656the Director General's] reasons for making the determination—
every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint or matter under section 21;
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
195


where the determination is made in relation to a complaint, the complainant;
the person to whose conduct the investigation will relate.
The duty imposed by sub-paragraph (9) on the [F632Director General] in relation to a complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter shall have effect subject to such exceptions as may be provided for by regulations made by the Secretary of State.
Subsections (6) to (8) of section 20 apply for the purposes of sub-paragraph (10) as they apply for the purposes of that section.]


Textual Amendments
F638 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(4) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F656 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(5) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F729 Words in Sch. 3 para. 15(1)(a)(8) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 13; S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F730 Words in Sch. 3 para. 15(1)(b) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 15(2); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F731 Sch. 3 para. 15(1A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 15(3); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F732 Sch. 3 para. 15(3) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 15(4); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F733 Sch. 3 para. 15(4)(b) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 15(5)(a); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F734 Word in Sch. 3 para. 15(4)(c) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 15(5)(b); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F735 Sch. 3 para. 15(4A)-(4C) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 15(6); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F736 Sch. 3 para. 15(5)-(5B) substituted for Sch. 3para. 15(5) (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 15(7);
S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F737 Words in Sch. 3 para. 15(8) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 15(8); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F738 Sch. 3 para. 15(9)-(11) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 15(9); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))

Modifications etc. (not altering text)
C103 Sch. 3 para. 15 applied (with modifications) (28.12.2005) by virtue of The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(4)(6), Sch. 3
196	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Investigations by the appropriate authority on its own behalf
1[6F739(A1) This paragraph applies if the appropriate authority, acting in accordance with paragraph 6(2A) or in response to a recommendation under paragraph 6A(6)(b), is to make arrangements for a complaint to be investigated by the appropriate authority on its own behalf.]
This paragraph [F740also] applies if the appropriate authority is required by virtue of—
F741(a)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(b)	any determination made by the [F632Director General] under paragraph 15,
to make arrangements for a complaint[F742, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter] to be investigated by the appropriate authority on its own behalf.
This paragraph also applies if—
a determination falls to be made by that authority under paragraph [F74310(4D)], or [F74411(3E)] or 14(2) in relation to any recordable conduct matter [F745or under paragraph 14D(2) in relation to any DSI matter]; and
the appropriate authority determine that it is necessary for the matter to be investigated by the authority on its own behalf.
(3) Subject to sub-paragraph (4) [F746or (5)], it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to appoint—
a person serving with the police (whether under the direction and control of the chief officer of police of the relevant force or of the chief officer of another force), or
[F747(d) a National Crime Agency officer,] to investigate the complaint or matter.
The person appointed under this paragraph to investigate any complaint or
[F748conduct matter]—
in the case of an investigation relating to any conduct of a chief officer, must not be a person under that chief officer’s direction and control; and
in the case of an investigation relating to any conduct of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis or of the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, must be the person nominated by the Secretary of State for appointment under this paragraph.
[F749(5) The person appointed under this paragraph to investigate any DSI matter—
in relation to which the relevant officer is a chief officer, must not be a person under that chief officer's direction and control;
in relation to which the relevant officer is the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, must be the person nominated by the Secretary of State for appointment under this paragraph.]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
197




Textual Amendments
F632 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(2) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F739 Sch. 3 para. 16(A1) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 16(2); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F740 Word in Sch. 3 para. 16(1) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 16(3)(a); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F741 Sch. 3 para. 16(1)(a) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 16(3)(b); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F742 Words in Sch. 3 para. 16(1) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 14(2); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F743 Words in Sch. 3 para. 16(2)(a) substituted (22.11.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 11(5); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)
F744 Words in Sch. 3 para. 16(2)(a) substituted (22.11.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 12(5); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)
F745 Words in Sch. 3 para. 16(2)(a) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 14(3); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F746 Words in Sch. 3 para. 16(3) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15),
ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 14(4); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F747 Sch. 3 para. 16(3)(d) substituted for Sch. 3 para. 16(3)(b)(c) Sch. 3 (7.10.2013) by Crime and Courts Act 2013 (c. 22), s. 61(2), Sch. 6 para. 17(2); S.I. 2013/1682, art. 3(q)
F748 Words in Sch. 3 para. 16(4) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 14(5); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F749 Sch. 3 para. 16(5) added (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160,
178, Sch. 12 para. 14(6); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)

Modifications etc. (not altering text)
C104 Sch. 3 para. 16 applied (with modifications) (E.W.) (28.12.2005) by virtue of The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(4)(6), Sch. 3

Commencement Information
I31  Sch. 3 para. 16 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; Sch. 3 para. 16 not in force at Royal Assent see s. 108(2); Sch. 3 para. 16 in force for specified purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(e); Sch. 3 para. 16 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(d)


F750...

F75017	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
198	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Investigations [F751directed] by the [F632Director General]

(1) This paragraph applies where the [F632Director General] has determined that [F638the Director General] should [F752direct] the investigation by the appropriate authority of any complaint [F753, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter].
[F754(2) On being given notice of that determination, the appropriate authority shall, if it has not already done so, appoint—
a person serving with the police (whether under the direction and control of the chief officer of police of the relevant force or of the chief officer of another force), or
a National Crime Agency officer, to investigate the complaint or matter.
(2A) The [F632Director General] may require that no appointment is made under sub- paragraph (2) unless [F638the Director General] has given notice to the appropriate authority that [F638the Director General] approves the person whom that authority proposes to appoint.
(2B) Where at any time the [F632Director General] is not satisfied with the person investigating, the [F632Director General] may require the appropriate authority, as soon as reasonably practicable after being required to do so—
to select another person falling within sub-paragraph (2)(a) or (b) to investigate the complaint or matter, and
to notify the [F632Director General] of the person selected.
(2C) Sub-paragraph (2B) applies whether the person investigating was appointed—
before the appropriate authority was given notice of the [F666Director General's] determination that [F638the Director General] should direct the investigation by the appropriate authority,
under sub-paragraph (2) (including where the appointment was approved by the [F632Director General] in accordance with sub-paragraph (2A)), or
under sub-paragraph (2D)(a).
(2D) Where a selection made in pursuance of a requirement under sub-paragraph (2B) has been notified to the [F632Director General]—
the appropriate authority shall appoint that person to investigate the complaint or matter if, but only if, the [F632Director General] notifies the authority that [F638the Director General] approves the appointment of that person;
if the [F632Director General] notifies the authority that [F638the Director General] does not approve the appointment of that person, the appropriate authority must make another selection in accordance with sub- paragraph (2B).
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
199


(2E) A person appointed under this paragraph to investigate any complaint or conduct matter—
in the case of an investigation relating to any conduct of a chief officer, must not be a person under that chief officer's direction and control, and
in the case of an investigation relating to any conduct of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis or of the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, must be a person nominated by the Secretary of State for appointment under this paragraph (and approved for appointment in accordance with sub-paragraph (2A) (if required) or (2D)(a)).
(2F) A person appointed under this paragraph to investigate any DSI matter—
in relation to which the relevant officer is a chief officer, must not be a person under that chief officer's direction and control, and
in relation to which the relevant officer is the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, must be a person nominated by the Secretary of State for appointment under this paragraph (and approved for appointment in accordance with sub- paragraph (2A) (if required) or (2D)(a)).]
The person appointed to investigate the complaint or matter shall, in relation to that investigation, be under the direction and control of the [F632Director General].
[F755(4) The person appointed to investigate the complaint or matter shall keep the
[F632Director General] informed of the progress of the investigation.]

200	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Investigations by the [F632Director General]F756...

(1) This paragraph applies where the [F632Director General] has determined that [F638the Director General] should F757... carry out the investigation of a complaint [F758, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter].
[F759(2) The Director General must designate both—
a person to take charge of the investigation, and
such members of the Office's staff as are required by the Director General to assist the person designated to take charge of the investigation.
(2A) The person designated under sub-paragraph (2) to take charge of an investigation must be—
the Director General acting personally, or
a person who is authorised to exercise the function of taking charge of the investigation on behalf of the Director General by virtue of paragraph 6A of Schedule 2 (delegation of Director General's functions).]
The person designated under sub-paragraph (2) to be the person to take charge of an investigation relating to any conduct of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis or of the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis must be the person nominated by the Secretary of State to be so designated under that sub-paragraph.
[F760(3A) The person designated under sub-paragraph (2) to be the person to take charge of an investigation of a DSI matter in relation to which the relevant officer is the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis must be the person nominated by the Secretary of State to be so designated under that sub-paragraph.]
A [F761person] who—
is designated under sub-paragraph (2) in relation to any investigation, but
does not already, by virtue of section 97(8) of the 1996 Act, have all the powers and privileges of a constable throughout England and Wales and the adjacent United Kingdom waters,
shall, for the purposes of the carrying out of the investigation and all purposes connected with it, have all those powers and privileges throughout England and Wales and those waters.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
201


A [F762person designated under sub-paragraph (2)] who is not a constable shall not, as a result of sub-paragraph (4), be treated as being in police service for the purposes of—
section 280 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 (c. 52) (person in police service excluded from definitions of “worker” and “employee”); or
section 200 of the Employment Rights Act 1996 (c. 18) (certain provisions of that Act not to apply to persons in police service).
F763(6) The Secretary of State may by order [F764provide that—
such provisions of the 1984 Act relating to investigations of offences conducted by police officers as may be specified in the order, and
such provisions of a code of practice under section 60, 60A or 66 of that Act as may be so specified,
shall apply.]
[F765(6A) An order under sub-paragraph (6) may, in particular, provide that where a provision applied by the order allows a power to be exercised only if an authorisation is given by a police officer of or above a particular rank, the authorisation may be given by
a [F766the Director General or a member of the Office's staff] of or above a specified grade.]
References in this paragraph to the powers and privileges of a constable—
are references to any power or privilege conferred by or under any enactment (including one passed after the passing of this Act) on a constable; and
F767(aa)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
shall have effect as if every such power were exercisable, and every such privilege existed, throughout England and Wales and the adjacent United Kingdom waters (whether or not that is the case apart from this sub- paragraph).
In this paragraph “United Kingdom waters” means the sea and other waters within the seaward limits of the United Kingdom’s territorial sea.

202	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F761 Word in Sch. 3 para. 19(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(7)(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F762 Words in Sch. 3 para. 19(5) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(7)(e); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F763 Word in Sch. 3 para. 19(6) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(7)(f); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F764 Words in Sch. 3 para. 19(6) substituted (1.10.2014) by Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12), ss. 136(2), 185(1) (with ss. 21, 33, 42, 58, 75, 93); S.I. 2014/2454, art. 3(a)
F765 Sch. 3 para. 19(6A) inserted (1.10.2014) by Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12),
ss. 136(3), 185(1) (with ss. 21, 33, 42, 58, 75, 93); S.I. 2014/2454, art. 3(a)
F766 Words in Sch. 3 para. 19(6A) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(7)(g); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F767 Sch. 3 para. 19(7)(aa) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 20; S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))

Modifications etc. (not altering text)
C106 Sch. 3 para. 19 applied (with modifications) (28.12.2005) by virtue of The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(4)(6), Sch. 3
C107 Sch. 3 para. 19(4)(5)(7)(8) applied (with modifications) (16.1.2012) by The Elected Local Policing Bodies (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2012 (S.I. 2012/62), regs. 1, 20(3) (with reg. 3(6))

Commencement Information
I33  Sch. 3 para. 19 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; Sch. 3 para. 19 not in force at Royal Assent see s. 108(2); Sch. 3 para. 19 in force for specified purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(e); Sch. 3 para. 19 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(d)


[F768Investigations by the [F632Director General]: power to serve information notice

19ZA (1) The [F632Director General] may serve upon any person an information notice requiring the person to provide [F638the Director General] with information that [F638the Director General] reasonably requires for the purposes of an investigation in accordance with paragraph 19.
But an information notice must not require a person—
to provide information that might incriminate the person;
to provide an item subject to legal privilege within the meaning of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (see section 10 of that Act);
to make a disclosure that would be prohibited by [F769any of Parts 1 to 7 or Chapter 1 of Part 9 of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016];
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
203


to provide information that was provided to the person by, or by an agency of, the government of a country or territory outside the United Kingdom where that government does not consent to the disclosure of the information.
Neither must an information notice require a postal or telecommunications operator
F770... to provide communications data F771....
[ In	sub-paragraph	(3)	“communications	data”,	“postal	operator”	and
F772(3A) “telecommunications operator” have the same meanings as in the Investigatory Powers Act 2016 (see sections 261 and 262 of that Act).]
An information notice must—
specify or describe the information that is required by the [F632Director General] and the form in which it must be provided;
specify the period within which the information must be provided;
give details of the right of appeal against the information notice under paragraph 19ZC.
The period specified under sub-paragraph (4)(b) must not end before the end of the period within which an appeal can be brought against the notice and, if such an appeal is brought, the information need not be provided pending the determination or withdrawal of the appeal.
The [F632Director General] may cancel an information notice by written notice to the person on whom it was served.]


[F768Failure to comply with information notice
19ZB (1) If a person who has received an information notice—
fails or refuses to provide the information required by the notice, or
knowingly or recklessly provides information in response to the notice that is false in a material respect,
the [F632Director General] may certify in writing to the High Court that the person has failed to comply with the information notice.
(2) The High Court may then inquire into the matter and, after hearing any witness who may be produced against or on behalf of the person, and after hearing any statement
204	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


offered in defence, deal with the person as if the person had committed a contempt of court.]


[F768Appeals against information notices
19ZC (1) A person on whom an information notice is served may appeal against the notice to the First-tier Tribunal on the ground that the notice is not in accordance with the law.
If the Tribunal considers that the notice is not in accordance with the law—
it must quash the notice, and
it may give directions to the [F632Director General] in relation to the service of a further information notice.]


[F768Sensitive information: restriction on further disclosure]
F77319ZD	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


[F774Investigations by the [F632Director General]: power of seizure

19ZE (1) The powers conferred by this paragraph are exercisable by a person—
who is designated under paragraph 19(2) in relation to an investigation (the “designated person”), and
who is lawfully on any premises for the purposes of the investigation.
The designated person may seize anything which is on the premises if the designated person has reasonable grounds for believing—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
205


that it is evidence relating to the conduct or other matter to which the investigation relates, and
that it is necessary to seize it in order to prevent the evidence being concealed, lost, altered or destroyed.
The designated person may require any information which is stored in any electronic form and is accessible from the premises to be produced in a form in which it can be taken away and in which it is visible and legible, or from which it can readily be produced in a visible and legible form, if the designated person has reasonable grounds for believing—
that it is evidence relating to the conduct or other matter to which the investigation relates, and
that it is necessary to do so in order to prevent the evidence being concealed, lost, tampered with or destroyed.
The powers conferred by this paragraph do not authorise the seizure of an item which the designated person exercising the power has reasonable grounds for believing to be an item subject to legal privilege within the meaning of the 1984 Act (see section 10 of that Act).
Where a designated person has the power to seize a thing or require information to be produced under this paragraph and under section 19 of the 1984 Act (by virtue of section 97(8) of the 1996 Act or paragraph 19(4)), the designated person is to be treated for all purposes as acting in exercise of the power conferred by section 19 of the 1984 Act.
In this paragraph “premises” has the same meaning as in the 1984 Act (see section 23 of that Act).

Further provision about seizure under paragraph 19ZE
19ZF (1) This paragraph applies where a designated person seizes anything under paragraph 19ZE(2).
The designated person must provide a notice in relation to the thing seized if requested to do so by a person showing himself—
to be the occupier of the premises on which it was seized, or
to have had custody or control of it immediately before the seizure.
The notice must state what has been seized and the reason for its seizure.
The notice must be provided within a reasonable time from the making of the request for it.
In this paragraph “designated person” has the same meaning as in paragraph 19ZE.

Investigations by the [F632Director General]: power of retention
19ZG (1) This paragraph applies to anything which, for the purposes of an investigation in accordance with paragraph 19—
has been seized under paragraph 19ZE(2) or taken away following a requirement imposed under paragraph 19ZE(3), or
is otherwise lawfully in the possession of the [F632Director General].
206	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Anything to which this paragraph applies may be retained by the [F632Director General] for as long as is necessary in all the circumstances, including (amongst other things) so that it may be used as evidence in criminal or disciplinary proceedings or in an inquest held under Part 1 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009.
For the purposes of sub-paragraph (2), the retention of anything to which this paragraph applies is not necessary if having a photograph or copy of the thing would suffice (and the [F632Director General] may arrange for the thing to be photographed or copied before it ceases to be retained).

Further provision about things retained under paragraph 19ZG
19ZH (1) This paragraph applies to anything which—
has been seized (whether under paragraph 19ZE(2) or otherwise), and
is being retained by the [F632Director General] under paragraph 19ZG.
If a request for permission to be granted access to a thing to which this paragraph applies is made to the [F632Director General] by—
a person who had custody or control of the thing immediately before it was seized, or
someone acting on behalf of such a person,
the [F632Director General] must allow the person who made the request access to it under the supervision of a member of the [F775Office's] staff.
Sub-paragraph (4) applies if a request for a photograph or copy of a thing to which this paragraph applies is made to the [F632Director General] by—
a person who had custody or control of the thing immediately before it was seized, or
someone acting on behalf of such a person.
The [F632Director General] must either—
allow the person who made the request access to the thing under the supervision of a member of the [F776Office's] staff for the purpose of photographing or copying it, or
arrange for the thing to be photographed or copied.
If the [F632Director General] acts under sub-paragraph (4)(b), the [F632Director General] must supply the photograph or copy to the person who made the request within a reasonable time from the making of the request.
The [F632Director General] is not obliged to do anything in response to a request under sub-paragraph (2) or (3) if the [F632Director General] has reasonable grounds for believing that to do so would prejudice—
any investigation being carried out in accordance with this Schedule, or
any criminal or disciplinary proceedings or any inquest held under Part 1 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009.]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
207




[F777Special procedure where investigation relates to police officer or special constable

[F77819A(1) This paragraph applies to an investigation where condition A, B or C is satisfied.
Condition A is that—
the investigation is an investigation of a complaint, and
during the course of the investigation it appears to the person investigating [F779or, in the case of an investigation by a designated person under paragraph 19, the Director General,] that there is an indication that a member of a police
force, or a special constable, to whose conduct the investigation relates may have committed a criminal offence or behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings.
Condition B is that—
the investigation is an investigation of a complaint being carried out by a person appointed under paragraph 18, and
during the course of the investigation the [F632Director General] determines that there is an indication that a member of a police force, or a special constable, to whose conduct the investigation relates may have committed a criminal offence or behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings.
Condition C is that—
the investigation is an investigation of a recordable conduct matter, and
the investigation relates to the conduct of a member of a police force or a special constable.
Where this paragraph applies to an investigation the person investigating must proceed with the investigation in accordance with regulations made by the Secretary of State under this sub-paragraph.
Regulations under sub-paragraph (5) may (amongst other things) make provision—
208	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


as to the procedure to be followed in connection with any interview of the person concerned, including provision requiring the person concerned to attend an interview;
requiring the person investigating to supply information to the appropriate authority.
In this paragraph “the person concerned”—
in relation to an investigation of a complaint, means the person in respect of whom it appears to the person investigating [F780or, in the case of an investigation by a designated person under paragraph 19, the Director General,] that there is the indication mentioned in sub-paragraph (2)(b) or (as the case may be) the person in respect of whom the [F632Director General] determines that there is the indication mentioned in sub-paragraph (3)(b);
in relation to an investigation of a recordable conduct matter, means the person to whose conduct the investigation relates.]


Assessment of seriousness of conduct under investigation
F77819B	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Duty to consider submissions from person whose conduct is being investigated
F77819C	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
209




Interview of person whose conduct is being investigated
F77819D	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Duty to provide certain information to appropriate authority
F77819E	]


[F781Interview of persons serving with the police etc during certain investigations

19F	(1) This paragraph applies to an investigation of a complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter which—
is carried out by the appropriate authority under the [F782direction] of the
[F632Director General], or
is carried out by [F783a person designated under paragraph 19 (investigations by Director General)].
The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision as to the procedure to be followed in connection with an interview which—
is held with a serving officer during the course of the investigation by the person investigating the complaint or matter [F784other than, in the case of an investigation to which paragraph 19A applies, a serving officer who is
the person concerned in relation to the investigation (within the meaning of paragraph 19A).]
F785(b)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
210	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Regulations under sub-paragraph (2) may in particular make provision—
requiring a serving officer to attend an interview,
for determining how the time at which an interview is to be held is to be agreed or decided,
about the information that must be provided to a serving officer being interviewed,
for enabling a serving officer to be accompanied at the interview by a person of a prescribed description.
“Serving officer” means a person who—
is serving with the police, or
is serving with an additional police body.
A person is serving with an additional police body if the person is a member of, or is employed or otherwise engaged for the purposes of, that body (subject to sub- paragraph (6)).
The Secretary of State may by regulations provide, in relation to an additional police body, that a person is serving with that body only if the person—
is a member of, or is employed or otherwise engaged for the purposes of, that body, and
is of a prescribed description.
An “additional police body” means—
a body of constables which is maintained by an authority other than a local policing body and is prescribed in regulations made by the Secretary of State under this sub-paragraph, F786...
[
F787(aa)
a body required by section 26BA to enter into an agreement with the
[F632Director General], or]
[F788(b)	the National Crime Agency.]
The Secretary of State must obtain the consent of the Northern Ireland Assembly before making provision in regulations under this paragraph which would be within the legislative competence of the Northern Ireland Assembly.
But consent under sub-paragraph (8) is not required in relation to a provision if—
a Bill for an Act of the Northern Ireland Assembly containing the provision would require the consent of the Secretary of State under section 8 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998, and
the provision does not affect, other than incidentally, a transferred matter (within the meaning of that Act).
Nothing in this paragraph prevents or restricts the holding of interviews to which regulations under this paragraph do not apply during the course of any investigation under this Schedule.]

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
211




Restrictions on proceedings pending the conclusion of an investigation
(1) No criminal or disciplinary proceedings shall be brought in relation to any matter which is the subject of an investigation in accordance with the provisions of this Schedule [F789 until—
[F790(a) the conduct to which the investigation relates has been certified in accordance with regulations under paragraph 20A, or]]
[F791(b)]  a report on that investigation has been submitted to the [F632Director General] or to the appropriate authority under paragraph 22 [F792or 24A][F793or, where under paragraph 19 the Director General has personally carried out the investigation, a report has been completed by the Director General].
F794(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(3) The restrictions imposed by this paragraph in relation to the bringing of criminal proceedings shall not apply to the bringing of criminal proceedings by the Director of Public Prosecutions in any case in which it appears to him that there are exceptional circumstances which make it undesirable to delay the bringing of such proceedings.

212	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



[F795Accelerated procedure in special cases

[F79620A(1) This paragraph applies where—
at any time before the completion of an investigation of a complaint or recordable conduct matter, the person investigating [F797or, in the case of an investigation by a designated person under paragraph 19, the Director
General,] believes that the appropriate authority would, on consideration of the matter, be likely to consider that the conditions in sub-paragraph (2) are satisfied, or
at any time before the completion of an investigation of a complaint or recordable conduct matter being carried out by a person appointed under paragraph 18, the [F632Director General] determines that the appropriate authority would, on consideration of the matter, be likely to consider that the
conditions in sub-paragraph (2) are satisfied.
The conditions in this sub-paragraph are that—
there is sufficient evidence, in the form of written statements or other documents, to establish on the balance of probabilities that conduct to which the investigation relates constitutes gross misconduct, and
it is in the public interest for the person whose conduct it is to cease to be a member of a police force, or to be a special constable, without delay.
Where this paragraph applies the person investigating, the appropriate authority and [F798(where the person investigating is not also the Director General carrying out an investigation under paragraph 19 personally)] the [F632Director General] must proceed in accordance with regulations made by the Secretary of State.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
213


Regulations under sub-paragraph (3) may (amongst other things) make provision—
for the person investigating to continue the investigation (whether to its full extent or to such lesser extent as is provided) or to stop investigating;
for the person investigating to submit a report on the investigation [F799or, where the investigation is carried out under paragraph 19 by the Director General personally, finalise one,] to a point before its completion (not being a report under paragraph 22);
for the conduct to which the investigation relates to be certified for the purposes of paragraph 20(1)(a).]


Investigations managed or carried out by Commission: action by appropriate authority
F79620B	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Investigations managed or carried out by Commission: action by Commission
F79620C	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

214	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Investigations managed or carried out by Commission: action by Commission
F79620D	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Other investigations: action by appropriate authority
F79620E	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Other investigations: action by appropriate authority
F79620F	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20G	F800. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Special cases: recommendation or direction of Commission
F79620H	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
215




Special cases: recommendation or direction of Commission
F79620I	]



F801...

F80121	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

[F802Procedure where conduct matter is revealed during investigation of DSI matter

21A (1) If during the course of an investigation of a DSI matter it appears to a person appointed under paragraph 18 F803... that there is an indication that a person serving with the police (“the person whose conduct is in question”) may have—
committed a criminal offence, or
behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings,
he shall make a submission to that effect to the [F632Director General].
If, after considering a submission under sub-paragraph (1), the [F632Director General] determines that there is such an indication, [F638the Director General] shall—
notify the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter and (if different) the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question of [F656the Director General's] determination; and
send to it (or each of them) a copy of the submission under sub-paragraph (1).
216	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


[ If during the course of an investigation of a DSI matter being carried out by a person F804(2A) appointed under paragraph 18 the [F632Director General] determines (without there having been a submission under sub-paragraph (1)) that there is an indication that
a person serving with the police (“the person whose conduct is in question”) may have—
committed a criminal offence, or
behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings,
[F638the Director General] shall notify the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter and (if different) the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question of [F656the Director General's] determination.]
[ If during the course of an investigation of a DSI matter being carried out by a F805(2B) person designated under paragraph 19 the Director General determines that there is an indication that a person serving with the police (“the person whose conduct is in
question”) may have—
committed a criminal offence, or
behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings,
the Director General must proceed under sub-paragraph (2C).
(2C) The Director General must—
prepare a record of the determination,
notify the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter and (if different) the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question of the determination, and
send to it (or each of them) a copy of the record of the determination prepared under paragraph (a).]
If during the course of an investigation of a DSI matter it appears to a person appointed under paragraph 16 F806... that there is an indication that a person serving with the police (“the person whose conduct is in question”) may have—
committed a criminal offence, or
behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings,
he shall make a submission to that effect to the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter.
If, after considering a submission under sub-paragraph (3), the appropriate authority determines that there is such an indication, it shall—
if it is not the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question, notify that other authority of its determination and send to that authority a copy of the submission under sub-paragraph (3); and
notify the [F632Director General] of its determination and send to it a copy of the submission under sub-paragraph (3).
Where the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question—
is notified of a determination by the [F632Director General] under sub- paragraph (2) [F807or (2A)],
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
217


[
F808(aa)
is notified of a determination by the Director General under sub- paragraph (2C),]
(in a case where it is also the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter) makes a determination under sub-paragraph (4), or
(in a case where it is not the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter) is notified by that other authority of a determination by it under sub- paragraph (4),
F809 it shall record the matter under paragraph 11 as a conduct matter . . . .
[ Where a DSI matter is recorded under paragraph 11 as a conduct matter by virtue
F810(6) of sub-paragraph (5)—
the person investigating the DSI matter shall (subject to any determination made by the [F632Director General] under paragraph [F81115(5A) or (5B)]) continue the investigation as if appointed or designated to investigate the conduct matter, and
the other provisions of this Schedule shall apply in relation to that matter accordingly.]]


Textual Amendments
F632 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(2) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F638 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(4) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F656 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(5) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F803 Words in Sch. 3 para. 21A(1) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(13)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F804 Sch. 3 para. 21A(2A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 25(2); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F805 Sch. 3 para. 21A(2B)(2C) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(13)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F806 Words in Sch. 3 para. 21A(3) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(iv); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F807 Words in Sch. 3 para. 21A(5)(a) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 25(3); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F808 Sch. 3 para. 21A(5)(aa) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(13)(c); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F809 Words in Sch. 3 para. 21A(5) repealed (1.12.2008) by Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4),
ss. 127, 149, 153, Sch. 23 para. 11(2), Sch. 28 Pt. 8 (with s. 14(1)); S.I. 2008/2993, art. 2(1)(k)(ii)
(subject to art. 3)
218	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Final reports on investigations: complaints, conduct matters and certain DSI matters
[F81222(1) This paragraph applies on the completion of an investigation of—
a complaint,[F813 or]
a conduct matter, or
F814. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A person appointed under paragraph 16 shall submit a report on his investigation to the appropriate authority.
A person appointed under paragraph F815... 18 shall—
submit a report on his investigation to the [F632Director General]; and
send a copy of that report to the appropriate authority.
In relation to [F816a matter that was formerly a DSI matter but has been recorded as a conduct matter in pursuance of paragraph 21A(5)], the references in sub-paragraphs
(2) and (3) of this paragraph to the appropriate authority are references to—
the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter; and
(where different) the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question.
[F817(5) A person designated under paragraph 19 as the person in charge of an investigation must—
submit a report on the investigation to the Director General, or
where the person in charge of the investigation is the Director General acting personally, complete a report on the investigation.]
A person submitting [F818or, in the case of an investigation under paragraph 19 by the Director General personally, completing] a report under this paragraph shall not be prevented by any obligation of secrecy imposed by any rule of law or otherwise from including all such matters in his report as he thinks fit.
[F819(6A) Where a person would contravene section 21A by submitting, or (as the case may be) sending a copy of, a report in its entirety to the appropriate authority under sub- paragraph (2) or (3)(b), the person must instead submit, or send a copy of, the report after having removed or obscured the information which by virtue of section 21A the person must not disclose.]
[F820(7) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision requiring a report on an investigation [F821to which paragraph 19A applies]—
to include such matters as are specified in the regulations;
to be accompanied by such documents or other items as are so specified.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
219


A person who has submitted [F822or, in the case of an investigation under paragraph 19 by the Director General personally, completed] a report under this paragraph on an investigation [F821to which paragraph 19A applies] must supply the appropriate authority with such copies of further documents or other items in that person's possession as the authority may request [F823except so far as the person is prevented from doing so by section 21A].
The appropriate authority may only make a request under sub-paragraph (8) in respect of a copy of a document or other item if the authority—
considers that the document or item is of relevance to the investigation, and
requires a copy of the document or the item for either or both of the purposes mentioned in sub-paragraph (10).
Those purposes are—
complying with any obligation under regulations under section 50(3) or 51(2A) of the 1996 Act which the authority has in relation to any person to whose conduct the investigation related;
ensuring that any such person receives a fair hearing at any disciplinary proceedings in respect of any such conduct of his.]]

220	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Action by the [F632Director General] in [F824relation]
to an investigation report [F825under paragraph 22]

23   (1) This paragraph applies where—
a report on an investigation carried out under the [F826direction] of the [F632Director General] is submitted to [F638the Director Genera] under sub- paragraph [F827(3)] of paragraph 22; or
a report on an investigation carried out by a person designated by the [F632Director General] is submitted to [F638the Director General][F828, or is otherwise completed,] under sub-paragraph [F829(5)] of that paragraph.
[F830(1A) But if, following the submission [F831or completion] of such a report, the [F632Director General] determines under section 13B that the complaint or recordable conduct matter is to be re-investigated the provisions of this paragraph other than sub- paragraph (2)(a) [F832(read with sub-paragraph (2ZA))] do not apply, or cease to
apply, in relation to that report.]
On receipt of the report [F833(or on its completion by the Director General)], the
[F632Director General]—
if it appears that the appropriate authority has not already been sent a copy of the report, shall send a copy of the report to that authority;
[F834(b) shall determine whether the conditions set out in sub-paragraphs (2A) and (2B) are satisfied in respect of the report;]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
221


if [F638the Director General] determines that [F835those conditions are so satisfied], shall notify the Director of Public Prosecutions of the determination and send him a copy of the report; and
shall notify the appropriate authority [F836and the persons mentioned in sub-paragraph (5)] of [F656the Director General's] determination under paragraph (b) and of any action taken by [F638the Director General] under paragraph (c).
[F837(2ZA) Where the [F632Director General] would contravene section 21A by sending a copy of a report in its entirety to the appropriate authority under sub-paragraph (2)(a) or to the Director of Public Prosecutions under sub-paragraph (2)(c), the [F632Director General] must instead send a copy of the report after having removed or obscured the information which by virtue of section 21A the [F632Director General] must not disclose.]
[F838(2A) The first condition is that the report indicates that a criminal offence may have been committed by a person [F839(if any)] to whose conduct the investigation related.
(2B) The second condition is that—
the circumstances are such that, in the opinion of the [F632Director General], it is appropriate for the matters dealt with in the report to be considered by the Director of Public Prosecutions, or
any matters dealt with in the report fall within any prescribed category of matters.]
The Director of Public Prosecutions shall notify the [F632Director General] of any decision of his to take, or not to take, action in respect of the matters dealt with in any report a copy of which has been sent to him under sub-paragraph (2)(c).
F840(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F841The] persons are—
in the case of a complaint, the complainant and every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint under section 21; and
in the case of a recordable conduct matter, every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to that matter under that section.
[F842(5A) On receipt of the report [F843(or on its completion by the Director General)], the
[F632Director General] shall also—
seek the views of the appropriate authority on—
whether any person to whose conduct the investigation related has a case to answer in respect of misconduct or gross misconduct or has no case to answer,
whether or not any such person's performance is unsatisfactory, and
the other matters (if any) dealt with in the report (but not on whether the conditions in sub-paragraphs (2A) and (2B) are satisfied in respect of the report),
having considered the views (if any) of the appropriate authority, make a determination as to—
(i) the matters described in paragraph (a)(i) and (ii), and
222	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


(ii) whether or not disciplinary proceedings should be brought against any person to whose conduct the investigation related and, if so, what form the disciplinary proceedings should take,
having considered the views (if any) of the appropriate authority and if the [F632Director General] considers it appropriate to do so, make a determination as to any matter dealt with in the report, being a determination other than one that [F638the Director General] is required to make under sub-paragraph (2)
(b) or paragraph (b) of this sub-paragraph,
notify the appropriate authority of [F656the Director General's] determination under paragraph (b) and any determination under paragraph (c),
where the [F632Director General] determines that disciplinary proceedings of a form specified in the determination should be brought against a person, direct the appropriate authority to bring those proceedings, and
direct the appropriate authority to determine what action (if any) the appropriate authority will in its discretion take, not being action involving the bringing of disciplinary proceedings, in respect of the matters dealt with in the report and having regard to the [F666Director General's] determination
under paragraph (b) and any determination under paragraph (c).
(5B) The appropriate authority must comply with a direction given under sub- paragraph (5A)(e) and must secure that the proceedings, once brought, are proceeded with to a proper conclusion.
(5C) The [F632Director General] may at any time withdraw a direction given under sub- paragraph (5A)(e); and sub-paragraph (5B) shall not impose any obligation in relation to any time after the withdrawal of the direction.
(5D) The appropriate authority must keep the [F632Director General] informed of the action it takes in response to a direction given under sub-paragraph (5A)(e).
(5E) The appropriate authority must comply with the direction given under sub- paragraph (5A)(f) and must notify the [F632Director General] of the determination it makes.
(5F) On receipt of the report [F844(or on its completion by the Director General)], where it is a report of an investigation of a complaint, the [F632Director General] may also make a recommendation under paragraph 28ZA.]
F845(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F845(7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F845(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F846(9) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F846(10) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F846(11) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F846(12) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F847(13) In relation to a DSI matter in respect of which a determination has been made under paragraph 21A(2) [F848, (2A)][F849, (2B)] or (4), the references in this paragraph to
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
223


the appropriate authority are references to the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question.]


Textual Amendments
F638 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(4) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F656 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(5) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F666 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(3) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F826 Word in Sch. 3 para. 23(1)(a) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(viii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F827 Word in Sch. 3 para. 23(1)(a) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 22(2)(a); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F828 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(1)(b) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(16)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F829 Word in Sch. 3 para. 23(1)(b) substituted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160, 178, Sch. 12 para. 22(2)(b); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F830 Sch. 3 para. 23(1A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 18(3), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(f) (with art. 3(4))
F831 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(1A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(16)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F832 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(1A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 19(3)(c)(i), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(g) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F833 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(2) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(16)(c)(i); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F834 Sch. 3 para. 23(2)(b) substituted (1.12.2008) by Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4), ss.
127, 153, Sch. 23 para. 13(2)(a) (with s. 14(1)); S.I. 2008/2993, art. 2(1)(i)(i) (subject to art. 3)
F835 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(2)(c) substituted (1.12.2008) by Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4), ss. 127, 153, Sch. 23 para. 13(2)(b) (with s. 14(1)); S.I. 2008/2993, art. 2(1)(i)(i) (subject to art. 3)
F836 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(2)(d) inserted (1.12.2008) by Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4),
ss. 127, 153, Sch. 23 para. 13(2)(c) (with s. 14(1)); S.I. 2008/2993, art. 2(1)(i)(i) (subject to art. 3)
F837 Sch. 3 para. 23(2ZA) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 19(3)(c)(ii), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(g) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F838 Sch. 3 para. 23(2A)(2B) inserted (1.12.2008) by Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4), ss.
127, 153, Sch. 23 para. 13(3) (with s. 14(1)); S.I. 2008/2993, art. 2(1)(i)(i) (subject to art. 3)
F839 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(2A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 8(2); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F840 Sch. 3 para. 23(4) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(9)(a), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
224	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F841 Word in Sch. 3 para. 23(5) substituted (1.12.2008) by Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4),
ss. 127, 153, Sch. 23 para. 13(4) (with s. 14(1)); S.I. 2008/2993, art. 2(1)(i)(i) (subject to art. 3)
F842 Sch. 3 para. 23(5A)-(5F) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 26(2); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F843 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(5A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(16)(c)(ii); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F844 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(5F) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(16)(c)(iii); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F845 Sch. 3 para. 23(6)-(8) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 26(3); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F846 Sch. 3 para. 23(9)-(12) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(9)(a), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F847 Sch. 3 para. 23(13) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160,
178, Sch. 12 para. 22(3); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F848 Word in Sch. 3 para. 23(13) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(ix); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F849 Words in Sch. 3 para. 23(13) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(16)(c)(iv); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)

Modifications etc. (not altering text)
C112 Sch. 3 para. 23 applied (with modifications) (28.12.2005) by virtue of The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(4)(6), Sch. 3

Commencement Information
I36  Sch. 3 para. 23 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; Sch. 3 para. 23 not in force at Royal Assent see s. 108(2); Sch. 3 para. 23 in force for specified purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(e); Sch. 3 para. 23 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(d)


Action by the appropriate authority in response to an investigation report [F850under paragraph 22]

24	(1) This paragraph applies where—
a report of an investigation is submitted to the appropriate authority in accordance with paragraph [F85122(2)]; F852...
F853(b)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(2) On receipt of the report F854..., the appropriate authority—
[F855(a)	shall determine whether the conditions set out in sub-paragraphs (2A) and (2B) are satisfied in respect of the report;]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
225


if it determines that [F856those conditions are so satisfied], shall notify the Director of Public Prosecutions of the determination and send him a copy of the report[F857 and
shall notify the persons mentioned in sub-paragraph (5) of its determination under paragraph (a) and of any action taken by it under paragraph (b).]
[F858(2A) The first condition is that the report indicates that a criminal offence may have been committed by a person [F859(if any)] to whose conduct the investigation related.
(2B) The second condition is that—
the circumstances are such that, in the opinion of the appropriate authority, it is appropriate for the matters dealt with in the report to be considered by the Director of Public Prosecutions, or
any matters dealt with in the report fall within any prescribed category of matters.]
(3) The Director of Public Prosecutions shall notify the appropriate authority of any decision of his to take, or not to take, action in respect of the matters dealt with in any report a copy of which has been sent to him under sub-paragraph (2).
F860(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(5) [F861The] persons are—
in the case of a complaint, the complainant and every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint under section 21; and
in the case of a recordable conduct matter, every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to that matter under that section.
F862(5A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F862(5B) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F862(5C) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F863(6) F864On receipt of the report ..., the appropriate authority shall also—
in accordance with regulations under section 50 or 51 of the 1996 Act, determine—
whether any person to whose conduct the investigation related has a case to answer in respect of misconduct or gross misconduct or has no case to answer, and
[F865(ia) whether or not any such person's performance is unsatisfactory, and]
what action (if any) the authority is required to, or will in its discretion, take in respect of the matters dealt with in the report, and
[F866(aa) if it considers it appropriate to do so, make a determination as to any matter dealt with in the report, being a determination other than one that it is required to make by sub-paragraph (2)(a) or paragraph (a) of this sub- paragraph, and]
[F867(b) determine what action (if any), in addition to the action mentioned in paragraph (a)(ii), the authority will in its discretion take in respect of the matters dealt with in the report.]]
226	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


[F868(6A) Where the report is a report of an investigation of a complaint and the appropriate authority is a local policing body, the appropriate authority may also, on receipt of the report, make a recommendation under paragraph 28ZA.]
[F869(6B) It shall be the duty of the appropriate authority—
to take the action which it determines under sub-paragraph (6) that it is required to, or will in its discretion, take, and
in a case where that action consists of or includes the bringing of disciplinary proceedings, to secure that those proceedings, once brought, are proceeded with to a proper conclusion.]
F870(7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F870(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F870(9) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F870(10) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F871(11) In relation to a DSI matter in respect of which a determination has been made under paragraph 21A(2) [F872, (2A)][F873, (2B)] or (4), the references in this paragraph to the appropriate authority are references to the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question.]

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
227



F862 Sch. 3 para. 24(5A)-(5C) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(xii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F863 Sch. 3 para. 24(6) substituted (1.12.2008) by Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4), ss. 127,
153, Sch. 23 para. 14(6) (with s. 14(1)); S.I. 2008/2993, art. 2(1)(i)(i) (subject to art. 3)
F864 Words in Sch. 3 para. 24(6) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(xiii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F865 Sch. 3 para. 24(6)(a)(ia) inserted (22.11.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 14(3); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)
F866 Sch. 3 para. 24(6)(aa) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 27(2)(a); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F867 Sch. 3 para. 24(6)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 27(2)(b); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F868 Sch. 3 para. 24(6A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 27(3); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F869 Sch. 3 para. 24(6B) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(10)(a), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F870 Sch. 3 para. 24(7)-(10) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(9)(b), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F871 Sch. 3 para. 24(11) inserted (1.7.2005) by Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (c. 15), ss. 160,
178, Sch. 12 para. 23(3); S.I. 2005/1521, art. 3(1)(w)
F872 Word in Sch. 3 para. 24(11) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(xiv); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F873 Word in Sch. 3 para. 24(11) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(17); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)

Modifications etc. (not altering text)
C113 Sch. 3 para. 24 applied (with modifications) (28.12.2005) by virtue of The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(4)(6), Sch. 3

Commencement Information
I37  Sch. 3 para. 24 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; Sch. 3 para. 24 not in force at Royal Assent see s. 108(2); Sch. 3 para. 24 in force for specified purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(e); Sch. 3 para. 24 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(d)


[F874Final reports on investigations: other DSI matters

228	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


24A (1) This paragraph applies on the completion of an investigation of a DSI matter in respect of which neither the [F632Director General] nor the appropriate authority has made a determination under paragraph 21A(2) [F875, (2A)][F876, (2B)] or (4).
[F877The person investigating] shall—
submit a report on the investigation to the [F632Director General]; and
send a copy of that report to the appropriate authority.
[ Sub-paragraph (2)(a) does not apply where the person investigating is the Director
F878(2A) General carrying out an investigation personally under paragraph 19, but the Director General must complete a report on the investigation.]
A person submitting a report [F879to the [F632Director General]] under [F880sub- paragraph (2) or completing one under sub-paragraph (2A)] shall not be prevented by any obligation of secrecy imposed by any rule of law or otherwise from including all such matters in his report as he thinks fit.
[ Where a person would contravene section 21A by sending a copy of a report in F881(3A) its entirety to the appropriate authority under sub-paragraph (2)(b), the person must instead send a copy of the report after having removed or obscured the information
which by virtue of section 21A the person must not disclose.]
On receipt of the report [F882(or on its completion by the Director General)], the [F632Director General] shall determine whether the report indicates that a person serving with the police may have—
committed a criminal offence, or
behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings.
[ On receipt of the report [F884(or on its completion by the Director General)], the F883(5) [F632Director General] shall also, if [F638the Director General] considers it appropriate to do so, make a determination as to any matter dealt with in the report, being a determination other than one that [F638the Director General] is required to make under
sub-paragraph (4) or that the appropriate authority may be required to make by virtue of paragraph 24C(3).]
[ But sub-paragraphs (4) and (5) and paragraphs 24B and 24C do not apply, or cease F885(6) to apply, in relation to a report submitted under sub-paragraph (2) [F886or completed under sub-paragraph (2A)] if, following the submission [F887or completion] of the report, the [F632Director General] determines under section 13B that the DSI matter
is to be re-investigated.]

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
229



F875 Word in Sch. 3 para. 24A(1) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(xv); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F876 Word in Sch. 3 para. 24A(1) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(18)(a); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F877 Words in Sch. 3 para. 24A(2) substituted (1.12.2008) by Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (c. 4), ss. 127, 153, Sch. 23 para. 15 (with s. 14(1)); S.I. 2008/2993, art. 2(1)(i)(i) (subject to art. 3)
F878 Sch. 3 para. 24A(2A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(18)(b); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F879 Words in Sch. 3 para. 24A(3) inserted (1.10.2014) by Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12), s. 185(1), Sch. 11 para. 95(7) (with ss. 21, 33, 42, 58, 75, 93); S.I. 2014/2454, art. 3(c)(iii)
F880 Words in Sch. 3 para. 24A(3) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(18)(c); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F881 Sch. 3 para. 24A(3A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 19(3)(d), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(g) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F882 Words in Sch. 3 para. 24A(4) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(18)(d); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F883 Sch. 3 para. 24A(5) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 28; S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F884 Words in Sch. 3 para. 24A(5) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(18)(e); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F885 Sch. 3 para. 24A(6) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 18(4), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(f) (with art. 3(4))
F886 Words in Sch. 3 para. 24A(6) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(18)(f)(i); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F887 Words in Sch. 3 para. 24A(6) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(18)(f)(ii); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)


Action by the [F632Director General] in [F888relation]
to an investigation report under paragraph 24A

24B	(1) If the [F632Director General] determines under paragraph 24A(4) that the report indicates that a person serving with the police may have—
committed a criminal offence, or
behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings,
230	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


[F638the Director General] shall notify the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question of [F656the Director General's] determination and, if it appears that that authority has not already been sent a copy of the report, send a copy of the report to that authority.
[ Sub-paragraph (3A) of paragraph 24A applies for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1)
F889(1A) of this paragraph as it applies for the purposes of sub-paragraph (2)(b) of that paragraph.]
Where the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question is notified of a determination by the [F632Director General] under sub-paragraph (1), it shall record the matter under paragraph 11 as a conduct matter F890. . . .
[ Where a DSI matter is recorded under paragraph 11 as a conduct matter by virtue
F891(3) of sub-paragraph (2)—
the person investigating the DSI matter shall (subject to any determination made by the [F632Director General] under paragraph [F89215(5A) or (5B)]) investigate the conduct matter as if appointed or designated to do so, and
the other provisions of this Schedule shall apply in relation to that matter accordingly.]

24C (1) [F893This paragraph applies where] the [F632Director General] determines under paragraph 24A(4) that there is no indication in the report that a person serving with the police may have—
committed a criminal offence, or
behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings,
F894...
F895(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
231


[ The [F632Director General] may notify the appropriate authority that it must, in
F896(3) accordance with regulations under section 50 or 51 of the 1996 Act, determine—
whether or not the performance of a person serving with the police is unsatisfactory, and
what action (if any) the authority will take in respect of any such person's performance.]
[ On receipt of a notification under sub-paragraph (3) the appropriate authority shall
F896(4) make those determinations and submit a memorandum to the [F632Director General] setting out the determinations the authority has made.]
[ On receipt of a memorandum under sub-paragraph (4), the [F632Director General]
F896(5) shall—
consider the memorandum and whether the appropriate authority has made the determinations under sub-paragraph (4) that the [F632Director General] considers appropriate;
determine whether or not to make recommendations under paragraph 27;
make such recommendations (if any) under that paragraph as [F638the Director General] thinks fit.]]


[F897Reviews]F898... with respect to an investigation

25	(1) This paragraph applies where a complaint has been subjected to—
an investigation by the appropriate authority on its own behalf; F899... F900(b)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
232	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


[F901(1A) But this paragraph does not apply where the person investigating submitted a report on the investigation under provision made by virtue of paragraph 20A(4)(b) and did not (as a result of provision made by virtue of paragraph 20A(4)(a)) submit a further report under paragraph 22(2).
(1B) Where this paragraph applies, the complainant has the right to apply to the relevant review body for a review of the outcome of the complaint.
(1C) The relevant review body must notify the following of an application for a review under sub-paragraph (1B)—
the appropriate authority,
every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint under section 21, and
the person complained against (if any).]
F902(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F902(2ZA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F902(2A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F902(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F903(4) Where the relevant review body so requires on the making of an application for a review under sub-paragraph (1B), the appropriate authority must provide the relevant review body with—
a copy of the report of the investigation, and
such information concerning the authority's determinations under paragraph 24 as is described in a notification given by the relevant review body to the authority.]
[F904(4A) On a review applied for under sub-paragraph (1B), the relevant review body must determine whether the outcome of the complaint is a reasonable and proportionate outcome.
(4B) In making a determination under sub-paragraph (4A), the relevant review body may review the findings of the investigation.
(4C) Where the [F632Director General] is the relevant review body and the [F632Director General] finds that the outcome is not a reasonable and proportionate outcome, the [F632Director General] may—
make [F656the Director General's] own findings (in place of, or in addition to, findings of the investigation);
direct that the complaint be re-investigated;
make a recommendation to the appropriate authority in respect of any person serving with the police—
that the person has a case to answer in respect of misconduct or gross misconduct or has no case to answer in relation to the person's conduct to which the investigation related;
that the person's performance is, or is not, unsatisfactory;
that disciplinary proceedings of the form specified in the recommendation are brought against the person in respect of
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
233


the person's conduct, efficiency or effectiveness to which the investigation related;
that any disciplinary proceedings brought against that person are modified so as to deal with such aspects of that conduct, efficiency or effectiveness as may be so specified;
make a recommendation under paragraph 28ZA.
(4D) Where the [F632Director General] makes a recommendation under sub-paragraph (4C) (c)—
the appropriate authority must notify the [F632Director General] whether it accepts the recommendation and (if it does) set out in the notification the steps that it is proposing to take to give effect to it, and
sub-paragraphs (4) to (8) and (9)(b) of paragraph 27 apply in relation to the recommendation as if it had been made under that paragraph.
(4E) Where a local policing body is the relevant review body and the local policing body finds that the outcome is not a reasonable and proportionate outcome, the local policing body may—
make a recommendation to the appropriate authority that the complaint be re-investigated by the authority on its own behalf;
where the complaint has not previously been referred to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 4, make a recommendation to the appropriate authority that it refer the complaint to the [F632Director General] under sub- paragraph (2) of that paragraph;
make a recommendation to the appropriate authority in respect of any person serving with the police—
that the person has a case to answer in respect of misconduct or gross misconduct or has no case to answer in relation to the person's conduct to which the investigation related;
that the person's performance is, or is not, unsatisfactory;
that disciplinary proceedings of the form specified in the recommendation are brought against the person in respect of the person's conduct, efficiency or effectiveness to which the investigation related;
that any disciplinary proceedings brought against that person are modified so as to deal with such aspects of that conduct, efficiency or effectiveness as may be so specified;
make a recommendation under paragraph 28ZA.
(4F) Sub-paragraph (4G) applies where, on a review applied for under sub- paragraph (1B), the relevant review body determines that the report of the investigation indicates that a criminal offence may have been committed by a person (if any) to whose conduct the investigation related and that—
the circumstances are such that, in the opinion of the relevant review body, it is appropriate for the matters dealt with in the report to be considered by the Director of Public Prosecutions, or
any matters dealt with in the report fall within any category of matters prescribed for the purposes of paragraph 24(2B)(b).
(4G) Where this sub-paragraph applies—
234	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


if the [F632Director General] is the relevant review body, the [F632Director General] must notify the Director of Public Prosecutions of the determination under sub-paragraph (4F) and send the Director a copy of the report;
if a local policing body is the relevant review body, the local policing body must make a recommendation to the appropriate authority that the appropriate authority—
notify the Director of Public Prosecutions of the determination under sub-paragraph (4F), and
send the Director a copy of the report.
(4H) The Secretary of State may by regulations make further provision about recommendations under sub-paragraph (4E)(a), (b) or (c) or (4G)(b).
(4I) The regulations may (amongst other things) authorise the local policing body making the recommendation to require a response to the recommendation.
(4J) Where this paragraph applies because the person investigating submitted a report on the investigation under provision made by virtue of paragraph 20A(4)(b) (“the first report”) and a further report under paragraph 22(2), the references in sub-paragraphs (4B) and (4C)(a) to the findings of the investigation do not include a reference to findings on the first report.]
F905(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F905(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F905(7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F905(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F905(9) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F905(9ZA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F905(9ZB) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F905(9ZC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F905(9A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(10) The [F906relevant [F907review] body] shall give notification of [F908the outcome of a review] under this paragraph [F909and of its reasons for the determination made under sub-paragraph (4A)]—
to the appropriate authority F910...,
to the complainant;
to every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint under section 21; and
except in a case where it appears to the [F911relevant [F912review] body] that to do so might prejudice any F913... re-investigation of the complaint, to the person complained against [F914(if any)].
F915(11) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
235


It shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to comply with any directions given to it under this paragraph.
The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision—
for the form and manner in which [F916applications under sub-paragraph (1B) are to be made];
for the period within which any such [F917application must be made]; and
[F918(c)	for the procedure to be followed by the relevant review body when carrying out a review applied for under sub-paragraph (1B).]
[F919(14) In this paragraph references in relation to an investigation to the outcome of the complaint do not include the outcome of any criminal or disciplinary proceedings brought in relation to any matter which was the subject of the investigation.]


Textual Amendments
F632 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(2) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F656 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(5) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F899 Word in Sch. 3 para. 25(1)(a) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(xvii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F900 Sch. 3 para. 25(1)(b) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(xvii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F901 Sch. 3 para. 25(1A)-(1C) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(2); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F902 Sch. 3 para. 25(2)-(3) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(3); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F903 Sch. 3 para. 25(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(4); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F904 Sch. 3 para. 25(4A)-(4J) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(5); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F905 Sch. 3 para. 25(5)-(9A) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(6); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F906 Words in Sch. 3 para. 25(10) substituted (22.11.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 20(12)(a); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)
F907 Word in Sch. 3 para. 25(10) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(7)(a)(i); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F908 Words in Sch. 3 para. 25(10) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(7)(a)(ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
236	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F909 Words in Sch. 3 para. 25(10) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(7)(a)(iii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F910 Words in Sch. 3 para. 25(10)(a) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(7)(b);
S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F911 Words in Sch. 3 para. 25(10)(d) substituted (22.11.2012) by Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13), s. 157(1), Sch. 14 para. 20(12)(c); S.I. 2012/2892, art. 2(g) (with art. 6)
F912 Word in Sch. 3 para. 25(10)(d) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(7)(c)(i); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F913 Words in Sch. 3 para. 25(10)(d) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(7)(c) (ii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F914 Words in Sch. 3 para. 25(10)(d) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 4 para. 8(4); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(m) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F915 Sch. 3 para. 25(11) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(8); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F916 Words in Sch. 3 para. 25(13)(a) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(9)(a); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F917 Words in Sch. 3 para. 25(13)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(9)(b); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F918 Sch. 3 para. 25(13)(c) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(9)(c); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F919 Sch. 3 para. 25(14) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 34(10); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))

Modifications etc. (not altering text)
C114 Sch. 3 para. 25 applied (with modifications) (1.4.2006) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(5)(6), Sch. 3

Commencement Information
I38  Sch. 3 para. 25 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; Sch. 3 para. 25 not in force at Royal Assent see s. 108(2); Sch. 3 para. 25 in force for specified purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(e); Sch. 3 para. 25 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(d)


[F920Information for complainant about disciplinary recommendations

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
237


25A (1) This paragraph applies where, on the review of the outcome of a complaint under paragraph 25, the [F632Director General] makes a recommendation under sub- paragraph (4C)(c) of that paragraph.
Where the appropriate authority notifies the [F632Director General] under paragraph 25(4D)(a) that the recommendation has been accepted, the [F632Director General] must notify the complainant and every person entitled to be kept properly informed
in relation to the complaint under section 21 of that fact and of the steps that have been, or are to be taken, by the appropriate authority to give effect to it.
Where the appropriate authority—
notifies the [F632Director General] under paragraph 25(4D)(a) that it does not (either in whole or in part) accept the recommendation, or
fails to take steps to give full effect to the recommendation,
the [F632Director General] must determine what, if any, further steps to take under paragraph 27 as applied by paragraph 25(4D)(b).
The [F632Director General] must notify the complainant and every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint under section 21—
of any determination under sub-paragraph (3) not to take further steps, and
where the [F632Director General] determines under that sub-paragraph that [F638the Director General] will take further steps, of the outcome of the taking of those steps.]


[F921Re-investigations following a review]

26 F922(1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Where the [F632Director General] directs under paragraph 25 F923... that a complaint be re-investigated, [F638the Director General] shall make a determination of the form that the re-investigation should take.
Sub-paragraphs [F924(4)] to (7) of paragraph 15 shall apply in relation to a determination under sub-paragraph (2) as they apply in the case of a determination under that paragraph.
238	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


[F925(3A) Where, following a recommendation under paragraph 25(4E)(a) in relation to a complaint, the appropriate authority determines that it is appropriate for it to re- investigate the complaint on its own behalf, sub-paragraphs (3) to (5) of paragraph 16 shall apply in relation to the re-investigation as they apply in relation to an investigation to which paragraph 16 applies.]
The other provisions of this Schedule (including this paragraph) shall apply in relation to any re-investigation in pursuance of a direction under paragraph [F92625(4C)(b)]F927... [F928and any re-investigation of the type described in sub- paragraph (3A) of this paragraph] as they apply in relation to any investigation in
pursuance of a determination under paragraph 15.
[F929(4A) Where the [F632Director General] determines under sub-paragraph (2) that the re- investigation should take the form of an investigation by the appropriate authority on its own behalf, the [F632Director General] may also give the appropriate authority such directions as to the handling of the matter in future as the [F632Director General] thinks fit.]
[F930(5) The [F632Director General] shall notify the appropriate authority of any determination that [F638the Director General] makes under this paragraph and of [F656the Director General's] reasons for making the determination.
(5A) The [F632Director General] shall also notify the following of any determination that [F638the Director General] makes under this paragraph and of [F656the Director General's] reasons for making the determination—
the complainant;
every person entitled to be kept properly informed in relation to the complaint under section 21;
the person complained against (if any).
(5B) The duty imposed by sub-paragraph (5A) on the [F632Director General] shall have effect subject to such exceptions as may be provided for by regulations made by the Secretary of State.
(5C) Subsections (6) to (8) of section 20 apply for the purposes of sub-paragraph (5B) as they apply for the purposes of that section.]
F931(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
239



F922 Sch. 3 para. 26(1) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(2); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F923 Words in Sch. 3 para. 26(2) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(3); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F924 Word in Sch. 3 para. 26(3) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(4); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F925 Sch. 3 para. 26(3A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(5); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F926 Word in Sch. 3 para. 26(4) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(6)(a); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F927 Words in Sch. 3 para. 26(4) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(6)(b); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F928 Words in Sch. 3 para. 26(4) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(6)(c); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F929 Sch. 3 para. 26(4A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(7); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F930 Sch. 3 para. 26(5)-(5C) substituted for Sch. 3para. 26(5) (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(8);
S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F931 Sch. 3 para. 26(6) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 37(9); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))

Modifications etc. (not altering text)
C115 Sch. 3 para. 26 applied (with modifications) (1.4.2006) by The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(5)(6), Sch. 3

Commencement Information
I39  Sch. 3 para. 26 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; Sch. 3 para. 26 not in force at Royal Assent see s. 108(2); Sch. 3 para. 26 in force for specified purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(e); Sch. 3 para. 26 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(d)


Duties with respect to disciplinary proceedings [F932etc]

27	(1) This paragraph applies where, in the case of any investigation, the appropriate authority—
F933(a)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F934(b)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
240	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


[F935(c)	has submitted, or is required to submit, a memorandum to the [F632Director General] under paragraph 24C(4).]
[F936(1A) But where this paragraph would otherwise apply by virtue of sub-paragraph (1)(c), it does not apply, or ceases to apply, in relation to the investigation if the [F632Director General] determines under section 13B that the DSI matter is to be re-investigated.]
Subject to paragraph 20 and to any recommendations or directions under the following provisions of this paragraph, it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority—
to take the action F937... which is or is required to be set out in the memorandum; and
in a case where that action consists of or includes the bringing of disciplinary proceedings, to secure that those proceedings, once brought, are proceeded with to a proper conclusion.
F938(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F939(3A) Where this paragraph applies by virtue of sub-paragraph (1)(c), the [F632Director General] may make a recommendation to the appropriate authority—
that the performance of a person serving with the police is, or is not, satisfactory;
that action of the form specified in the recommendation is taken in respect of the person's performance;
and it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to notify the [F632Director General] whether it accepts the recommendation and (if it does) to set out in the notification the steps that it is proposing to take to give effect to it.]
If, after the [F632Director General] has made a recommendation under this paragraph, the appropriate authority does not take steps to secure that full effect is given to the recommendation—
the [F632Director General] may direct the appropriate authority to take steps for that purpose; and
it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to comply with the direction.
A direction under sub-paragraph (4) may, to such extent as the [F632Director General] thinks fit, set out the steps to be taken by the appropriate authority in order to give effect to the recommendation.
Where the [F632Director General] gives the appropriate authority a direction under this paragraph, [F638the Director General] shall supply the appropriate authority with a statement of its reasons for doing so.
Where disciplinary [F940or other] proceedings have been brought in accordance with a recommendation or direction under this paragraph, it shall be the duty of the authority to ensure that they are proceeded with to a proper conclusion.
The [F632Director General] may at any time withdraw a direction given under this paragraph; and sub-paragraph (7) shall not impose any obligation in relation to any time after the withdrawal of the direction.
The appropriate authority shall keep the [F632Director General] informed—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
241


in a case in which this paragraph applies by virtue of sub-paragraph [F941(1)(c)], of whatever action it takes in pursuance of its duty under sub- paragraph (2); and
in every case of a recommendation or direction under this paragraph, of whatever action it takes in response to that recommendation or direction.


Textual Amendments
F632 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(2) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F638 Words in Sch. 3 substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 8.1.2018 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 9 para. 56(4) (with Sch. 9 para. 56(6)); S.I. 2017/1249, reg. 2 (with reg. 3)
F933 Sch. 3 para. 27(1)(a) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(10)(b)(i), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F934 Sch. 3 para. 27(1)(b) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(xviii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F935 Sch. 3 para. 27(1)(c) and word inserted (1.10.2014) by Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12), ss. 138(3), 185(1) (with ss. 21, 33, 42, 58, 75, 93); S.I. 2014/2454, art. 3(a)
F936 Sch. 3 para. 27(1A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 18(5), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(f) (with art. 3(4))
F937 Words in Sch. 3 para. 27(2)(a) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 15(10)(b)(ii), 183(1)(5)(e); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(c) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F938 Sch. 3 para. 27(3) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(xviii); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))
F939 Sch. 3 para. 27(3A) inserted (1.10.2014) by Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12),
ss. 138(4), 185(1) (with ss. 21, 33, 42, 58, 75, 93); S.I. 2014/2454, art. 3(a)
F940 Words in Sch. 3 para. 27(7) inserted (1.10.2014) by Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12), s. 185(1), Sch. 11 para. 95(9)(b) (with ss. 21, 33, 42, 58, 75, 93); S.I. 2014/2454, art. 3(c)(iii)
F941 Word in Sch. 3 para. 27(9)(a) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 1.2.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), s. 183(1)(5)(e), Sch. 5 para. 47(h)(xix); S.I. 2020/5, reg. 2(n) (with art. 3(1)(2)(4))

Modifications etc. (not altering text)
C116 Sch. 3 para. 27 applied (with modifications) (28.12.2005) by virtue of The Revenue and Customs (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2005 (S.I. 2005/3311), reg. 3(4)(6), Sch. 3

Commencement Information
I40  Sch. 3 para. 27 wholly in force at 1.4.2004; Sch. 3 para. 27 not in force at Royal Assent see s. 108(2); Sch. 3 para. 27 in force for specified purposes at 1.10.2002 by S.I. 2002/2306, art. 4(e); Sch. 3 para. 27 in force in so far as not already in force at 1.4.2004 by S.I. 2004/913, art. 2(d)


Information for complainant about disciplinary recommendations
F94228    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
242	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



[F943Recommendations by the [F632Director General] or a local policing body

28ZA (1) A recommendation under this paragraph (for the purposes of paragraphs 6A, 23, 24 and 25) is a recommendation of a kind described in regulations made by the Secretary of State which is made with a view to remedying the dissatisfaction expressed by the complainant concerned.
A recommendation of a kind described in regulations under subsection (1) may (amongst other things) be a recommendation that compensation be paid.
The reference in subsection (1) to the complainant concerned—
in relation to a recommendation made by virtue of paragraph 6A(5)(b) or (6)(c), is a reference to the complainant who applied under paragraph 6A(2) for the review;
in relation to a recommendation made by virtue of paragraph 23(5F) or 24(6A), is a reference to the complainant whose complaint, having been investigated, resulted in the submission [F944or completion] of the report under paragraph 22;
in relation to a recommendation made by virtue of paragraph 25(4C)(d) or (4E)(d), is a reference to the complainant who applied under paragraph 25(1B) for the review.
The Secretary of State may by regulations make further provision about recommendations under this paragraph.
The regulations may (amongst other things)—
specify the persons to whom recommendations under this paragraph may be made;
authorise the person making a recommendation under this paragraph (whether the [F632Director General] or a local policing body) to require a response to the recommendation;
require the person making a recommendation under this paragraph to send a copy of the recommendation, and any response to it, to any prescribed person or person of a prescribed description.]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
243




[F945Recommendations by the [F632Director General]

28A (1) This paragraph applies where the [F632Director General] has received a report [F946(or otherwise completed one in relation to an investigation carried out under paragraph 19 by the Director General personally)] under—
paragraph 22(3) (report on completion of investigation of complaint or conduct matter F947... [F948directed] by [F632Director General]),
paragraph 22(5) (report on completion of investigation of complaint or conduct matter by [F949or on behalf of the Director General]), or
paragraph 24A(2) [F950or (2A)] (report on completion of investigation of DSI matter that is not also conduct matter).
This paragraph also applies where the [F632Director General] has made a determination on [F951a review] under—
paragraph [F9526A] ([F953review] relating to complaint dealt with other than by investigation), or
paragraph 25 ([F954review] with respect to an investigation).
The [F632Director General] may make a recommendation in relation to a matter dealt with in the report or [F955review].
[ Where this paragraph applies—
F956(3A)
by virtue of sub-paragraph (1)(a) or (b) and the report is a report of an investigation of a complaint, or
by virtue of sub-paragraph (2),
a recommendation made under sub-paragraph (3) may not be a recommendation of a kind described in regulations made under paragraph 28ZA(1).]
A recommendation under this paragraph may be made to any person if it is made—
following the receipt [F957or completion] of a report relating to—
a DSI matter,
a conduct matter of a type specified in regulations, or
a complaint of a type specified in regulations; or
following a determination on [F958a review] relating to a complaint of a type specified in regulations.
In any other case, a recommendation under this paragraph may be made only to—
244	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


a person serving with the police, or
a local policing body.
Where the [F632Director General] makes a recommendation under this paragraph,
[F638the Director General] must also—
publish the recommendation, and
send a copy of it—
in a case where the recommendation is made to a local policing body, to the chief officer of the police force maintained by that body;
in a case where the recommendation is made to a chief officer of a police force, to the local policing body that maintains the police force;
in a case where the recommendation is made to a contractor (within the meaning of section 12(10)), to the chief officer of a police force to whom the contractor is providing services, and the local policing body that maintains the police force;
in a case where the recommendation is made to a sub-contractor or an employee of a contractor, to the contractor and the persons to whom a copy must be sent under paragraph (iii);
in a case where the recommendation is made to an employee of a sub-contractor, to the sub-contractor, the contractor and the persons to whom a copy must be sent under sub-paragraph (iii);
in any other case, to any person to whom the [F632Director General] thinks a copy should be sent.
Nothing in this paragraph affects the power of the [F632Director General] to make recommendations or give advice under section 10(1)(e) (whether arising under this Schedule or otherwise).]

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
245




[F945Response to recommendation
28B	(1) A person to whom a recommendation under paragraph 28A is made must provide to the [F632Director General] a response in writing stating—
what action the person has taken or proposes to take in response to the recommendation, or
why the person has not taken, or does not propose to take, any action in response.
The person must provide the response to the [F632Director General] before the end of the period of 56 days beginning with the day on which the recommendation was made, unless sub-paragraph (3) applies.
The [F632Director General] may extend the period of 56 days following an application received before the end of the period; and if the [F632Director General] grants an extension, the person must provide the response before the end of the extended period.
But if proceedings for judicial review of the [F666Director General's] decision to make a recommendation are started during the period allowed by sub-paragraph (2) or (3), that period is extended by however many days the proceedings are in progress.
On receiving a response, the [F632Director General] must, within the period of 21 days beginning with the day on which the [F632Director General] received it—
publish the response, and
send a copy of it to any person who was sent a copy of the recommendation under paragraph 28A(6)(b),
246	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


unless the person giving the response has made representations under sub- paragraph (6).
The person giving the response may, at the time of providing it to the [F632Director General], make representations to the [F632Director General] asserting that the requirements of publication and disclosure under sub-paragraph (5) should not apply to the response, or to particular parts of it.
On receiving such representations, the [F632Director General] may decide—
that the response should not be published, or that only parts of it should be published;
that the response should not be disclosed, or that only parts of the response should be disclosed.
Where, following a decision on representations, the [F632Director General] decides to publish or disclose a response (in whole or in part), [F638the Director General] must do so only after the person giving the response has been informed of the [F666Director General's] decision, and—
in a case where the [F632Director General] has decided to accept all of the representations, [F638the Director General] must do so within the period of 21 days beginning with the day on which [F638the Director General] received the response;
in a case where the [F632Director General] has decided to reject any of the representations, [F638the Director General] must do so—
within the period of 21 days beginning with the day on which the person was informed of the [F666Director General's] decision on the representations, but
not before the end of the period of 7 days beginning with that day.
But if proceedings for judicial review of the [F666Director General's] decision to reject a representation are started during the period of 7 days referred to in sub- paragraph (8)(b)(ii)—
the [F632Director General] must not publish or disclose the response while the proceedings are in progress;
if the court upholds the [F666Director General's] decision to reject a representation, the [F632Director General] must publish and disclose the response (in whole or in part, as appropriate) before the end of the period
of 7 days beginning with the day on which the proceedings are no longer in progress.
Where a local policing body or a chief officer makes a response under this paragraph, the body or officer must, at the time the [F632Director General] publishes the response, also publish the response (to the same extent as published by the [F632Director General]) and the recommendation under paragraph 28A.
For the purposes of this paragraph—
“disclosing” a response means sending a copy of it as mentioned in sub- paragraph (5)(b);
the period during which judicial review proceedings are in progress includes any day on which an appeal is in progress or may be brought.]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
247


[F959(12) This paragraph does not apply, or ceases to apply, in relation to a recommendation made by virtue of paragraph 28A(1) if the [F632Director General] determines under section 13B that the complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter that the
[F632Director General] received a report on [F960(or otherwise completed one on in relation to an investigation carried out under paragraph 19 by the Director General personally)] is to be re-investigated.]


[F961Minor definitions

In this Part of this Schedule—
F962...
[F963“gross misconduct” means a breach of the Standards of Professional Behaviour that is so serious as to justify dismissal;
“misconduct” means a breach of the Standards of Professional Behaviour; “the person investigating”, in relation to a complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter, means the person appointed or designated to
investigate that complaint or matter;
“prescribed” means prescribed by regulations made by the Secretary of State;
“the Standards of Professional Behaviour” means the standards so described in, and established by, regulations made by the Secretary of State.]]
248	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc.
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



[F964Reviews]: the relevant [F965review] body

(1) The relevant [F966review] body in relation to [F967a review] is—
the [F632Director General], in a case where [F968a local policing body is the appropriate authority in relation to the relevant complaint or] the relevant complaint falls within a description of complaints specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this paragraph; or
[F969(b)  the local policing body which is the relevant local policing body in relation to the relevant complaint, in any other case.]
[F970(2) In this paragraph and paragraphs 31 and 32—
“relevant complaint”, in relation to a review, means the complaint to which the review relates;
“relevant local policing body”, in relation to a relevant complaint where a chief officer is the appropriate authority in relation to the complaint, means the local policing body for the area of the police force of which the chief officer is a member;
“review” means a review applied for under paragraph 6A(2) or 25(1B).]

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3 – Handling of Complaints and Conduct matters etc. Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
249



[F97131(1) This paragraph applies in a case where—
an application for a review is made to the [F632Director General], and
a local policing body is the relevant review body in relation to the review.
The [F632Director General] must—
forward the application to the local policing body, and
notify the person who applied for the review—
that the local policing body is the relevant review body, and
the application has been forwarded.
The application is to be taken to have been—
made to the local policing body, and
so made at the time when it is forwarded to the local policing body.]

[F97232(1) This paragraph applies in a case where—
an application for a review is made to a local policing body, and
the [F632Director General] is the relevant review body in relation to the review.
The local policing body must—
forward the application to the [F632Director General], and
notify the person who applied for the review—
that the [F632Director General] is the relevant review body, and
the application has been forwarded.
The application is to be taken to have been—
made to the [F632Director General], and
so made at the time when it is forwarded to the [F632Director General].]

250	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3A – Whistle-blowing investigations: procedure
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes





F973[F974SCHEDULE 3A	Section 29D(5)

Whistle-blowing investigations: procedure


Designation of persons to take part in investigation
(1) Paragraph 19(1), (2) [F975, (2A)] and (4) to (8) of Schedule 3 (investigations under that Schedule by the [F973Director General]F976...), and any order made under paragraph 19(4) of that Schedule, apply where the [F973Director General] decides to carry out
an investigation under section 29D (1) as they apply where the [F973Director General] has determined to investigate, or is required to investigate, a complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter under that Schedule.
In the case of an investigation under section 29D(1) relating to any conduct of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis or the Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, the person designated under paragraph 19(2) of Schedule 3 (as applied by sub-paragraph (1)) must be the person nominated by the Secretary of State for that purpose.


Protection of anonymity
(1) The person in charge of an investigation under section 29D(1), and any other person designated for the purposes of the investigation by virtue of paragraph 1, may not disclose the identity of the whistle-blower or information that might (whether alone or with other information) tend to reveal that identity.
Sub-paragraph (1) does not apply to the extent that—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3A – Whistle-blowing investigations: procedure Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
251


the whistle-blower consents to the disclosure of his or her identity or (as the case may be) to the disclosure of information that might tend to reveal it, or
the disclosure is authorised by regulations made by the Secretary of State under section 29J.
The person in charge of an investigation under section 29D(1) must take all reasonable steps to ensure that, where the identity of the whistle-blower, or information that might tend to reveal that identity, is disclosed for the purposes of the investigation (whether with the consent of the whistle-blower or in accordance with regulations under section 29J), it is not further disclosed without the consent of the person in charge.
For the purpose of the duty under sub-paragraph (3), the person in charge may impose such requirements on persons to whom the identity of the whistle-blower, or information that might tend to reveal that identity, is disclosed as are specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State for the purpose of this paragraph.

Powers to obtain information etc
Paragraphs 19ZA to 19ZC of Schedule 3 apply in relation to an investigation under section 29D(1) as they apply in relation to an investigation under paragraph 19 of that Schedule.

Procedure where conduct matter is revealed during investigation
(1) If, during the course of an investigation under section 29D(1), [F977the Director General determines] that there is an indication that a person serving with the police (“the person whose conduct is in question”) may have—
committed a criminal offence, or
behaved in a manner which would justify the bringing of disciplinary proceedings,
[F978the Director General must proceed under sub-paragraph (2)].
[F979(2) The Director General must—
prepare a record of the determination,
notify the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question of the determination, and
send to it a copy of the record of the determination prepared under paragraph (a).]
Where the appropriate authority in relation to the person whose conduct is in question is notified under sub-paragraph (2), it must record the matter under paragraph 11 of Schedule 3 to this Act as a conduct matter.
Where a matter is, in accordance with sub-paragraph (3), recorded under paragraph 11 of Schedule 3 as a conduct matter—
the person in charge of the investigation under section 29D(1) must (subject to any determination made by the [F973Director General] under paragraph 15(5B) of Schedule 3) continue the investigation as if appointed or designated to investigate the conduct matter, and
the other provisions of Schedule 3 apply in relation to that matter accordingly (subject to regulations under sub-paragraph (5)).
252	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3A – Whistle-blowing investigations: procedure
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision modifying Schedule 3 in relation to an investigation of a matter that, in accordance with sub-paragraph (3), is recorded under paragraph 11 of that Schedule as a conduct matter but only for the purpose of making provision for the protection of the anonymity of whistle-blowers.


Procedure where DSI matter is revealed during investigation
(1) If, during the course of an investigation under section 29D(1), [F980the Director General determines] that the matter may be a DSI matter, [F981the Director General must proceed under sub-paragraph (2)].
[F982(2) The Director General must—
prepare a record of the determination,
notify the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter, and
send to it a copy of the determination prepared under paragraph (a).]
Where the appropriate authority in relation to the DSI matter is notified under sub- paragraph (2), it must record the matter under paragraph 14A of Schedule 3 to this Act as a DSI matter.
Where a matter is, in accordance with sub-paragraph (3), recorded under paragraph 14A of Schedule 3 as a DSI matter—
the person in charge of the investigation under section 29D(1) must (subject to any determination made by the [F973Director General] under paragraph 15(5B) of Schedule 3) continue the investigation as if appointed or designated to investigate the DSI matter, and
the other provisions of Schedule 3 apply in relation to that matter accordingly (subject to regulations under sub-paragraph (5)).
The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision modifying Schedule 3 in relation to an investigation that, in accordance with sub-paragraph (3), is recorded under paragraph 14A of that Schedule as a DSI matter but only for the purpose of making provision for the protection of the anonymity of whistle-blowers.
In this paragraph, references to the appropriate authority in relation to a DSI matter have the same meaning as in Part 2 (see section 29).
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3A – Whistle-blowing investigations: procedure Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
253




Conclusion of investigation
(1) When an investigation under section 29D(1) is concluded, the person in charge of the investigation must submit a report on it to the [F973Director General].
[ Sub-paragraph (1) does not apply where the person in charge of the investigation
F983(1A) is the Director General acting personally, but the Director General must complete a report on the investigation.]
The [F973Director General]—
must send a copy of [F984a report submitted under sub-paragraph (1) or completed under sub-paragraph (1A)] to the whistle-blower, and
may, with the consent of the whistle-blower, send a copy of the report to the appropriate authority.
The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision for circumstances in which the duty under sub-paragraph (2)(a) does not apply.
The power conferred by sub-paragraph (3) may be exercised only to the extent that the Secretary of State considers necessary for any of the permitted non-disclosure purposes.
The Secretary of State may also by regulations make provision for circumstances in which (despite sub-paragraph (2)(b)) a copy of the report may be sent to the appropriate authority without the consent of the whistle-blower.
The power conferred by sub-paragraph (5) may be exercised only to the extent that the Secretary of State considers necessary for any of the permitted disclosure purposes.
Where the [F973Director General] would contravene section 21A by sending a copy of a report in its entirety to the whistle-blower or to the appropriate authority, the [F973Director General] may comply with its duty under sub-paragraph (2)(a) or (as the case may be) may exercise its power under sub-paragraph (2)(b) (or under
regulations under sub-paragraph (5)) by sending instead a copy of the report after having removed or obscured the information which it is prohibited from disclosing by section 21A.
In this paragraph—
“the permitted non-disclosure purposes” has the same meaning as in section 29I;
254	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3B – Designations under section 38
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


“the permitted disclosure purposes” has the same meaning as in section 29J.


Power of [F973Director General] to make recommendations
(1) On receipt of a report under paragraph 6[F985(1) or on its completion by the Director General under paragraph 6(1A)], the [F973Director General] may make a recommendation in relation to any matter dealt with in it.
The Secretary of State may by regulations make further provision about recommendations under this paragraph.
The regulations may (amongst other things)—
describe the kinds of recommendations that the [F973Director General] may make under this paragraph;
specify the persons to whom the recommendations may be made;
authorise the [F973Director General] to require a response to a recommendation made under this paragraph.]




[F986SCHEDULE 3B	Section 38(6B)(a) and (6D)

Designations under section 38

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3B – Designations under section 38 Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
255



Part 1

Excluded powers and duties of constables
Any power or duty of a constable to make an arrest.
Any power or duty of a constable to stop and search an individual or a vehicle or other thing.
The power of a constable, under section 36(4) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, to perform the functions of a custody officer at a designated police station if a custody officer is not readily available to perform them.
[F9873A.  The power of a constable, under section 55(6) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984F988, to conduct an intimate search if an officer of at least the rank of inspector considers under section 55(5) of that Act that an intimate search by a suitably qualified person is not practicable.]

Any power that is exercisable only by a constable of a particular rank.
Any power of a constable under—
the Terrorism Act 2000;
the Terrorism Act 2006;
the Counter-Terrorism Act 2008;
the Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures Act 2011;
the Counter-Terrorism and Security Act 2015.
Any power of a constable under [F989the National Security Act 2023].

The power of a constable to make an application on behalf of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis under section 19 or 21 of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016 (applications for warrants under Chapter 1 of Part 2 of that Act).

Part 2

Application of legislation
(1) Where a power or duty of a constable is conferred or imposed on a person designated under section 38—
a reference to a constable (however expressed) in legislation relating to the power or duty includes a reference to the person designated under section 38;
256	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3C – Designations under section 38: additional powers and duties
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


a reference in legislation to anything done in the exercise or purported exercise of the power, or in the performance or purported performance of the duty, includes a reference to anything done in the exercise or purported exercise of the power, or the performance or purported performance of the duty, by the person designated under section 38.
The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision for legislation relating to a power or duty of a constable specified in the regulations to apply in relation to a person designated under section 38 in a way that modifies or supplements the effect of sub-paragraph (1).
In this paragraph, “legislation” means any provision of—
an Act;
subordinate legislation within the meaning of the Interpretation Act 1978;
a Measure or Act of the National Assembly for Wales or an instrument made under a Measure or Act of that Assembly.]


[F990SCHEDULE 3C	Section 38(6B)(b)

Designations under section 38: additional powers and duties


Introduction
(1) The designation of a person under section 38 as a community support officer or a community support volunteer may provide for any of paragraphs 2 to 11 to apply to the community support officer or the community support volunteer.
The designation may provide for any such paragraph to apply—
to its full extent, or
only in cases or circumstances described in the designation.
Where the designation provides for any of those paragraphs to apply—
the community support officer or community support volunteer has any power or duty described in the paragraph as a power or duty of a community support officer or community support volunteer (subject to provision included in the designation under sub-paragraph (2)(b) or section 38(7A)), and
any provision made by the paragraph in connection with the exercise of the power or the performance of the duty applies in relation to the exercise of the power or the performance of the duty by the community support officer or community support volunteer.
In this Schedule—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3C – Designations under section 38: additional powers and duties Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
257


“CSO” means a person designated by a chief officer of police as a community support officer under section 38;
“CSV” means a person designated by a chief officer of police as a community support volunteer under section 38;
“the relevant police area”, in relation to a CSO or CSV, means the police area for which the police force in question is maintained.
Expressions used in this Schedule and in the 1984 Act have the same meanings in this Schedule as in that Act.

Powers to issue fixed penalty notices
(1) A CSO or CSV has the power of an authorised officer of a litter authority to give a notice under section 88 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 (fixed penalty notices in respect of litter) in relation to an individual whom the CSO or CSV has reason to believe has committed an offence under section 87 of that Act at a place within the relevant police area.
A CSO or CSV has the power of an authorised officer of a local authority to give a notice under section 43(1) of the Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003 (penalty notices in respect of graffiti or fly-posting) in relation to an individual whom the CSO or CSV has reason to believe has committed an offence that is a relevant offence for the purposes of section 43(1) at a place within the relevant police area.
A CSO or CSV designated under section 38 by the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis has the power of an authorised officer of a borough council to give a notice under section 15 of the London Local Authorities Act 2004 in relation to an individual whom the CSO or CSV has reason to believe has committed an offence under section 38(1) of the London Local Authorities Act 1990.
A CSO or CSV designated under section 38 by the Commissioner of Police for the City of London has the power of an authorised officer of a borough council to give a notice under section 15 of the London Local Authorities Act 2004 in relation to an individual whom the CSO or CSV has reason to believe has committed an offence under section 27(1) of the City of Westminster Act 1999 (unlicensed street trading).
A CSO or CSV has the power of an authorised officer of an authority to give a notice under section 237A of the Local Government Act 1972 or under section 12 of the Local Government Byelaws (Wales) Act 2012 (fixed penalty notices in relation to offences against certain byelaws) in relation to an individual whom the CSO or CSV has reason to believe has committed an offence against a listed byelaw at a place within the relevant police area.
A byelaw is a “listed byelaw” for the purposes of sub-paragraph (5) if, at the time the CSO or CSV gives the notice—
it is a byelaw to which section 237A of the Local Government Act 1972 or to which section 12 of the Local Government Byelaws (Wales) Act 2012 (fixed penalty notices in relation to offences against certain byelaws) applies, and
the chief officer of police for the relevant police area and the authority that made the byelaw have agreed to include it in a list of byelaws kept for the purposes of sub-paragraph (5).
258	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3C – Designations under section 38: additional powers and duties
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


The chief officer of police for the relevant police area must publish the list of byelaws kept for the purposes of sub-paragraph (5) in such a way as to bring it to the attention of members of the public in localities where the byelaws in the list apply.
The list of byelaws kept for the purposes of sub-paragraph (5) may be amended from time to time by agreement between the chief officer of police and the authority, by adding byelaws to it or removing byelaws from it.
Where the list of byelaws is amended, the amended list must be published by the chief officer as mentioned in sub-paragraph (7).

Powers to require names and addresses
(1) A CSO or CSV may require a person to give his or her name and address if the CSO or CSV has reason to believe that—
the person has committed a relevant offence in the relevant police area, or
the person has committed a relevant licensing offence (whether or not in the relevant police area).
A person who fails to comply with a requirement under sub-paragraph (1) is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.
In this paragraph, “relevant offence” means any of the following offences—
an offence in respect of which the CSO or CSV is authorised to give a penalty notice (whether in consequence of paragraph 2 of this Schedule or in consequence of provision included in his or her designation in reliance on section 38(6B)(a));
an offence under section 3 or 4 of the Vagrancy Act 1824;
an offence committed in a specified park which by virtue of section 2 of the Parks Regulation (Amendment) Act 1926 is an offence against the Parks Regulation Act 1872;
an offence under section 39 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014;
an offence under a listed byelaw;
an offence the commission of which appears to the CSO or CSV to have caused—
injury, alarm or distress to any other person, or
the loss of, or any damage to, any other person's property.
In this paragraph, “relevant licensing offence” means an offence under any of the following provisions of the Licensing Act 2003—
section 141 (otherwise than by virtue of subsection (2)(c) or (3) of that section);
section 142;
section 146(1);
section 149(1)(a), (3)(a) or (4)(a);
section 150(1);
section 150(2) (otherwise than by virtue of subsection (3)(b) of that section);
section 152(1) (excluding paragraph (b)).
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3C – Designations under section 38: additional powers and duties Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
259


A byelaw is a “listed byelaw” for the purposes of sub-paragraph (3)(e) if, at the time the CSO or CSV requires a person to give his or her name and address—
it is a byelaw which has been made by a relevant body with authority to make byelaws for any place within the relevant police area, and
it is included in the list of byelaws published for the purposes of this paragraph by the chief officer of police for the relevant police area.
A byelaw may be included in the list of byelaws published for the purposes of this paragraph only if the chief officer of police and the relevant body which made the byelaw agree that it should be included.
The chief officer of police for the relevant police area must publish the list in such a way as to bring it to the attention of members of the public in localities where the byelaws in the list apply.
The list of byelaws published for the purposes of this paragraph may be amended from time to time by agreement between the chief officer of police and the relevant body, by adding byelaws to it or removing byelaws from it.
Where the list of byelaws is amended, the amended list must be published by the chief officer as mentioned in sub-paragraph (8).
In sub-paragraphs (5), (6) and (8), “relevant body” means—
in England, a county council, a district council, a London borough council or a parish council;
in Wales, a county council, a county borough council or a community council;
the Greater London Authority;
Transport for London;
an Integrated Transport Authority for an integrated transport area in England;
a combined authority established under section 103 of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009;
a body specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State.
Regulations under sub-paragraph (10)(g) may provide, in relation to any body specified in the regulations, that the agreement mentioned in sub-paragraph (6) or
(8) is to be made between the chief officer and the Secretary of State (rather than between the chief officer and the relevant body).
In the case of a relevant offence that is an offence under a listed byelaw (see sub-paragraphs (3)(e) and (5)), the power to impose a requirement under sub- paragraph (1) is exercisable only in a place to which the byelaw relates.
In its application in relation to an offence in respect of which the CSO or CSV is authorised to give a penalty notice under section 444A of the Education Act 1996 (penalty notice in respect of failure to secure regular attendance at school of registered pupil), sub-paragraph (1)(a) of this paragraph has effect as if the words “in the relevant police area” were omitted.
In this paragraph, “specified park” has the same meaning as in section 162 of the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005.
260	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3C – Designations under section 38: additional powers and duties
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Powers to search for and seize alcohol and tobacco
(1) A CSO or CSV may search a person for alcohol or a container for alcohol if—
the CSO or CSV has (in consequence of provision included in his or her designation in reliance on section 38(6B)(a)) imposed a requirement on a person to surrender alcohol or a container for alcohol under section 63(2) of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 or under section 1 of the Confiscation of Alcohol (Young Persons) Act 1997,
the person has failed to comply with the requirement, and
the CSO or CSV reasonably believes that the person has alcohol or a container for alcohol in his or her possession.
A CSO or CSV may search a person for tobacco or cigarette papers where—
the CSO or CSV has (in consequence of provision included in his or her designation in reliance on section 38(6B)(a)) sought to seize the tobacco or cigarette papers under section 7(3) of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 (seizure of tobacco from young persons),
the person from whom the CSO or CSV sought to seize the item has failed to surrender it, and
the CSO or CSV reasonably believes that the person has it in his or her possession.
The power to search under sub-paragraph (1) or (2)—
is to do so only to the extent that is reasonably required for the purpose of discovering whatever the CSO or CSV is searching for, and
does not authorise the CSO or CSV to require a person to remove any of his or her clothing in public other than an outer coat, jacket or gloves.
A person who without reasonable excuse fails to consent to being searched in the exercise of a power under this paragraph is guilty of an offence and is liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.
A CSO or CSV who proposes to exercise a power to search a person under sub- paragraph (1) or (2) must inform him or her that failing without reasonable excuse to consent to being searched is an offence.
If the person in question fails to consent to being searched, the CSO or CSV may require him or her to give the CSO or CSV his or her name and address.
If on searching the person the CSO or CSV discovers what he or she is searching for, the CSO or CSV may seize it and dispose of it.

Powers to seize and detain: controlled drugs
(1) A CSO or CSV may exercise the powers conferred by sub-paragraph (2) or (3) in the relevant police area.
If the CSO or CSV—
finds a controlled drug in a person's possession (whether or not the CSO or CSV finds it in the course of searching the person in the exercise of a power or duty conferred or imposed by his or her designation under section 38), and
reasonably believes that it is unlawful for the person to be in possession of it, the CSO or CSV may seize it and retain it.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3C – Designations under section 38: additional powers and duties Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
261


If the CSO or CSV—
either—
finds a controlled drug in a person's possession (as mentioned in sub-paragraph (2)(a)), or
reasonably believes that a person is in possession of a controlled drug, and
reasonably believes that it is unlawful for the person to be in possession of it,
the CSO or CSV may require the person to give the CSO or CSV his or her name and address.
If, in exercise of the power conferred by sub-paragraph (2), the CSO or CSV seizes and retains a controlled drug, the CSO or CSV must—
if the person from whom it was seized maintains that he or she was lawfully in possession of it, tell the person where inquiries about its recovery may be made, and
comply with a constable's instructions about what to do with it.
A person who fails to comply with a requirement imposed under sub-paragraph (3) is guilty of an offence and liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.
In this paragraph, “controlled drug” has the same meaning as in the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971.

Powers to seize and detain: psychoactive substances
(1) A CSO or CSV may exercise the powers conferred by sub-paragraph (2) or (3) in the relevant police area.
If the CSO or CSV—
finds a psychoactive substance in a person's possession (whether or not the CSO or CSV finds it in the course of searching the person in the exercise of a power or duty conferred or imposed by his or her designation under section 38), and
reasonably believes that it is unlawful for the person to be in possession of it, the CSO or CSV may seize it and retain it.
If the CSO or CSV—
either—
finds a psychoactive substance in a person's possession (as mentioned in sub-paragraph (2)(a)), or
reasonably believes that a person is in possession of a psychoactive substance, and
reasonably believes that it is unlawful for the person to be in possession of it,
the CSO or CSV may require the person to give the CSO or CSV his or her name and address.
If, in exercise of the power conferred by sub-paragraph (2), the CSO or CSV seizes and retains a psychoactive substance, the CSO or CSV must—
if the person from whom it was seized maintains that he or she was lawfully in possession of it—
262	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3C – Designations under section 38: additional powers and duties
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


tell the person where inquiries about its recovery may be made, and
explain the effect of sections 49 to 51 and 53 of the Psychoactive Substances Act 2016 (retention and disposal of items), and
comply with a constable's instructions about what to do with it.
Any substance seized in exercise of the power conferred by sub-paragraph (2) is to be treated for the purposes of sections 49 to 53 of the Psychoactive Substances Act 2016 as if it had been seized by a police or customs officer under section 36 of that Act.
Section 50 of that Act applies in relation to any such substance as if the reference in subsection (1)(b) to the police or customs officer who seized it were a reference to the CSO or CSV who seized it.
A person who fails to comply with a requirement imposed under sub-paragraph (3) is guilty of an offence and liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.
In this paragraph, “police or customs officer” and “psychoactive substance” have the same meaning as in the Psychoactive Substances Act 2016.

Powers to detain pending arrival of a constable etc
(1) A CSO or CSV may require a person to wait with the CSO or CSV, for a period not exceeding 30 minutes, for the arrival of a constable where—
the CSO or CSV has required the person to give his or her name and address (whether in consequence of paragraph 3, 4(6), 5(3) or 6(3) or in consequence of provision included in his or her designation in reliance on section 38(6B) (a)), and
either—
the person has failed to comply with the requirement, or
the CSO or CSV has reasonable grounds for suspecting that the person has given a name or address that is false or inaccurate.
Sub-paragraph (1) does not apply if the requirement to give a name and address was imposed in connection with a relevant licensing offence mentioned in paragraph 3(4) (a), (c) or (f) which the CSO or CSV believes to have been committed on licensed premises (within the meaning of the Licensing Act 2003).
A CSO or CSV may require a person to wait with the CSO or CSV, for a period not exceeding 30 minutes, for the arrival of a constable where—
the CSO or CSV has reason to believe that the person is committing an offence under section 3 or 4 of the Vagrancy Act 1824,
the CSO or CSV requires the person to stop doing whatever gives rise to that belief, and
the person fails to stop as required.
A person who has been required under sub-paragraph (1) or (3) to wait with a CSO or CSV may, if requested to do so, elect that (instead of waiting) he or she will accompany the CSO or CSV to a police station in the relevant police area.
Where the person does not elect to accompany the CSO or CSV to the police station, and the constable arrives within the period of 30 minutes, the CSO or CSV is under a duty to remain with the person and the constable until the CSO or CSV has transferred control of the person to the constable.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 3C – Designations under section 38: additional powers and duties Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
263


Where the person does elect to accompany the CSO or CSV to the police station—
the CSO or CSV is under a duty to remain at the police station until the CSO or CSV has transferred control of the person to the custody officer there,
until control is transferred, the CSO or CSV is treated for all purposes as having the person in his or her lawful custody, and
for so long as the CSO or CSV remains at the police station or in its immediate vicinity (whether before control of the person is transferred or afterwards), the CSO or CSV is under a duty to prevent the person's escape and to assist in keeping the person under control.
A person who—
makes off while subject to a requirement under sub-paragraph (1) or (3), or
makes off while accompanying a CSO or CSV to a police station in accordance with an election under sub-paragraph (4),
is guilty of an offence and liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.

Powers to search etc individuals detained under paragraph 7
(1) A CSO or CSV may exercise the powers set out in sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) in relation to a person whom the CSO or CSV has required to wait for the arrival of a constable under paragraph 7(1) or (3) (whether or not that person makes an election under paragraph 7(4)).
If the CSO or CSV has reasonable grounds for believing that the person may present a danger to himself or herself or to others, the CSO or CSV may search the person.
If the CSO or CSV has reasonable grounds for believing that the person may have concealed on him or her anything which might be used to assist in escaping from lawful custody, the CSO or CSV may search the person for that thing.
The power conferred by sub-paragraph (2) or (3)—
does not authorise a CSO or CSV to require a person to remove any of his or her clothing in public other than an outer coat, jacket or gloves;
does authorise a search of a person's mouth.
A CSO or CSV searching a person under sub-paragraph (2) may seize and retain anything that is found, if the CSO or CSV has reasonable grounds for believing that the person searched might use it to cause physical injury to himself or herself or to any other person.
A CSO or CSV searching a person under sub-paragraph (3) may seize and retain anything that is found, other than an item subject to legal privilege, if the CSO or CSV has reasonable grounds for believing that the person might use it to assist in escaping from lawful custody.
If a CSO or CSV seizes or retains anything under sub-paragraph (5) or (6), the CSO or CSV must—
tell the person from whom it was seized where inquiries about its recovery may be made, and
comply with a constable's instructions about what to do with it.
264	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Persons detained under paragraph 7: park trading offences
(1) If a CSO or CSV reasonably suspects that a person required to wait for the arrival of a constable under paragraph 7(1) has committed a park trading offence, the CSO or CSV may take possession of anything of a non-perishable nature which—
the person has in his or her possession or under his control, and
the CSO or CSV reasonably believes to have been used in the commission of the offence.
The CSO or CSV may retain possession of the thing in question for a period not exceeding 30 minutes unless the person makes an election under paragraph 7(4), in which case the CSO or CSV may retain possession of the thing in question until he or she is able to transfer control of it to a constable.
In this paragraph “park trading offence” means an offence committed in a specified park which is a park trading offence for the purposes of the Royal Parks (Trading) Act 2000.
In sub-paragraph (3), “specified park” has the same meaning as in section 162 of the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005.

Road traffic
A CSO or CSV has in the relevant police area the powers conferred on persons designated by regulations under section 99 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 (removal of abandoned vehicles).

Power to use reasonable force
A CSO or CSV has power to use reasonable force—
to prevent a person whom the CSO or CSV has required under paragraph 7(1) or (3) to wait for a constable from making off, or to keep the person under control, at any time while the person is subject to the requirement;
where such a person elects under paragraph 7(4) to accompany a CSO or CSV to a police station, to prevent the person from making off, or to keep the person under control, while the person is accompanying the CSO or CSV to the police station;
where a CSO or CSV is fulfilling a duty imposed under paragraph 7(5) or (6), to prevent the person from making off (or escaping) and to keep him or her under control;
where a CSO or CSV is exercising a power conferred by paragraph 8.]


F991SCHEDULE 4	Section 38

[F991Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff]

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
265






F992PART 1

Community Support Officers


Powers to issue fixed penalty notices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1ZA	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Power to issue community protection notices
1ZB	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Power to require name and address
1A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Power to detain etc.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Powers to search individuals and to seize and retain items
2A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

General power of seizure
2B	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Power to require name and address of person acting in an anti-social manner
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Power to require name and address: road traffic offences
3A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
266	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Power to require name and address etc: charity collectors
3B	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Power to use reasonable force to detain person
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4ZA	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4ZB	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Power to disperse groups and remove young persons to their place of residence
4A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4AB	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Power to disperse groups and remove young persons to their place of residence
4B	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Power to remove truants and excluded pupils to designated premises etc.
4C	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Alcohol consumption in restricted areas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Power to serve closure notice for licensed premises persistently selling to children
5A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Confiscation of alcohol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Confiscation of tobacco etc.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Search and seizure powers: alcohol and tobacco
7A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Powers to seize and detain: controlled drugs
7B	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Powers to seize and detain: controlled drugs
7C	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Park Trading offences
7D	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Powers to seize and detain: psychoactive substances
7E	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7F	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Entry to save life or limb or prevent serious damage to property
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Entry to investigate licensing offences
8A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Seizure of vehicles used to cause alarm etc.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Abandoned vehicles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Power to stop vehicle for testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Power to stop cycles
11A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
267

Power to control traffic for purposes other than escorting a load of exceptional dimensions
11B	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Power to control traffic for purposes of escorting a load of exceptional dimensions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Carrying out of road checks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Power to place traffic signs
13A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Cordoned areas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
268	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Power to stop and search vehicles etc. in authorised areas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Photographing of persons arrested, detained or given fixed penalty notices
15ZA	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Power to modify paragraph 1(2A)
15A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


F993PART 2

Investigating Officers


Search warrants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16B	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Access to excluded and special procedure material
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Entry and search after arrest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Entry and search for evidence of nationality after arrest
18A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

General power of seizure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Access and copying in the case of things seized by constables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Arrest at a police station for another offence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Power to transfer persons into custody of investigating officers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Powers in respect of detained persons
22A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Power to require arrested person to account for certain matters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Extended powers of seizure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Persons accompanying investigating officers
24A	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Part 3

Detention Officers
269

Attendance at police station for fingerprinting
Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he shall, in respect of police stations in the relevant police area, have the power of a constable under [F994Schedule 2A to the 1984 Act (fingerprinting and samples: power to require attendance at a police station) ] to require a person to attend a police station in order
to have his fingerprints taken.


Non-intimate searches of detained persons
(1) Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he shall have the powers of a constable under section 54 of the 1984 Act (non-intimate searches of detained persons)—
to carry out a search under that section of any person at a police station in the relevant police area or of any other person otherwise in police detention in that area; and
to seize or retain, or cause to be seized or retained, anything found on such a search.
270	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


(2) Subsections (6C) and (9) of section 54 of that Act (restrictions on power to seize personal effects and searches to be carried out by a member of the same sex) shall apply to the exercise by a person to whom this paragraph is applied of any power exercisable by virtue of this paragraph as they apply to the exercise of the power in question by a constable.

Searches and examinations to ascertain identity
Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he shall have the powers of a constable under section 54A of the 1984 Act (searches and examinations to ascertain identity)—
to carry out a search or examination at any police station in the relevant police area; and
to take a photograph at any such police station of an identifying mark.

Searches of persons answering to live link bail
[F99527A(1) Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, that person has the powers of a constable under section 54B of the 1984 Act (searches of persons answering to live link bail)—
to carry out a search of any person attending a police station in the relevant police area; and
to seize or retain articles found on such a search.
(2) Anything seized by a person under the power conferred by sub-paragraph (1) must be delivered to a constable as soon as practicable and in any case before the person from whom the thing was seized leaves the police station.]


Intimate searches of detained persons
(1) Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he shall have the powers of a constable by virtue of section 55(6) of the 1984 Act (intimate searches) to carry out an intimate search of a person at any police station in the relevant police area.
(2) Subsection (7) of section 55 of that Act (no intimate search to be carried out by a constable of the opposite sex) shall apply to the exercise by a person to whom this paragraph applies of any power exercisable by virtue of this paragraph as it applies to the exercise of the power in question by a constable.

Fingerprinting without consent
Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person—
he shall have, at any police station in the relevant police area, the power of a constable under section 61 of the 1984 Act (fingerprinting) to take fingerprints without the appropriate consent; and
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
271


the requirement by virtue of subsection (7A)(a) of that section that a person must be informed by an officer that his fingerprints may be the subject of a speculative search shall be capable of being discharged, in the case of a person at such a station, by his being so informed by the person to whom this paragraph applies.

Warnings about intimate samples
Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, the requirement by virtue of [F996section 62(5)(c)] of the 1984 Act (intimate samples) that a person must be informed by an officer that a sample taken from him may be the subject of a
speculative search shall be capable of being discharged, in the case of a person in a police station in the relevant police area, by his being so informed by the person to whom this paragraph applies.


Non-intimate samples
Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person—
he shall have the power of a constable under section 63 of the 1984 Act (non-intimate samples), in the case of a person in a police station in the relevant police area, to take a non-intimate sample without the appropriate consent;
the requirement by virtue of subsection (6) of that section (information about authorisation) that a person must be informed by an officer of the matters mentioned in that subsection shall be capable of being discharged, in the case of an authorisation in relation to a person in a police station in the relevant police area, by his being so informed by the person to whom this paragraph applies; and
the requirement by virtue of subsection (8B)(a) of that section that a person must be informed by an officer that a sample taken from him may be the subject of a speculative search shall be capable of being discharged, in the case of a person in such a police station, by his being so informed by the person to whom this paragraph applies.

Attendance at police station for the taking of a sample
Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he shall, as respects any police station in the relevant police area, have the power of a constable under [F997Schedule 2A to the 1984 Act (fingerprinting and samples: power to require attendance at a police station) ] to require a person to attend a police station in order
to have a sample taken.
272	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Photographing persons in police detention
Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he shall, at police stations in the relevant police area, have the power of a constable under section 64A of the 1984 Act (photographing of suspects etc.) to take a photograph of a person detained at a police station.

Taking of impressions of footwear
[F99833A  Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person—
he shall, at any police station in the relevant police area, have the powers of a constable under section 61A of the 1984 Act (impressions of footwear) to take impressions of a person's footwear without the appropriate consent; and
the requirement by virtue of section 61A(5)(a) of the 1984 Act that a person must be informed by an officer that an impression of his footwear may be the subject of a speculative search shall be capable of being discharged, in the case of a person at such a station, by his being so informed by the person to whom this paragraph applies.]


Powers in respect of detained persons
[F99933B Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he shall be under a duty, when in the course of his employment he is present at a police station—
to keep under control any person detained at the police station and for whom he is for the time being responsible;
to assist any officer or other designated person to keep any other person detained at the police station under control; and
to prevent the escape of any such person as is mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b),
and for those purposes shall be entitled to use reasonable force.

33C	Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he shall be entitled to use reasonable force when—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
273


securing, or assisting an officer or another designated person to secure, the detention of a person detained at a police station in the relevant police area, or
escorting within a police station in the relevant police area, or assisting an officer or another designated person to escort within such a police station, a person detained there.]

[F100033D Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he is authorised to carry out the duty under—
section 55 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 of informing a person who is to be subject to an intimate search under that section of the matters of which he is required to be informed in pursuance of subsection (3B) of that section;
section 55A of that Act of informing a person who is to be subject to x-ray or ultrasound (as the case may be) under that section of the matters of which he is required to be informed in pursuance of subsection (3) of that section.]



Part 4

Escort Officers

Power to take an arrested person to a police station
(1) Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person—
the persons who, in the case of a person arrested by a constable in the relevant police area, are authorised for the purposes of [F1001subsection (1A) of section 30] of the 1984 Act (procedure on arrest of person elsewhere than
at a police station) to take the person arrested to a police station in that area shall include that person;
that section shall have effect in relation to the exercise by that person of the power conferred by virtue of paragraph (a) as if the references to a constable in subsections (3), (4)(a) and (10) (but not the references in subsections (5) to (9)) included references to that person; and
a person who is taking another person to a police station in exercise of the power conferred by virtue of paragraph (a)—
shall be treated for all purposes as having that person in his lawful custody;
shall be under a duty [F1002to keep the person under control and] to prevent his escape; and
274	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


shall be entitled to use reasonable force to keep that person in his charge [F1003and under his control] .
[F1004(d) a person who has taken another person to a police station in exercise of the power conferred by virtue of paragraph (a)—
shall be under a duty to remain at the police station until he has transferred control of the other person to the custody officer at the police station;
until he has so transferred control of the other person, shall be treated for all purposes as having that person in his lawful custody;
for so long as he is at the police station or in its immediate vicinity in compliance with, or having complied with, his duty under sub- paragraph (i), shall be under a duty to prevent the escape of the other person and to assist in keeping him under control; and
shall be entitled to use reasonable force for the purpose of complying with his duty under sub-paragraph (iii).]
Without prejudice to any [F1005application of] paragraph 26, where a person has another in his lawful custody by virtue of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph—
he shall have the same powers under subsections (6A) and (6B) of section 54 of the 1984 Act (non-intimate searches) as a constable has in the case of a person in police detention—
to carry out a search of the other person; and
to seize or retain, or cause to be seized or retained, anything found on such a search;
subsections (6C) and (9) of that section (restrictions on power to seize personal effects and searches to be carried out by a member of the same sex) shall apply to the exercise by a person to whom this paragraph is applied of any power exercisable by virtue of this sub-paragraph as they apply to the exercise of the power in question by a constable.


Escort of persons in police detention
(1) Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, that person may be authorised by the custody officer for any designated police station in the relevant police area to escort a person in police detention—
from that police station to another police station in that or any other police area; or
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
275


from that police station to any other place specified by the custody officer and then either back to that police station or on to another police station in that area or in another police area.
Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, that person may be authorised by the custody officer for any designated police station outside the relevant police area to escort a person in police detention—
from that police station to a designated police station in that area; or
from that police station to any place in that area specified by the custody officer and either back to that police station or on to another police station (whether in that area or elsewhere).
A person who is escorting another in accordance with an authorisation under sub- paragraph (1) or (2)—
shall be treated for all purposes as having that person in his lawful custody;
shall be under a duty [F1006to keep the person under control and] to prevent his escape; and
shall be entitled to use reasonable force to keep that person in his charge
[F1007and under his control] .
[F1008(3A) A person who has escorted another person to a police station or other place in accordance with an authorisation under sub-paragraph (1) or (2) —
shall be under a duty to remain at the police station or other place until he has transferred control of the other person to a custody officer or other responsible person there;
until he has so transferred control of the other person, shall be treated for all purposes as having that person in his lawful custody;
for so long as he is at the police station or other place, or in its immediate vicinity, in compliance with, or having complied with, his duty under paragraph (a), shall be under a duty to prevent the escape of the other person and to assist in keeping him under control; and
shall be entitled to use reasonable force for the purpose of complying with his duty under paragraph (c).]
Without prejudice to any [F1009application of] paragraph 26, where a person has another in his lawful custody by virtue of sub-paragraph (3) of this paragraph—
he shall have the same powers under subsections (6A) and (6B) of section 54 the 1984 Act (non-intimate searches) as a constable has in the case of a person in police detention—
to carry out a search of the other person; and
to seize or retain, or cause to be seized or retained, anything found on such a search;
subsections (6C) and (9) of that section (restrictions on power to seize personal effects and searches to be carried out by a member of the same sex) shall apply to the exercise by a person to whom this paragraph is applied of any power exercisable by virtue of this sub-paragraph as they apply to the exercise of the power in question by a constable.
Section 39(2) of that Act (responsibilities of custody officer transferred to escort) shall have effect where the custody officer for any police station transfers or permits the transfer of any person to the custody of a person who by virtue of this paragraph
276	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


has lawful custody outside the police station of the person transferred as it would apply if the person to whom this paragraph applies were a police officer.




F1010[F1011PART 4A]



. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35B	Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he shall be under a duty, when in the course of his employment he is present at a police station—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 4 – Powers exercisable by contracted-out staff Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
277


to keep under control any person detained at the police station and for whom he is for the time being responsible;
to assist any officer or other designated person to keep any other person detained at the police station under control; and
to prevent the escape of any such person as is mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b),
and for those purposes shall be entitled to use reasonable force.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35C   Where a designation applies this paragraph to any person, he is authorised to carry out the duty under—
section 55 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 of informing a person who is to be subject to an intimate search under that section of the matters of which he is required to be informed in pursuance of subsection (3B) of that section;
section 55A of that Act of informing a person who is to be subject to x-ray or ultrasound (as the case may be) under that section of the matters of which he is required to be informed in pursuance of subsection (3) of that section.


F991PART 5

Interpretation of Schedule
(1) In this Schedule “the relevant police area”—
in relation to a [F1012person designated] under [F1013section 39] by the chief officer of any police force, means the police area for which that force is maintained; F1014. . .
F1014. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F1015[F1016(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F1015(2A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
In Parts 3 and 4 of this Schedule “a designation” means a designation under
[F1017section 39].]
F1018(3A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Expressions used in this Schedule and in the 1984 Act have the same meanings in this Schedule as in that Act.

278	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 5 – Powers exercisable by accredited persons
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes





SCHEDULE 5	Section 41

Powers exercisable by accredited persons

Power to issue fixed penalty notices
(1) An accredited person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall have the powers specified in sub-paragraph (2) in relation to any individual who he has reason to believe has committed or is committing a relevant fixed penalty offence at a place within the relevant police area.
Those powers are the following powers so far as exercisable in respect of a relevant
[F1019fixed penalty] offence—
the power of a constable in uniform to give a person a fixed penalty notice under section 54 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (fixed penalty notices) in respect of an offence under section 72 of the Highway Act 1835 (c. 50) (riding on a footway) committed by cycling;
[F1020(aa) the powers of a constable F1021... to give a penalty notice under Chapter 1 of Part 1 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (fixed penalty notices in respect of offences of disorder) F1022. . . ;]
[F1023(ab) the power of a constable to give a penalty notice under section 444A of the Education Act 1996 (penalty notice in respect of failure to secure regular attendance at school of registered pupil);]
[F1024(ac) the power of a constable to give a penalty notice under section 105 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 (penalty notice in respect of presence of excluded pupil in public place);]
F1025. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[F1026(ba) the power of an authorised officer of a local authority to give a notice under section 43(1) of the Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003 (penalty notices in respect of graffiti or fly-posting); and]
the power of an authorised officer of a litter authority to give a notice under section 88 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 (c. 43) (fixed penalty notices in respect of litter)
F1027(d)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 5 – Powers exercisable by accredited persons Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
279



[F1028(2A) The reference to the powers mentioned in sub-paragraph (2)(aa) does not include those powers so far as they relate to an offence under the provisions in the following list—
section 12 of the Licensing Act 1872, section 91 of the Criminal Justice Act 1967, section 1 of the Theft Act 1968,
section 1(1) of the Criminal Damage Act 1971, section 87 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990.]
In this paragraph “relevant fixed penalty offence”, in relation to an accredited person, means an offence which—
is an offence by reference to which a notice may be given to a person in exercise of any of the powers mentioned in [F1029sub-paragraph (2)(a) to (d)]
; and
is specified or described in that person’s accreditation as an offence he has been accredited to enforce.
[F1030(3A) For the purposes of paragraph (f) of section 64A(1B) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (photographing of suspects in relation to fixed penalty offences) “relevant fixed penalty offence”, in relation to an accredited person, includes an offence under a relevant byelaw within the meaning of paragraph 1A(4) (and, accordingly, the reference in that paragraph (f) to paragraph 1 of this Schedule includes a reference to paragraph 1A of this Schedule).]
[F1031(4) In its application to an offence which is an offence by reference to which a notice may be given to a person in exercise of the power mentioned in sub-paragraph (2)
(ab) [F1032or (ac)] , sub-paragraph (1) shall have effect as if for the words from “who he has reason to believe” to the end there were substituted “in the relevant police area who he has reason to believe has committed or is committing a relevant fixed penalty offence”.]

280	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 5 – Powers exercisable by accredited persons
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


[F10331A(1) This paragraph applies to an accredited person whose accreditation specifies that it applies to him.
The accreditation may specify that, in relation to that person, the application of sub- paragraph (3) is confined to one or more only (and not all) relevant byelaws, being in each case specified in the accreditation.
Where that person has reason to believe that an individual has committed an offence against a relevant byelaw at a place within the relevant police area, he may exercise the power of an authorised officer of an authority to give a notice under section 237A of the Local Government Act 1972 [F1034or under section 12 of the Local Government
Byelaws (Wales) Act 2012] (fixed penalty notices in relation to offences against certain byelaws).
In this paragraph “relevant byelaw”, in relation to an accredited person, means a byelaw which—
falls within sub-paragraph (5); and
is specified or described in that person's accreditation as a byelaw he has been accredited to enforce under this paragraph.
A byelaw falls within this sub-paragraph if—
it is a byelaw to which section 237A of the Local Government Act 1972 [F1035or to which section 12 of the Local Government Byelaws (Wales) Act 2012 applies] applies (fixed penalty notices in relation to offences against certain byelaws); and
the chief officer of the police force for the relevant police area and the authority who made the byelaw have agreed to include it in a list of byelaws for the purposes of this sub-paragraph.
A list under sub-paragraph (5)(b) must be published by the chief officer in such a way as to bring it to the attention of members of the public in localities where the byelaws in the list apply.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 5 – Powers exercisable by accredited persons Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
281


The list may be amended from time to time by agreement between the chief officer and the authority, by adding byelaws to it or removing byelaws from it, and the amended list shall also be published by the chief officer as mentioned in sub- paragraph (6).]


Power to require giving of name and address
(1) Where an accredited person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him has reason to believe that another person has committed a relevant offence in the relevant police area, he may require that other person to give him his name and address.
A person who fails to comply with a requirement under sub-paragraph (1) is guilty of an offence and shall be liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.
In this paragraph “relevant offence”, in relation to any accredited person, means any offence which is—
a relevant fixed penalty offence for the purposes of any powers exercisable by the accredited person by virtue of paragraph 1; or
[F1036(aa)  an offence under section 3 or 4 of the Vagrancy Act 1824; or]
[F1037(aza) an offence under a relevant byelaw within the meaning of paragraph 1A(4); or]
an offence the commission of which appears to the accredited person to have caused—
injury, alarm or distress to any other person; or
the loss of, or any damage to, any other person’s property;
but the accreditation of an accredited person may provide that an offence is not to be treated as a relevant offence by virtue of paragraph (b) unless it satisfies such other conditions as may be specified in the accreditation.
[F1038(4) In its application to an offence which is an offence by reference to which a notice may be given to a person in exercise of the power mentioned in paragraph 1(2)(ab)
[F1039or (ac)], sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall have effect as if for the words “has committed a relevant offence in the relevant police area” there were substituted “in the relevant police area has committed a relevant offence”.]

282	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 5 – Powers exercisable by accredited persons
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Power to require name and address of person [F1040engaging in anti-social behaviour]
F1[0F4100341(1)] An accredited person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall, in the relevant police area, have the powers of a constable in uniform
under section 50 to require a person whom he has reason to believe [F1042to have been engaging, or to be engaging, in anti-social behaviour] to give his name and address.
[F1043(2) In sub-paragraph (1), “anti-social behaviour” has the meaning given by section 2 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (ignoring subsection (2) of that section).]


Power to require name and address: road traffic offences
[F10443A(1) An accredited person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall, in the relevant police area, have the powers of a constable—
under subsection (1) of section 165 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 to require a person mentioned in paragraph (c) of that subsection who he has reasonable cause to believe has committed, in the relevant police area, an offence under subsection (1) or (2) of section 35 of that Act (including that section as extended by paragraphs 8B(4) and 9(2) of this Schedule) to give his name and address; and
under section 169 of that Act to require a person committing an offence under section 37 of that Act (including that section as extended by paragraphs 8B(4) and 9(2) of this Schedule) to give his name and address.
(2) The reference in section 169 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 to section 37 of that Act is to be taken to include a reference to that section as extended by paragraphs 8B(4) and 9(2) of this Schedule.]
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 5 – Powers exercisable by accredited persons Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
283




Alcohol consumption in designated public places
An accredited person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall, within the relevant police area, have the powers of a constable under section 12 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16) (alcohol consumption in public places)—
to impose a requirement under subsection (2) of that section; and
to dispose under subsection (3) of that section of anything surrendered to him;
and that section shall have effect in relation to the exercise of those powers by that person as if the references to a constable in subsections (1) and (5) were references to the accredited person.

Confiscation of alcohol
An accredited person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall, within the relevant police area, have the powers of a constable under section 1 of the Confiscation of Alcohol (Young Persons) Act 1997 (c. 33) (confiscation of intoxicating liquor)—
to impose a requirement under subsection (1) [F1045or (1AA)] of that section; and
to dispose under subsection (2) of that section of anything surrendered to him;
and that section shall have effect in relation to the exercise of those powers by that person as if the references to a constable in [F1046subsections (1), (1AA) and (4) (but not the reference in subsection (1AB) (removal))] were references to the accredited person.


Confiscation of tobacco etc.
(1) An accredited person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall, within the relevant police area, have—
the power to seize anything that a constable in uniform has a duty to seize under subsection (3) of section 7 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 (c. 12) (seizure of tobacco etc. from young persons); and
the power to dispose of anything that a constable may dispose of under that subsection;
284	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 5 – Powers exercisable by accredited persons
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


and the power to dispose of anything shall be a power to dispose of it in such manner as the relevant employer of the accredited person may direct.
(2) In this paragraph “relevant employer”, in relation to an accredited person, means the person with whom the chief officer of police for the relevant police area has entered into arrangements under section 40.

Abandoned vehicles
An accredited person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall have all such powers in the relevant police area as are conferred on accredited persons by regulations under section 99 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 (c. 27) (removal of abandoned vehicles).

Power to stop vehicle for testing
A person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall, within the relevant police area, have the power of a constable in uniform to stop a vehicle under subsection (3) of section 67 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) for the purposes of a test under subsection (1) of that section.

Power to stop cycles
[F10478A(1) Subject to sub-paragraph (2), a person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall, within the relevant police area, have the power of a constable in uniform under section 163(2) of the Road Traffic Act 1988 to stop a cycle.
(2) The power mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) may only be exercised by that person in relation to a person who he has reason to believe has committed an offence under section 72 of the Highway Act 1835 (riding on a footway) by cycling.]


Power to control traffic for purposes other than escorting a load of exceptional dimensions
[F10488B(1) A person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall have, in the relevant police area—
the power of a constable engaged in the regulation of traffic in a road to direct a person driving or propelling a vehicle to stop the vehicle or to make it proceed in, or keep to, a particular line of traffic;
the power of a constable in uniform engaged in the regulation of vehicular traffic in a road to direct a person on foot to stop proceeding along or across the carriageway.
The purposes for which those powers may be exercised do not include the purpose mentioned in paragraph 9(1).
A person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall also have, in the relevant police area, the power of a constable, for the purposes of a traffic
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 5 – Powers exercisable by accredited persons Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
285


survey, to direct a person driving or propelling a vehicle to stop the vehicle, to make it proceed in, or keep to, a particular line of traffic, or to proceed to a particular point on or near the road.
Sections 35 and 37 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (offences of failing to comply with directions of constable engaged in regulation of traffic in a road) shall have effect in relation to the exercise of the powers mentioned in sub-paragraphs (1) and (3), for the purposes for which they may be exercised and by a person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him, as if the references to a constable were references to him.
A person's accreditation may not specify that this paragraph applies to him unless it also specifies that paragraph 3A applies to him.]


Power to control traffic for purposes of escorting a load of exceptional dimensions
(1) A person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall have, for the purpose of escorting a vehicle or trailer carrying a load of exceptional dimensions either to or from the relevant police area, the power of a constable engaged in the regulation of traffic in a road—
to direct a vehicle to stop;
to make a vehicle proceed in, or keep to, a particular line of traffic; and
to direct pedestrians to stop.
Sections 35 and 37 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (offences of failing to comply with directions of constable engaged in regulation of traffic in a road) shall have effect in relation to the exercise of those powers for the purpose mentioned in sub- paragraph (1) by a person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him as if the references to a constable engaged in regulation of traffic in a road were references to that person.
The powers conferred by virtue of this paragraph may be exercised in any police area in England and Wales.
In this paragraph “vehicle or trailer carrying a load of exceptional dimensions” means a vehicle or trailer the use of which is authorised by an order made by the Secretary of State under section 44(1)(d) of the Road Traffic Act 1988.

Photographing of persons given fixed penalty notices
[F10499ZA An accredited person whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall, within the relevant police area, have the power of a constable under section 64A(1A) of the 1984 Act (photographing of suspects etc.) to take a photograph, elsewhere than at a police station, of a person to whom the accredited person has given a penalty notice (or as the case may be a fixed penalty notice) in
exercise of any power mentioned in paragraph 1(2) [F1050or in exercise of the power mentioned in paragraph 1A(3)].]
286	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 5A – Powers exercisable by accredited inspectors
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes



Power to modify paragraph [F10521(2A)]
[F1[0F510953A(1) The Secretary of State may by order amend paragraph 1(2A) so as to remove a provision from the list or add a provision to the list; but the list must contain only provisions mentioned in the first column of the Table in section 1(1) of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001.]
(2) The Secretary of State shall not make an order containing (with or without any other provision) any provision authorised by this paragraph unless a draft of that order has been laid before Parliament and approved by a resolution of each House.]


Meaning of “relevant police area”
In this Schedule “the relevant police area”, in relation to an accredited person, means the police area for which the police force whose chief officer granted his accreditation is maintained.


[F1054SCHEDULE 5A
Powers exercisable by accredited inspectors


Power to issue fixed penalty notices
(1) An accredited inspector whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall have the powers specified in sub-paragraph (2) in relation to any individual
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 5A – Powers exercisable by accredited inspectors Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
287


who he has reason to believe has committed a relevant fixed penalty offence at a place within the relevant police area.
The powers are the powers of a constable F1055... to give a penalty notice under Chapter 1 of Part 1 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (fixed penalty notices in respect of offences of disorder) so far as exercisable in respect of a relevant fixed penalty offence.


Power to require giving of name and address
(1) Where an accredited inspector whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him has reason to believe that a person has committed a relevant fixed penalty offence in the relevant police area, he may require the person to give him his name and address.
A person who fails to comply with a requirement under sub-paragraph (1) is guilty of an offence and shall be liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.

Photographing of persons given fixed penalty notices
An accredited inspector whose accreditation specifies that this paragraph applies to him shall, within the relevant police area, have the power of a constable under section 64A(1A) of the 1984 Act (photographing of suspects etc) to take a photograph, elsewhere than at a police station, of a person to whom the accredited inspector has given a penalty notice in exercise of the powers mentioned in paragraph 1(2).

Interpretation
In this Schedule—
“the relevant police area”, in relation to an accredited inspector, means the police area for which the police force whose chief officer granted his accreditation is maintained;
“relevant fixed penalty offence”, in relation to an accredited inspector, means an offence which—
is an offence contained in a provision mentioned in the first column of the Table in section 1(1) of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001, and
is specified or described in his accreditation as an offence he has been accredited to enforce.]
288	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 6
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


F1056F1056SCHEDULE 6

F1056. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


SCHEDULE 7	Section 107

Minor and Consequential Amendments

Police (Scotland) Act 1967
(1) In subsection (1) of section 38A of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 (c. 77) (police officers engaged on service outside their force), after paragraph (aa) there shall be inserted—
“(ab) temporary service on which a person is engaged in accordance with arrangements made under paragraph 6(2) of Schedule 2 to the Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) (service with the Independent Police Complaints Commission);”.
In subsection (6)(a) of that section, after “paragraph (a),” there shall be inserted “ (aa), ”.

Superannuation Act 1972
(1) In Schedule 1 to the Superannuation Act 1972 (c. 11) (kinds of employment to which that Act applies), at the appropriate place in the entries under the heading “Royal Commissions and other Commissions”, there shall be inserted—
“Independent Police Complaints Commission.”
In that Schedule, in the entries under the heading “Other bodies”, the words “Police Complaints Authority.” shall be omitted.

Juries Act 1974
In Part 1 of Schedule 1 to the Juries Act 1974 (c. 23) (ineligibility for jury service), in Group B, after the entry relating to the Criminal Cases Review Commission there shall be inserted—
“Chairman and members of the Independent Police Complaints Commission and any member of its staff who is not otherwise ineligible.”

Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974
In section 7(2)(bb) of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 (c. 53) (limitations on rehabilitations under Act etc.), for “a sex offender order under section 2 or, as the case may be, 20” there shall be substituted “ an order under section 2, 2A or 20 ”.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 7 – Minor and Consequential Amendments Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
289


House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975
In Part 2 of Schedule 1 to the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975 (c. 24) (bodies of which all members are disqualified)—
at the appropriate place, there shall be inserted— “The Independent Police Complaints Commission.
;
and”
the words “The Police Complaints Authority.” shall be omitted.

Northern Ireland Assembly Disqualification Act 1975
In Part 2 of Schedule 1 to the Northern Ireland Assembly Disqualification Act 1975 (c. 25) (bodies of which all members are disqualified)—
at the appropriate place, there shall be inserted— “The Independent Police Complaints Commission.
;
and”
the words “The Police Complaints Authority.”shall be omitted.

The Police Pensions Act 1976
(1) Section 11 of the Police Pensions Act 1976 (c. 35) (interpretation) shall be amended as follows.
In subsection (2) (meaning of “police authority” in relation to pensions)—
in paragraph (b), for “(c)”, in the second place where it occurs, there shall be substituted “ (ba) ”;
after paragraph (b) there shall be inserted—
“(ba) in relation to service of the kind described in section 97(1) (aa) of the Police Act 1996 (c. 16) or section 38A(1)(aa) of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 (c. 77), it means the Independent Police Complaints Commission;”
in paragraph (c), for “subsection (ba) or (bc) above” there shall be substituted “ paragraph (ba) or (bc) of subsection (1) ”;
in paragraph (d), for “subsection (bb) or (bd) above” there shall be substituted “ paragraph (bb) or (bd) of subsection (1) ”;
in paragraph (da), for “subsection (be)” there shall be substituted “ subsection (1)(be) ”.
In subsection (5) of that section, in the definition of “central service”, in each of paragraphs (a) and (b), after “paragraph” there shall be inserted “ (aa), ”.
After that subsection, there shall be inserted—
“(6) References in this Act to the Director General of the National Criminal Intelligence Service and to his service have effect only in relation to cases in which the person in question was a serving police officer for the purposes of
290	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 7 – Minor and Consequential Amendments
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


section 6 of the Police Act 1997 (c. 50) immediately before his appointment to that office took effect.”


Rehabilitation of Offenders (Northern Ireland) Order 1978
In Article 8(2) of the Rehabilitation of Offenders (Northern Ireland) Order 1978 (S.I. 1978/ 1908 (N.I. 27)) (limitations on rehabilitation under Order etc.), after sub- paragraph (b) there shall be inserted—
“(bb)  in any proceedings on an application for an order under Article 6 or 6A of the Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 1998 (S.I. 1998/ 2839 (N.I. 20)) or in any appeal against the making of such an order;”.

The 1984 Act
(1) In section 18(5) of the 1984 Act (power of constable to conduct search of an arrested person’s premises before taking him to a police station), for “taking the person” there shall be substituted “ the person is taken ”.
In section 54A(6) of that Act (persons entitled to carry out search or examination or to take photographs), for paragraphs (a) and (b) and the words after paragraph (b) there shall be substituted “ constables ”.
In section 61 of that Act (fingerprinting), before subsection (9) there shall be inserted—
“(8B) The power to take the fingerprints of a person detained at a police station without the appropriate consent shall be exercisable by any constable.”
In section 63 of that Act (non-intimate samples), after subsection (9) there shall be inserted—
“(9ZA) The power to take a non-intimate sample from a person without the appropriate consent shall be exercisable by any constable.”
In section 64A(3) of that Act (persons entitled to photograph detainees), for paragraphs (a) and (b) and the words after paragraph (b) there shall be substituted “ constables ”.
In subsection (7B) of section 67 of that Act (limited effect of modification of code of practice), in paragraph (c) for “order” there shall be substituted “ code ”.
After subsection (9) of that section there shall be inserted— “(9A) Persons on whom powers are conferred by—
any designation under section 38 or 39 of the Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) (police powers for police authority employees), or
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 7 – Minor and Consequential Amendments Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
291


any accreditation under section 41 of that Act (accreditation under community safety accreditation schemes),
shall have regard to any relevant provision of a code of practice to which this section applies in the exercise or performance of the powers and duties conferred or imposed on them by that designation or accreditation.”
In subsection (10) of that section (failure to comply with codes not to render a person liable to civil or criminal proceedings), after paragraph (b) there shall be inserted “, or
of a person designated under section 38 or 39 or accredited under section 41 of the Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) to have regard to any relevant provision of such a code in the exercise or performance of the powers and duties conferred or imposed on him by that designation or accreditation,”.
In section 118, at the beginning of subsection (2) (meaning of persons in police detention) there shall be inserted “ Subject to subsection (2A) ”; and after that subsection there shall be inserted—
“(2A) Where a person is in another’s lawful custody by virtue of paragraph 22, 34(1) or 35(3) of Schedule 4 to the Police Reform Act 2002, he shall be treated as in police detention.”

Prosecution of Offences Act 1985
In section 3(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 (c. 23) (functions of the Director of Public Prosecutions), after paragraph (b) there shall be inserted—
“(ba) to institute and have the conduct of any criminal proceedings in any case where the proceedings relate to the subject-matter of a report a copy of which has been sent to him under paragraph 23 or 24 of Schedule 3 to the Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) (reports on investigations into conduct of persons serving with the police);”.

Road Traffic Act 1988
(1) Section 103 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) (obtaining licence, or driving, while disqualified) shall be amended as follows.
Subsection (3) shall cease to have effect.
In subsection (4), for “Subsections (1) and (3) above do” there shall be substituted “ Subsection (1) above does ”.
In subsection (5), for “Subsections (1)(b) and (3) above do” there shall be substituted “ Subsection (1)(b) above does ”.
In subsection (6), for “subsections (1) and (3)” there shall be substituted “ subsection (1) ”.
In section 183(1) of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (application to the Crown), in paragraph (c), the words “, except section 103(3)” shall be omitted.

Aviation and Maritime Security Act 1990
In section 22(4) of the Aviation and Maritime Security Act 1990 (c. 31) (persons entitled to exercise certain powers in relation to private dwelling), in paragraph (b)
292	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 7 – Minor and Consequential Amendments
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


(i), for the words from “Police Complaints Authority” to the end of the sub- paragraph there shall be substituted “ Independent Police Complaints Commission under section 26 of the Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30); or ”.

The 1996 Act
In section 8 of the 1996 Act (local policing plans), after subsection (4) there shall be inserted—
“(4A) It shall be the duty of a police authority and of a chief constable, in preparing, issuing or submitting any plan or draft plan under this section, to have regard to any general guidance given by the Secretary of State with respect to local policing plans and the drafts of such plans.
(4B) Before giving any guidance under subsection (4A), the Secretary of State shall consult with—
persons whom he considers to represent the interests of police authorities;
persons whom he considers to represent the interests of chief officers of police; and
such other persons as he thinks fit.”
In section 54 of the 1996 Act (appointment and functions of inspectors of constabulary), before subsection (3) there shall be inserted—
“(2D) It shall be the duty of the chief inspector of constabulary—
to enter into arrangements with the Independent Police Complaints Commission for the purpose of securing cooperation, in the carrying out of their respective functions, between the inspectors of constabulary and that Commission; and
to ensure that inspectors of constabulary provide that Commission with all such assistance and co-operation as may be required by those arrangements or as otherwise appears to the chief inspector to be appropriate for facilitating the carrying out by that Commission of its functions.”
F1057. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F1058. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In section 87 of that Act (guidance concerning disciplinary proceedings), for subsection (2) there shall be substituted—
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 7 – Minor and Consequential Amendments Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
293


“(1A) The Secretary of State may also issue guidance to the Independent Police Complaints Commission concerning the discharge of its functions under any regulations under section 50 in relation to disciplinary proceedings.
Nothing in this section shall authorise the issuing of any guidance about a particular case.
It shall be the duty of every person to whom any guidance under this section is issued to have regard to that guidance in discharging the functions to which the guidance relates.
A failure by a person to whom guidance under this section is issued to have regard to the guidance shall be admissible in evidence in any disciplinary proceedings or on any appeal from a decision taken in any such proceedings.
In this section “disciplinary proceedings” means any proceedings under any regulations under section 50 that are identified as disciplinary proceedings by those regulations.”
(1) In subsection (1) of section 97 of that Act (police officers engaged on service outside their force), after paragraph (a) there shall be inserted—
“(aa) temporary service on which a person is engaged in accordance with arrangements made under paragraph 6(2) of Schedule 2 to the Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) ;”.
F1059. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F1059. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Justices of the Peace Act 1997
F1060. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


The 1997 Act
F1061. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

294	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 8 – Repeals
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998
(1) In subsection (1) of section 27 of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (c. 32) (police officers engaged on service outside the Police Service of Northern Ireland), after paragraph (a) there shall be inserted—
“(aa)  temporary service on which a member of the police force is engaged in accordance with arrangements made under paragraph 6(2) of Schedule 2 to the Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30);”.
F1062. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Freedom of Information Act 2000
In Part 6 of Schedule 1 to the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (c. 36) (public bodies for the purposes of that Act)—
at the appropriate place, there shall be inserted— “The Independent Police Complaints Commission.
;
and”
the words “The Police Complaints Authority.” shall be omitted.

Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001
F1063. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .




SCHEDULE 8	Section 107

Repeals

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) SCHEDULE 8 – Repeals Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
295




Short title and chapter	Extent of repeal
Superannuation Act 1972 (c. 11)	In Schedule 1, in the entries under the
heading “Other bodies”, the words “Police Complaints Authority.”
House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975 (c. 24)
Northern Ireland Assembly Disqualification Act 1975 (c. 25)
In Part 2 of Schedule 1, the words “Police Complaints Authority.”
In Part 2 of Schedule 1, the words “The Police Complaints Authority.”
Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 (c. 27)	In section 96(3)—
in the words before paragraph (a), the words “163”; and
paragraph (c) and the word “or” immediately preceding it.
Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60)
In section 67(10), the word “or” after paragraph (a).
Housing Act 1985 (c. 68)	In section 4(e), the words “the Metropolitan Police Authority”.
Housing Act 1988 (c. 50)	In paragraph 12(2)(g) of Schedule 1, the words “and the Metropolitan Police Authority”.
Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52)	Section 103(3).
In section 183(1)(c), the words “, except section 103(3)”.
Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53)	In section 34(3), the word “and” after
paragraph (a).
Official Secrets Act 1989 (c. 6)	Section 11(1).
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 (c. 33)
Section 54(5).
Police Act 1996 (c. 16)	Section 42(5).
In section 62(1B), the words “6 or”. Section 63(3)(b).
Chapter 1 of Part 4.
Section 86.
In section 105(2), the words from “paragraph 8” to “that paragraph);”.
In Schedule 2, paragraph 25. In Schedule 2A, paragraph 20. Schedule 5.
Employment Rights Act 1996 (c. 18)	In section 200(1), the words “Part IVA,” and
“47B”.
Protection from Harassment Act 1997 (c. 40)  Section 2(3).
296	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
SCHEDULE 8 – Repeals
Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes


Police (Health and Safety) Act 1997 (c. 42)	F1064
. . .
Police Act 1997 (c. 50)	Section 6(3).
In section 9, in subsection (2)(b), the words from “to which” to “applies”.
Section 9A(2). Section 39(3). Section 42(6)(a).
In section 55, in subsection (2)(b), the words from “to which” to “applies”.
Section 55A(2).
Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 (c. 23)	Section 13.
Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (c. 32)	In Schedule 4, sub-paragraphs (2) to (4) of
paragraph 22, and sub-paragraph (9) of that paragraph, the words “and 55(3)(c)”.
Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (c. 37)	In section 1—
the words after paragraph (b) of subsection (1); and
subsection (2).
In section 5(1), the word “and” at the end of paragraph (a).
Section 32(2).
Section 84(2).
Football (Offences and Disorder) Act 1999 (c. 21)
Section 1(2)(f). Section 8(3) and (4).
Local Government Act 1999 (c. 27)	Section 24(3).
Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29)	In Schedule 27, paragraphs 51, 59, 90 and 97
to 99.
Police (Northern Ireland) Act 2000 (c. 32)	In Schedule 6, paragraph 20(4). Freedom of Information Act 2000 (c. 36)	In Part 6 of Schedule 1, the words “The
Police Complaints Authority”.
Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 (c. 37)
Criminal Justice and Court Services Act 2000 (c. 43)
In Schedule 12, paragraph 13.

In Schedule 7, in paragraph 151, the words “5(2)(b)”.
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)	Section 12(6).
Section 46(6).
Section 71.
Section 80(2).
Section 122(3).
Section 123(3). Section 125(4)(b).
In Schedule 6, paragraph 74.
Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001 Section 82(1). (c. 24)	Section 94(3).

Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30) SCHEDULE 8 – Repeals Document Generated: 2025-03-18
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
Changes to legislation: Police Reform Act 2002 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 March 2025. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
297



298	Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)
Document Generated: 2025-03-18






Home  Crime, justice and the law  Your rights and legal support


Definition of disability under the Equality Act 2010



You’re disabled under the Equality Act 2010 if you have a physical or mental
impairment that has a ‘substantial’ and ‘long-term’ negative eﬀect on your ability to do normal daily activities.

The Equality Act 2010 does not apply to Northern Ireland.


What ‘substantial’ and ‘long-term’ mean
  ‘substantial’ is more than minor or trivial, for example it takes much longer than it usually would to complete a daily task like getting dressed
  ‘long-term’ means 12 months or more, for example a breathing condition that develops as a result of a lung infection
There are special rules about recurring or fluctuating conditions, for example arthritis.

Progressive conditions
A progressive condition is one that gets worse over time. People with progressive conditions can be classed as disabled.
However, you automatically meet the disability definition under the Equality Act 2010 from the day you’re diagnosed with HIV infection, cancer or multiple sclerosis.

What is not counted as a disability
There’s g uidance on conditions that are not covered by the disability definition, for example addiction to non–prescribed drugs or alcohol.
Related content
Disability rights
Reasonable adjustments for workers with disabilities or health conditions
Discrimination: your rights
Medical conditions, disabilities and driving Financial help if you're disabled



Explore the topic
Your rights and legal support
Disability rights and the Equality Act 2010

Elsewhere on the web
The Equality Act 2010















24/03/2025  Definitions
https://www.college.police.uk/app/civil-emergencies/disaster-victim-identification/definitions Page



Definitions


This page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published
23 October 2013 Updated
6 August 2018
Written by College of Policing Disaster victim identification 4 mins read

Mass fatality incident
Following an emergency or major incident, there may be a large number of fatalities. Due to the scale of the situation and demands on the emergency services, it may not be practical or appropriate to follow normal arrangements. It can therefore be proportionate and necessary to invoke the DVI process.
Incidents may be categorised as follows:

Open incidents
Open incidents are where the number and details of the deceased are not known at the time when the incident is declared, and this information cannot be easily ascertained. During these incidents, there is likely to be early high demand for information from family and friends reporting people missing.

Closed incidents
Closed incidents are where the provisional number and details of the deceased can be easily obtained. Ante Mortem evidence can be collected at an early stage and the involvement of other people can be provisionally discounted.

Major incident
A major incident is an event or situation, with a range of serious consequences, which requires special arrangements to be implemented by one or more emergency responder agencies.
Critical incident
A critical incident is any incident where the effectiveness of the police response is likely to have a significant impact on the confidence of the victim, their family and/or the community.

Declaring a mass fatality incident
National planning for a mass fatality response is coordinated centrally by the Fire Resilience and Major Events (FRaME) part of the Home Office.
The decision to declare a mass fatality incident lies jointly with HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal and the Gold Commander. Consult the chief executive of relevant local authorities when reaching a decision and form a mass fatality coordination group (MFCG) as soon as the decision is made to declare a mass fatality incident.
Where police respond to a mass fatality incident, the Gold Commander assumes overall command and has ultimate responsibility and accountability for the police response. This includes attending and possibly chair a strategic coordination group (SCG), if established, or considering the need to request that an SCG is set up.
The decision to form an mass fatality coordination group (MFCG) may be influenced by a number of factors:  the number of deceased (actual or potential)
 whether the nature of the incident is likely to make identifying the deceased difficult
 whether any, or many, of the deceased are in difficult to access locations  whether there are fragmented human remains
 whether the incident was as a result of terrorist or criminal activity
 if any hazards are present at the scene – for example, asbestos, chemicals or radiological debris – that need to be taken into account before recovering the deceased, property or evidence
 whether suitable and sustainable mortuary capacity is available for as long as is likely to be required

Deceased persons
This refers to a body that is readily identifiable as a deceased human being and is still intact. If a limb is severed, even if it is lying alongside a deceased torso missing a limb, it is to be retrieved as separate ‘human remains’.

Human remains
This refers to any fragments or parts that have come from a human body. Human remains can range from limbs to small fragments.

Legal control and care of the body
Once HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal jurisdiction is engaged, the legal control and care of the body passes to HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal to allow them to carry out their statutory investigative duties. As soon as this is over, usually following any Post Mortem examination and formal identification process, the body is released back to the next of kin or those entitled to receive it.
Those involved with grieving families must deal with them in a sensitive manner and be aware of the terminology that they use. For instance, they must never describe the body of their loved one as ‘belonging to HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal’.
See J.Jones ‘The patronising disposition of unaccountable power’ A report to ensure the pain and suffering of the Hillsborough families is not repeated. London: TSO.
The functions and responsibilities of HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal, along with any legal language, should be carefully explained to families.
Back to Disaster victim identification overview

Tags

Civil emergencies
Serious Crime Bill
Delegated Powers – Supplementary Memorandum by the Home Office

The Government has tabled further amendments to the Serious Crime Bill for Commons Report stage; these include two new delegated powers. This supplementary memorandum explains why the powers have been taken and the reason for the procedure selected.

New clause “Duty to notify police of female genital mutilation”: Power to make regulations adding to, removing from or otherwise altering the descriptions of “regulated profession”
Power conferred on:	The Secretary of State
Power exercisable by:	Regulations made by statutory instrument Parliamentary procedure:	Affirmative
New clause “Duty to notify police of female genital mutilation” amends the Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003 (the FGM Act) to place a duty on a person working in a “regulated profession” to notify the police when, in the course of their work, they discover that an act of female genital mutilation appears to have been carried out on a girl who is aged under 18. By virtue of subsection (2)(a) of the new clause, the duty will apply to healthcare professionals, teachers and social care workers in Wales on the basis that this range of professionals are most likely to acquire the required direct knowledge that a child has been subjected to FGM either as a result of a visual confirmation or as a result of the victim disclosing to them that she has been subjected to FGM. However, subsection (8) of the new clause confers on the Secretary of State a power to add to, remove from or otherwise alter, the descriptions of “regulated profession” to whom the duty applies.
The regulation-making power includes a power to make consequential, transitional, transitory or saving provision (subsection (9)(b)). In particular, it may be necessary to amend, add to or remove definitions in subsections (11) and (12) of the new clause.

This regulation-making power would afford the flexibility to extend the categories of professionals to whom the duty applies if, in the light of experience, it is evident that other professionals would have the requisite knowledge as a result of victims making disclosures to them, for example, early years professionals. Such a power is considered appropriate as Parliament would have approved the principle of the mandatory reporting duty and its application to persons working in specified categories of “regulated professions”. The power can only be used to add to, remove from or otherwise alter the descriptions of regulated professions to which the duty is to apply and could not be used to extend (or narrow) the scope of the reporting duty, for example so that it applied in respect of victims over 18 or to
suspected victims in any age group. The power to extend the categories of regulated professionals to whom the duty is applied is therefore narrowly drawn, albeit that the power could, in principle, be used to apply the duty to any class of person operating in a professional capacity and subject to some level of regulation (for example, youth workers).

By virtue of subsection (10) of the new clause, the regulation-making power is subject to the affirmative procedure. This is considered appropriate given the ‘Henry VIII’ nature of the power. It also recognises that in adding the new clause to the Bill Parliament will have agreed a particular set of regulated professions to whom the duty should apply and will ensure that both Houses have the opportunity to consider and approve any changes to the range of regulated professionals before such changes can take effect.

New clause “Guidance about female genital mutilation”: Power to issue guidance in relation to the Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003

Power conferred on:	Secretary of State

Power exercisable by:	Statutory Guidance

Parliamentary procedure	None
The FGM Act already provides for offences in relation to FGM. Clauses 69 to 72 of the Bill make a number of amendments to the FGM Act to further strengthen the criminal and civil law to tackle FGM. These provisions extend the extra-territorial reach of the offences in the FGM Act so that they apply to offences involving habitual (as well as permanent) UK residents; introduce a new offence of failing to protect a girl at risk of FGM, grant lifelong anonymity to victims, and provide for a civil order (the FGM protection order) to protect potential victims. And, as indicated above, new clause “Duty to notify police of female genital mutilation“ further amends the FGM Act to place a duty on specified regulated professionals to notify the police when, in the course of their work, they discover that an act of FGM appears to have been carried out on a girl who is aged under 18. To complement these provisions, new clause “Guidance about female genital mutilation” enables the Secretary of State to issue guidance about any of the provisions in the FGM Act, as amended, or other matters relating to FGM. In preparing the guidance, the Secretary of State is under a duty to consult the Welsh Ministers so far as the guidance is to a body exercising devolved Welsh functions, and such other persons as she considers appropriate. Persons exercising public functions to whom the guidance is given will be under a duty to have regard to the guidance when exercising such functions.
The intention is to place relevant aspects of the existing multi-agency practice guidelines on FGM1, updated to reflect the provisions in the Bill, on a

1 Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/380125/MultiAg encyPracticeGuidelinesNov14.pdf
statutory footing. That guidance provides information on identifying when a girl or young women may be at risk of FGM and responding appropriately to protect them, identifying when a girl or young women has been subjected to FGM and responding appropriately to support them, and measures that can be implemented to prevent the practice of FGM. The revised guidance would detail the changes to the FGM Act and, in particular, provide information on applying for FGM protection orders and complying with the statutory duty to report known cases of FGM against girls and young women under 18. Placing the existing guidance on a statutory footing will help promote awareness amongst public authorities of the strategies and powers available to them to tackle FGM.

Any guidance issued under the new clause will not be subject to any parliamentary scrutiny, on the grounds that it will provide practical advice on the application of the legislative provisions and will be worked up in consultation with all interested stakeholders and practitioners. The guidance will not conflict with, or alter the scope of, the criminal offences or civil powers in the FGM Act, as amended. Moreover, whilst a person exercising public functions will be required to have regard to the guidance when exercising those functions, the guidance will not be binding to the extent that this requirement falls short of a duty to follow the guidance. The approach taken in the new clause is consistent with other legislative provisions providing for statutory guidance, in particular section 63Q of the Family Law Act 1996 in relation to forced marriage.


Home Office
12 February 2015
24/03/2025  Detention and custody - Guidance overview
https://www.college.police.uk/guidance/detention-and-custody/detention-and-custody-guidance-overview Page



Detention and custody - Guidance overview


This page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published
23 October 2013 Detention and custody
The Detention and Custody Authorised Professional Practice module has been developed through the consolidation of pre-existing guidance*, current legislation and consensus of expert opinion. Where the guidance draws on any empirical evidence it is explicitly referenced in the text.
*Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) (2012) Guidance on the Safer Detention and Handling of Persons in Police Custody (second edition). This document was formally decommissioned on 22 October 2012.

Tags

Detention and custody
24/03/2025  Detention and custody risk assessment
https://www.college.police.uk/app/detention-and-custody/detention-and-custody-risk-assessment Page



Detention and custody risk assessment


This page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published
23 October 2013 Updated
9 October 2024
Written by College of Policing Detention and custody
27 mins read
When an officer makes an arrest, they are personally responsible for the risk assessment and welfare of the detained person. This responsibility continues until the suspect is handed over to the custody officer for a decision regarding detention.
Risk assessment means assessing the risk and potential risk that each detainee presents to themselves, staff, other detainees and other people coming into the custody suite. The dynamic nature of the incident and the process of arrest may have a bearing on the assessment which, by its very nature, is likely to be continuous and needs to respond to changing situational requirements. It may be impractical for this assessment to be written, but it must be documented at the earliest opportunity.
Officers must be aware that they have a continuing responsibility and duty of care to the detained person and must assess their environment and the impact of their actions.

Assessment and monitoring
Assessment must be ongoing and must be reviewed throughout the period of detention.
The risk that a detainee may pose to themselves and others may alter when a detainee is charged, refused bail or released on bail. The custody officer must, therefore, review the risk assessment at these stages and prior to release or transfer.
Escalation and de-escalation of the level of observation appropriate for each detainee (for example, level 1 general observation up to level 4 close proximity) must be based on a current risk assessment that has been appropriately and thoroughly reviewed. Officers must record all risk assessments in the custody record.
Risk assessment should be as objective as possible and officers should never make assumptions when assessing risk. Police custody is stressful for most detainees and for some it is particularly traumatic. Simply being placed in a police cell may raise the category of risk immediately for a detainee.

Recording information
Officers and staff must record all information regarding risks to the detainee in the custody record. The custody officer must be informed of identified risks or changing circumstances that may lead to additional risk and ensure that those risks are documented and managed.

Content of risk assessments

Officers and staff must record identified risks and control measures in the custody record, as covered by the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) Code C, paragraph 3.8.
Paragraph 3.8A requires officers to comply with the principles of the Data Protection Act 1998. However, they should not withhold information from any person acting on the detainee’s behalf, for example an appropriate adult, solicitor or interpreter, if to do so might put that person at risk.
Advice is available for distribution to third parties required to enter the custody area. See Home Office (034/2007) Safety of Solicitors and Accredited and Probationary Representatives Working in Custody Suites at Police Stations and, where persons are arrested under section 41 of the Terrorism Act 2000, APP Counter terrorism – OFFICIAL SENSITIVE (this link is only available via College Learn).

Responsibility for risk management
The arresting or escorting officer should monitor the welfare of the detainee that they are responsible for until such time as they bring them before the custody officer. The custody officer is responsible for documenting and recording the risk assessment for every detainee in the custody record, in accordance with paragraphs 3.6 to 3.10 of PACE Code C.
The custody officer must ensure that all those responsible for the detainee’s custody are briefed about the risks. They should ensure their responses to risk are dynamic, reviewed and communicated to all people involved in the care of the detainee, including relevant healthcare staff.
The arresting or escorting officer should make checks with any immediately available sources of information relevant to the welfare of the arrested person. This may include:
 the detainee
 the detainee’s friends or relatives  witnesses
 all staff involved in the person’s arrest and detention
 Police National Computer, Police National Database and other local IT systems  healthcare professionals (HCPs), including GPs
 legal representatives  an appropriate adult  other detainees
 other relevant bodies and organisations, eg, youth offending team
Checklist: assessing detainees

Custody officers must ensure that the detainee is asked the following questions.
 Is this your first time in police custody?  How are you feeling in yourself now?
 Do you have any illness or injury?
 Are you experiencing any mental ill health or depression?
 Would you like to speak to the doctor/nurse/paramedic (as appropriate)?  Have you seen a doctor or been to a hospital for this illness or injury?
 Are you taking or supposed to be taking any tablets or medication? If yes, what are they and what are they for?
 Are you in contact with any medical or support service? If yes, what is the name of your contact or support worker there?
 Do you have a card that tells you who to contact in a crisis?
 Have you ever tried to harm yourself? If yes, how often, how long ago, how did you harm yourself, have you sought help?
If the detainee answers yes to any of the above, they should be asked the following.
 What is the name of your GP and GP’s surgery?
 Do you have a family member who is aware of your health problems?  Is there anything I can do to help?
When detainees are questioned they should, as far as possible, be asked probing, open questions in a manner that encourages and elicits information.
There is no standard risk assessment model for the British police service but risk assessment should be guided by the National Decision Model (NDM).


Information sources
A person escort record form (PER form) is used to ensure that all staff transporting and receiving detainees are provided with all the information they need. This includes details of any risks or vulnerabilities that the detainee may present. Forces must ensure that custody officers are trained and competent in completing the PER form.
Forces should establish procedures to audit and assess completed forms. For further information, see APP on Information management.
Police National Computer (PNC)
The PNC should be considered the primary reference for recording and accessing risk information. Custody staff should have direct access to the PNC at all times.
Where no information is available, custody officers and/or investigating officers should perform checks with other forces using the police national database (PND) to check for any information that may influence the care
plan for a detainee in custody at this time. This is particularly relevant for detainees who reside outside of that force area.

Violent offender and sex offender register
Custody officers should be aware of ViSOR (VS), which may hold relevant information regarding detainees who present a high risk. Access is restricted to those with licenses, usually in public protection units.
A detainee with a ViSOR entry should have a corresponding VS marker on their PNC record. If this flag is present, custody staff should contact the public protection unit or other staff with ViSOR access for further information. They should bring any relevant information to the attention of healthcare staff.

Foreign nationals
Forces may also obtain information from the Home Office Immigration Enforcement Command and Control Unit in the case of foreign nationals. This would also assist in identifying risk.

Person escort record form
The PER form provides staff transporting and receiving detainees with all necessary information. This includes any risks or vulnerabilities that the person may present.
Officers must complete a PER form whenever a detainee is escorted from a police station to another location. This includes movement or transfer between separate custody suites (police stations) and other custody accommodation (courts, prisons and immigration detention facilities) and from custody to hospital. If the prisoner escort and custody services (PECS) contractor are transporting the detainee, officers must use the digital PER (dPER).
Officers must complete the dPER prior to handover to PECS. There are four main sections which require input and supporting narrative: the sections on risk, offence, health and property. Where there is nil to add in a section this should be clearly stated for example, ‘no health issues or medication needs identified’. No sections should be left blank.
Identifying a risk of suicide or self-harm is one of the prime purposes of the form. Staff must indicate both a current risk and any known past risks.

PER/dPER form requirements

Where the detainee is to be transferred from a police station, the responsibility for the PER/dPER form lies with the first custody officer who becomes aware of the transfer.
The form may be completed by a trained and competent custody detention officer, but responsibility for the form content and sign-off remains with the custody officer. This reduces the risk of important information being lost during any subsequent handovers between custody officers.
It is the responsibility of the custody officer who transfers the detainee from the police station to the escort to ensure that the PER/dPER is up to date and contains details of any additional post-charge or other care requirements.
Custody officers must provide supporting information when ticking a warning marker box.
Officers should attach copies of risk assessment forms and medical examination records that are not confidential to the PER/dPER. They should also enter relevant information onto the PER/dPER in case any of the attached information is lost. Confidential medical information must be attached in a sealed envelope. Information relating to self-harm or suicide cannot be deemed confidential and should always be on the PER/dPER form.
The PECS electronic booking system is a standalone system and does not interface with any other police system. Therefore officers must input any new or existing information about a detainee onto the dPER. This is especially important in relation to risk information and warning markers.
Staff should add a direct contact telephone number for the custody suite to the PER/dPER so that escort, court, probation or prison staff can make prompt contact with the custody officer should they need to clarify any information.
The escorting staff are responsible for maintaining a record of the detainee’s movements and any occurrences during transit.

Managing an ‘at-risk’ detainee from a prison or young offender institution

While the detainee is in police custody, officers and staff should:
 maintain the assessment, care in custody and teamwork (ACCT) plan (this can provide important information for staff at the prison/young offender institution (YOI) that the detainee is returned to)
 document relevant conversations, observations, significant events, changes in mood, behaviour or circumstances on the PER/dPER form and on the ongoing record
The minimum frequency suggested by the prison/YOI for making such records is indicated in the ‘required frequency of conversations and observations’ box on the front cover. Officers and staff should continue to follow policies for receiving and caring for an at-risk detainee.
They should remember to:  talk to the detainee
 send the ACCT plan with the escort staff to the prison/YOI that the detainee is being returned to, and note
this on the PER/dPER form
 keep a copy of the ACCT plan with the custody record

Receiving an at-risk detainee

There are occasions when the police take people into custody who are already serving a prison sentence. They could be on a care or support plan, having been identified as being at risk of suicide or self-harm. Some examples are when a prisoner is:
 lodged overnight in police cells because of the distance of the court from a prison, and they are due back in court the following morning
 released to police custody (sometimes referred to as a police presentation) because of outstanding elements of an investigation or new charges
 arrested on release from prison (known as a re-arrest or gate arrest)
It is, therefore, possible that police custody staff have an at-risk prisoner temporarily in their custody, but have no information on how to maintain the care/support plan that is already in place for them. To assist police custody staff in these circumstances, the following information details the current systems used in prisons and YOIs and the signals that police custody staff need to look for.

At-risk status

When taking over responsibility for prisoners, officers and staff should always make an immediate check for at- risk status.
All public and private prisons use the ACCT system to identify and care for prisoners thought to be at risk of suicide or self-harm. It is an assessment and care planning tool.
There are two reasons for providing the police with the ACCT plan:
 custody staff are made aware of the risk and of what can be done to support the detainee and keep them safe
 when the detainee is returned, staff at the prison/YOI have information about any important events that occurred while in police custody, thereby aiding them to continue to care for the detainee
If the ACCT plan is not returned to the prison/YOI, the second aspect is lost.

ACCT plan

Officers and staff should check the information on both the front and inside front cover of the ACCT plan if the detainee is on an open ACCT plan. In particular, they should look at the:
 ‘required frequency of conversations and observations’ box on the front cover
 triggers/warning signs box on the inside front cover as this may contain particular behaviours or events to be aware of
 ‘concern and keep safe form’ (page three of the ACCT form) to learn why the ACCT plan was opened
Officers and staff should look at the current CAREMAP (pages 13 and 14 of the form) to see what action is required to keep the detainee safe.
Occasionally, where the ACCT plan has only just been opened, there may not be anything written on the CAREMAP. In this case, staff should look at the immediate action plan (page four of the form) to see what action to take.
They should also look at the Ongoing Record (pages 21 and 22 of the form) to see what has recently happened.
They should check the PER/dPER for any further information and, if anything is unclear, ask the staff handing over the detainee for more information.

Condition of the detainee
Officers should seek advice from an appropriate HCP if they have concern that a detainee has an injury, medical condition or a mental illness, appears to be experiencing mental ill health or otherwise requires medical attention. This does not apply to minor injuries or ailments, but officers should still note those in the custody
record. If unsure of the nature of a condition, officers should call an HCP. See PACE Code C paragraph 9.5 and Notes for Guidance, Note 9C.
The need for medical attention may reoccur following earlier medical assessment if the detainee’s condition subsequently deteriorates.
Wherever possible, officers must ask detainees about any current or recent mental health or medical conditions. They should also ask detainees about any medication they are currently taking. Items in a detainee’s possession should also be checked as they may indicate a medical condition, for example insulin syringes, inhalers or other medication. The presence of a health condition and its severity affects decisions about how and where a person should be treated.
For further information, see Independent Office for Police Conduct: Learning the Lessons.

Vulnerable detainees
An appropriate HCP may provide advice to a custody officer as to the needs and requirements of any suspect who they believe may be vulnerable. The decision to request an appropriate adult is, though, for the custody officer.

‘Do not resuscitate’ (DNR) orders (otherwise known as 'Do not attempt resuscitation (DNAR) or 'Do not attempt cardio-pulmonary resuscitation (DNACPR))
DNACPRs (previously known as DNRs or DNARs) may be presented by people with terminal illnesses to police and custody officers. A custody officer should carefully consider the necessity to detain someone in these circumstances and in all cases they should seek the advice of a medical practitioner. The prevailing responsibility of the police officers and staff is to keep the detainee alive and safe while in custody. A DNACPR only applies to the provision of CPR. If there is any doubt as to the existence or validity of a DNACPR then CPR should be administered.
For further information, see Faculty of Forensic and Legal Medicine (FFLM) Management of DNR/DNAR/DNACPR decisions in police custody.

Detainees requiring urgent medical attention
Such detainees should not be taken to a police station. Detainees suspected of swallowing unknown quantities of drugs should be taken to hospital immediately.
Detailed guidance on National Police Chiefs’ Council (NPCC) approved first-aid procedures and practices in response to a wide range of medical conditions can be found in the ACPO Police First Aid Learning Programme (available on College Learn to registered users only).
The NPIA (2011) Template Protocol for the Management of Detainees who Require Hospital Treatment provides forces with a template for drawing up agreements with local healthcare providers.

Symptoms or behaviours
If a detainee exhibits any of the following symptoms or behaviours, the officer responsible for the care of the detainee should consider immediate transfer of the detainee to hospital. As a minimum the detainee should be
examined by an HCP.
These include:
 unconsciousness or lack of full consciousness (for example, problems keeping their eyes open)  any confusion (not knowing where they are, getting things muddled up)
 any apparent drowsiness or sleepiness which goes on for more than one hour when the detainee would normally be wide awake
 difficulty waking
 any problems understanding or speaking  any loss of balance or problems walking
 any weakness in one or more arms or legs  any problems with vision
 very painful headache that does not go away  any vomiting (unexplained)
 any fits (collapsing or losing consciousness suddenly)  clear fluid coming out of their ear or nose
 bleeding from one or both ears
 new deafness in one or both ears  abnormal breathing
 chest pain

Risk of suicide and self-harm
Custody officers need to be aware of the enhanced risk of suicide and self-harm during periods of detention. Detainees who are deemed to be a high risk of suicide or self-harm must be seen by an HCP and kept under close proximity supervision. This allows officers and staff to engage with the detainee and intervene if required.
In all cases, the HCP should provide a care plan that will specifically identify their assessment of the risk and any mitigating measures in all cases of suicidal ideation and self-harm. If the person has disclosed to them issues of self-harm or suicide, these will be mentioned in the care plan.
This care plan should also give the custody officer adequate information on which to base an exit risk assessment from custody and should be included in any PER documentation.
Factors which may indicate an increased risk include:
 mental ill health including depression, personality disorder, anorexia and schizophrenia  it is the first time the person has been arrested and detained
 drug, alcohol or substance abuse or withdrawal
 breakdown of social support and isolation (military service veterans, students, prisoners, homeless people, immigrants, older people and refugees are at particular risk)
 being unemployed
 previous episodes of deliberate self-harm, especially if occurring in a custodial environment
 people in certain professions who have easy access to a means of suicide, for example poisons, drugs or guns, have higher rates of suicide than the general population
 chronic disabling pain or illness
 family history of suicide and/or mental ill health
 recent loss such as bereavement, divorce, separation, redundancy
 adverse childhood experiences
 people arrested in relation to violent or sexual offences, especially where they involve children, a close friend or family
Young people may be more at risk of suicide or self-harm when the following factors are present:
 impaired parent-child relationships (including poor family communication styles and extremes of high and low parental expectations and control)
 parental separation or divorce
 mental ill health in parents (for example depression)
 history of parental substance use disorders and antisocial behaviour

Self-harm
Increased vulnerability to self-harm may arise:  after interview
 on being charged with an offence  after arrest for further offences
 following a visit by family, friends or others who have taken an interest in their welfare  after refusal of bail
 while on bail
For further information, see NICE (2024) Guidance on self-harm and immediate treatment guidelines.

Potentially violent individuals
Chief officers must establish local protocols with social services, local authorities and health trusts for dealing with potentially violent individuals, in line with local service availability.
HCPs may refuse to transport or care for an individual who is violent. Forces and healthcare agencies should agree protocols to establish respective responsibilities for dealing with such occurrences.
For further information, see the following.
 Home Office Circular (17/2004) General principles to inform local protocols between the police and health services on handling potentially violent individuals
 NICE Guideline NG10 (2015) Violence and aggression: short-term management in mental health, health and community settings

Acute behavioural disturbance
People who are violent and agitated may have an underlying medical reason for their behaviour. If there is any suspicion that the violence stems from a medical condition, the person must be treated as a medical emergency. Whenever possible, the person should be contained rather than restrained until medical assistance can be obtained.
The following medical conditions may cause violent, aggressive or changing behaviour and confusion:  diabetes
 head injury  epilepsy
 stroke
 infections
 angina and other heart problems  dehydration (and salt imbalance)  sickle-cell anaemia
 acute mental illness such as paranoia, hearing voices
 neurological diseases such as dementia and brain injury  learning difficulties
There is an increased risk that symptoms of serious illness or injury may go unnoticed where an individual is well known or familiar to police officers and staff. In particular, when dealing with regular detainees who are known substance abusers and/or known to experience mental illness, it should not be assumed that physical or behavioural signs are due to their being under the influence of a substance/mental illness. They may also be caused by substance withdrawal or other medical reasons, any of which can have serious implications for detainee welfare.
The symptoms of acute behavioural disturbance (ABD) include:
 a state of high mental and physiological arousal – perceiving others as frightening and dangerous, ‘fight or flight’ reaction
 breathing problems  agitation
 high body temperature and/or sweating – so may try to undress  violence, aggression and hostility
 insensitivity to pain and incapacitant sprays For further information, see the following.
 FFLM guidance on managing acute behavioural disturbance
 The Royal College of Emergency Medicine best practice guideline for the management of Acute Behavioural Disturbance May 2024

Restraining a person with ABD

People who appear to have this condition should be restrained only in an emergency. They must be taken by ambulance to hospital as soon as the condition is suspected. If no ambulance is immediately available, the person should be transported to hospital in a suitable police vehicle.
It is important that people experiencing ABD have their physical health needs assessed prior to any further mental health assessment.

Pre-existing medical conditions
These might include diabetes, epilepsy, asthma and heart conditions such as angina. Custody officers should consider all of these as part of the booking-in assessment process. On each occasion, they should seek individual advice from an HCP. This includes considering whether detainees should be left in possession of medication, such as inhalers. Each case should be considered on individual merits in line with local protocols, medical
opinion and the risk posed to the individual.

Claustrophobia
This is the extreme or irrational fear of confined places and can lead to intense anxiety accompanied by:  panic attacks
 shaking
 rapid heartbeat
 intense sweating
 difficulty breathing  feeling sick (nausea)  dizziness
 chest pain
In extreme cases, symptoms may be accompanied by the fear of:  losing control
 fainting  dying
Dealing with claustrophobia is difficult in the custody environment. There are generally no suitable areas in a custody suite to keep detainees who suffer from claustrophobia. Each detainee must be risk assessed and then a decision made on where they should be detained. It may be necessary to:
 keep them in a holding cell visible to the custody officer from the main desk, or
 place them in a cell on constant observation (level 3) or within close proximity (level 4), with a member of staff at the open door. See detainee care.

Dealing with claustrophobia

Staff should:
 stay calm
 reassure the detainee
 take them to a cool, quiet place
 encourage them to breathe more slowly  stay with them until they have recovered  call an HCP
 be aware that opening a cell hatch to alleviate any symptoms presents the risk of a ligature point

Head injuries
Detainees who have suffered a head injury should be immediately transported to hospital for medical assessment and monitoring.
For the purpose of this APP, head injury is defined as any trauma (external force) to the head, other than superficial injuries to the face.
Traumatic brain injury may be defined as a traumatically induced structural injury and/or physiological disruption of brain function as a result of an external force. It may be indicated by new onset or worsening of at least one of the following clinical signs, immediately following the event:
 any period of loss of or a decreased level of consciousness
 any loss of memory for events immediately before or after the injury
 any alteration in mental state at the time of the injury (confusion, disorientation, slowed thinking)
 neurological deficits (weakness, loss of balance, change in vision, praxis, paresis/plegia, sensory loss, aphasia) that may or may not be a transient intracranial lesion
A blow to the head can result in bruising or bleeding inside the skull or inside the brain. Not all head injuries are visible and complications may occur at any time after the event. Staff must be aware of the risks associated with head injuries, particularly when dealing with detainees who may have been involved in a fight or a road traffic collision.
Staff should also be aware that symptoms of a serious injury to the head can display as the common signs of drunkenness (for example slurred speech, drowsiness and vomiting).
A head injury may result in a rapid deterioration in the health of the detainee.

Responsibilities of custody officers

Custody officers and staff should be guided by the FFLM (2023) Head injury warning: Advice to custody officers, gaolers and detention officers when dealing with a detainee who is exhibiting symptoms of a head injury. This may be necessary even where there is no obvious sign of injury, or when/if the detainee denies that any injury has occurred.

Infectious and communicable diseases
Officers should seek advice from an HCP whenever a detainee is known or suspected to have an infection or communicable disease. Some detainees give information readily about a disease or infection, others do not. Information may be available on the PNC, the PND or local force systems. There may be visible signs, such as discolouration of the skin or weeping sores. Officers should record information on the risk assessment and the detainee’s medical forms. If information is written on a whiteboard, it should not be visible to anyone other than custody staff.
All people who appear to have suffered a human bite should be taken to Accident and Emergency.

Procedures needed to manage potential risk

Forces must have procedures to manage the potential risk of communicable diseases. PACE Code C paragraph
9.7 allows a detainee and their property to be kept in isolation at the discretion of the custody officer until medical directions have been obtained.
For further information, see FFLM (2022) Managing blood-borne virus exposures in custody

Cleaning cells
Every cell must be adequately cleaned between detainees, following NHS cleaning standards, to prevent the spread of infection and/or communicable disease. In the event of any significant infection risk such as bleeding, body fluids or concern identified by the HCP, the cell may need to be taken out of use and deep cleaning arranged.
Relevant information about communicable diseases must be included on the detainee’s PER form.

Common communicable diseases

For up-to-date information on infectious diseases, see NHS Choices (or NHS Direct Wales) and Public Health England.

Release from custody
When making the decision to release or transfer a detainee, it is essential that custody officers are familiar with the NDM and can carry out and justify their decision making.
The custody officer should complete a pre-release risk assessment. They should not leave this until the point of release. Instead, it should be an ongoing process throughout detention and be concluded at the point of release. Custody officers should refer to all existing risk assessment information for the detainee. They should also personally speak to all detainees prior to release and consider the risk of exploitation and/or victimisation of the detainee. The custody officer then needs to decide what action, if any, is appropriate to support vulnerable detainees upon release.
In some circumstances it may be appropriate to simply offer an individual appropriate advice and options to support their welfare on release. The options open to the police for onward referral of a detainee vary according to local provision of services in:
 social care  healthcare
 hostels/refuges
 charity support organisations (for example the Royal British Legion)  other agencies
The force should ensure custody officers have access to available referral agencies and written material which may help a detainee self-refer to agencies if they choose to do so at a later point.
It is the responsibility of force custody leads to make strategic links with partners to ensure that appropriate local service options are available.
The custody officer should also ensure that any risk posed by the detainee to other persons has been considered as part of the pre-release process, and, when appropriate, bail conditions are put in place to address any risk identified. They should be mindful of the need to ensure that affected individuals are notified prior to release so that mitigating measures can be put in place where required. This includes liaising with any other officer responsible for a related risk assessment. In cases where a detainee is bailed in one force but transferred to the jurisdiction of another police force, clear lines of communication need to be established to ensure that the victim can be notified when the detainee is finally released. For full information on the Code of Practice for Victims of Crime, see keeping the victim informed.
There is no requirement to ask every detainee if they intend to self-harm upon release. However, custody officers should be aware that there is no evidence that asking a person about thoughts of suicide increases the risk of this occurring.
It is important that victims and suspects are kept updated regarding the progress of any criminal investigation, including where a person has been released under investigation or bailed. It is the responsibility of the investigating officer to keep relevant parties updated and notified. This includes if no further action is to be taken against the suspect. See NPCC Operational Guidance for Pre-Charge Bail and Released under Investigation.

Risk of self-harm and suicide after release
There are occasions when it becomes apparent through pre-release risk assessment that a detainee is extremely vulnerable and that there is a real and credible risk to that individual on release (including the risk of suicide). This risk may not always be apparent during the early stages of detention, leaving the custody officer very little time to make an urgent referral.
An adult detainee charged with an offence can be refused bail and kept in custody under section 38(1)(a)(vi) of PACE if the custody officer has reasonable grounds to believe detention is necessary for his/her own protection. Other grounds for keeping a person in custody may also apply.
The custody officer has no explicit powers to detain a high-risk detainee before/without charge once their detention can no longer be authorised, in accordance with Part 4 of PACE or any other lawful power. They may consider using section 135 or 136 of the Mental Health Act 1983 (if the legislative criteria is met at point of release). Where section 136 is applied in the case of children, this relates specifically to the powers of a police protection order, while section 136A specifies that children may not be taken or kept in police stations as a place of safety. Section 43 of The Children Act 1989 also confers emergency police protection powers to remove or keep children in safe accommodation.
The custody officer responsible for the duty of care for that detainee has to make a decision on the best course of action for the detainee on release and, under exceptional circumstances, the safest course of action to protect the life of that individual.
Custody officers should take into consideration the duty of a police officer to preserve life. Under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998, the police service is prohibited from acting in a manner incompatible with the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). One of the obligations under the ECHR is to take feasible operational steps (within the lawful power of the officer) to avert any real or immediate risk of death of which the officer is aware or should have been aware. As such, it may be appropriate in some circumstances to extend the detention period of the detainee for a minimal and limited period.
Similarly, a person may be detained if they are in need of mental health assessment and thus detention in custody after the criminal matter has been dealt with. The relevant case law includes:
 Webley v St George's Hospital NHS Trust & MPS [2014] EWHC 299 (QB)  MS v UK (2012) 55 EHRR 23
The reasons for not releasing someone are:
 police have a common law duty of care to the detainee  police have a duty to release into a safe environment
Forces should have clear escalation procedures up to the rank of superintendent where a custody officer has retained a person beyond the expiry of the provisions of PACE.
A person may also be kept for a minimal and limited period to allow for the transfer of care to other appropriate care services, for example transfer into social services or local hospital care facilities.
It is unlikely that a referral will be legally permitted without the explicit consent of the detainee unless there is a legal obligation to inform others. Where there is a legal requirement to make a referral but the referral has been made without the consent of the individual, officers should record the reason and justifications for this in the custody record.
For further information, see Suicide prevention and risk management for perpetrators of child sexual exploitation and indecent images of children (IIOC).

Transfer of detention
Responsibility for the welfare of a detainee being transferred to court by prisoner escort and custody services (PECS) lies with PECS staff.

Restraining a detainee

Officers may restrain a detainee during transfer if there are reasonable grounds to believe that they may otherwise use violence against escorts or bystanders, or attempt to escape from custody. Where restraint is to be applied, it is important to communicate to the detainee what is happening and why. When the detainee is passed to another agency or service, responsibility for restraint no longer rests with the police.

Multiple detainees

Transporting multiple detainees may increase risk and should be subject to a joint risk assessment prior to transfer.


Checklist: transfer of detention

Prior to transferring the detainee, the custody officer must:
 review the risk assessment, custody record and attachments  review medical notes
 complete a PER/dPER form (which should be accompanied as a minimum by the detainee medical assessment form (450), and the detainee medication form (450a), under confidential cover, if the detainee is being transferred to hospital)
 prepare the detainee
 check the detainee’s property and consider authorising an additional search where necessary  ensure the detainee has appropriate clothing
 check that the detainee has access to sufficient medication for their transfer  consider whether restraint is necessary and the appropriate level of restraint  consider the number of detainees being transferred
Back to Detention and custody overview
Tags

Detention and custody


Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police (Detention and Bail) Act 2011. (See end of Document for details)







Police (Detention and Bail) Act 2011
2011 CHAPTER 9

An Act to make provision about the calculation of certain periods of time for the purposes of Part 4 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984.   [12th July 2011]
BE IT ENACTED by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:—



Amendment of Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984
In section 47 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (bail after arrest), in subsection (6), at the end insert “and any time during which he was on bail shall not be so included”.
In section 34 of that Act (limitations on police detention), in subsection (7), at the end insert—
“But this subsection is subject to section 47(6) (which provides for the calculation of certain periods, where a person has been granted bail under this Part, by reference to time when the person is in police detention only).”
The amendments made by subsections (1) and (2) are deemed always to have had effect.

Extent and short title
This Act extends to England and Wales only.
This Act may be cited as the Police (Detention and Bail) Act 2011.
2	Police (Detention and Bail) Act 2011 (c. 9)
Document Generated: 2024-05-05

24/03/2025  Devolved nations
https://www.college.police.uk/app/civil-emergencies/civil-contingencies/devolved-nations Page



Devolved nations


This page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published
23 October 2013 Updated
3 April 2024
Civil contingencies 5 mins read
The devolved nations inform central government in the same way as local resilience forums (LRFs) to ensure coordination and to maintain an accurate national common recognised information picture (CRIP).
This section describes emergency preparedness and planning arrangements in the devolved nations, where they differ from UK government and local arrangements in England.
It also outlines how Part 1 of the Civil Contingencies Act 2004 (CCA) and its associated regulations apply in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
More detail on the specific duties under the Act and how they apply in the devolved administrations can be found in Emergency preparedness.

Emergency preparedness in Wales

North Wales Police act as the single point of contact (SPOC). For details about the role of the SPOC, see Pan- Wales Response Plan (central notification). The Pan-Wales Response Plan sets out the arrangements for the response to an emergency in, or affecting, Wales. Response arrangements at the local level in Wales are the same as those in England but take into account devolved functions. The CCA pays due cognisance to those organisations whose roles are devolved including fire and rescue, and health.
Response arrangements at the local level in Wales are the same as those in England but take into account devolved functions. The CCA pays due cognisance to those organisations whose roles are devolved, including fire and rescue, and health.
The Emergency Coordination Centre (Wales), or ECC(W), is a facility established by the Welsh Government to gather and disseminate information in Wales on developing emergencies. It supports the Wales Civil
Contingencies Committee (WCCC) and Welsh ministers in providing briefing and advice on emergencies. This facility also provides accommodation and equipment for all other services to work together and links into all three SCGs.
If the emergency is of a magnitude that requires national levels of coordination, it has been agreed that the ECC(W) will act as a conduit for communication. This includes all organisations whether devolved or not. Non- devolved organisations would also communicate through normal channels – for example, police to the NPCC or NPoCC. If emergency regulations are made covering Wales, the UK government must appoint a Wales Emergency Coordinator.
For further information see Welsh civil emergencies website and the UK/Wales Concordat.

Emergency preparedness in Scotland

Scottish emergency response arrangements are based on the same principles as those that apply elsewhere in the UK. These arrangements are outlined in Preparing Scotland. This guidance provides for suitable arrangements to be put in place to establish effective communication and engagement with the UK government depending upon whether the emergency relates to a devolved or a reserved matter. Resilience partnerships in Scotland are similar to LRFs. They operate regionally as regional resilience partnerships focusing on planning and locally as local resilience partnerships predominantly in response to the emergency. Strategic oversight and direction for civil contingencies and resilience is provided through government-led multi-agency governance arrangements. Scottish Ministers have devolved responsibilities related to managing the consequences of emergencies in Scotland.
Although the regional resilience partnerships are active during planning stages, in practical terms during response, multi-agency coordination is routinely configured around local resilience partnerships. These may be established to determine the appropriate management structures and strategy for the local inter-agency response.
Scottish ministers may open the Scottish Government Resilience Room (SGoRR), which gathers and disseminates information, coordinates activity, provides appropriate guidance and supports the Scottish response to emergencies. It provides a national picture of the impact of the emergency, which, in turn, can be used to advise and inform decisions on the strategic management of the situation for the Scottish and UK governments.
For further information see Scottish government civil emergencies website.

Northern Ireland

The Northern Ireland Office has responsibility for national security matters. It maintains crisis management arrangements to govern the strategic response to such emergencies. Civil protection in Northern Ireland is largely a devolved matter, with functions being exercised by the Northern Ireland departments.
Some functions are not devolved and are delivered in Northern Ireland by bodies that fall within the remit of the UK government. The Civil Contingencies Policy Branch in the Executive Office promotes civil contingencies preparedness in Northern Ireland. It maintains arrangements for strategic crisis management in serious and catastrophic emergencies. The Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Framework has been published by the
Executive Office (2023).
Sub-regional and local coordination is achieved by a variety of arrangements, including those involving the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) and the district councils. The PSNI is a Category 1 responder. Some Category 1 and 2 responders in Northern Ireland are subject to Part 1 of the CCA and its regulations, and guidance issued by UK ministers including the Maritime and Coastguard Agency, and telecommunications providers.
Arrangements are in place to ensure information exchange and coordination in the event of emergencies that cross the border with the Republic of Ireland.
Back to Civil contingencies overview

Tags

Civil emergencies



Disability rights


Overview
As a disabled person, you have rights to protect you from discrimination. These rights cover most areas including:
 employment  education
 dealing with the police
The Equality Act 2010 and the United Nations (UN) Convention on disability rights (https://www.un.org /development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of- persons-with-disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities-2.html) help to enforce, protect and promote your rights.

	Next
Employment (/rights-disabled-person/employment)
View a printable version of the whole guide (/rights-disabled-person/print)














All content is available under the Open Government
Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated	© Crown copyright



Home  Working , jobs and pensions  Redundancies, dismissals and disciplinaries


Disciplinary procedures and action against you at work





Overview
Your employer could start formal disciplinary action against you if they have concerns about your work, conduct or absence.
Before taking formal disciplinary action or dismissing you, your employer may try to raise the matter informally with you. However, they can go straight to their formal disciplinary or dismissal procedures.
Disciplinary procedures are a set way for an employer to deal with disciplinary issues. They should include a disciplinary hearing where you’re given a chance to explain your side of the story.
There should also be a chance to appeal any disciplinary action your employer decides to take.
Related content Dismissal: your rights Raise a grievance at work
Make a claim to an employment tribunal
Taking disciplinary action against an employee

	Next
How disciplinary procedures work

View a printable version of the whole guide


Explore the topic
Your rights and legal support Redundancies, dismissals and disciplinaries




















Home  Crime, justice and the law  Your rig hts and legal support


Discrimination: your rights



Discrimination at work
The law protects you against discrimination at work, including:  dismissal
 employment terms and conditions  pay and benefits
 promotion and transfer opportunities  training
 recruitment  redundancy
Some forms of discrimination are only allowed if they’re needed for the way the organisation works, for example:
 a Roman Catholic school restricting applications for admission of pupils to Catholics only
 employing only women in a health centre for Muslim women

Disability
If you’re disabled you have the same rights as other workers. Employers should also make ‘reasonable adjustments’ to help disabled employees and job applicants with:
 application forms, for example providing forms in Braille or audio formats  aptitude tests, for example giving extra time to complete the tests
 dismissal or redundancy  discipline and grievances
 interview arrangements, such as providing wheelchair access, communicator support
 making sure the workplace has the right facilities and equipment for disabled workers or someone oﬀered a job
 promotion, transfer and training opportunities  terms of employment, including pay
 work-related benefits like access to recreation or refreshment facilities

What you can do
If you’re discriminated against at work there are ways to deal with it. Employers have to follow the law on preventing discrimination at work.
Other types of unfair treatment
You’re also protected from being treated unfairly because of:  trade union membership or non-membership
 being a fixed-term or part-time worker
Related content
Solve a workplace dispute
Definition of disability under the Equality Act 2010
Disability rights Report hate crime
Reporting an accessibility problem on a public sector website

 Previous
How you can be discriminated against

 Next
What you can do

View a printable version of the whole guide

Explore the topic
Your rights and legal support
Disability rights and the Equality Act 2010 Work and disabled people
Your rights at work and trade unions















Home  Crime, justice and the law  Your rights and legal support


Discrimination: your rights





How you can be discriminated against
Discrimination can come in one of the following forms:
 direct discrimination - treating someone with a protected characteristic less favourably than others
  indirect discrimination - putting rules or arrangements in place that apply to everyone, but that put someone with a protected characteristic at an unfair disadvantage
 harassment - unwanted behaviour linked to a protected characteristic that violates someone’s dignity or creates an oﬀensive environment for them
 victimisation - treating someone unfairly because they’ve complained about discrimination or harassment

It can be lawful to have specific rules or arrangements in place, as long as they can be justified.
Related content
Solve a workplace dispute
Definition of disability under the Equality Act 2010
Disability rights Report hate crime
Reporting an accessibility problem on a public sector website


 Previous
Ty pes of discrimination ('protected characteristics')

 Next
Discrimination at work

View a printable version of the whole guide


Explore the topic
Your rights and legal support
Disability rights and the Equality Act 2010 Work and disabled people
Your rights at work and trade unions




















Home  Crime, justice and the law  Your rig hts and legal support


Discrimination: your rights




Types of discrimination ('protected characteristics')
It is against the law to discriminate against anyone because of:  age
 gender reassignment
 being married or in a civil partnership  being pregnant or on maternity leave  disability
 race including colour, nationality, ethnic or national origin  religion or belief
 sex
 sexual orientation

These are called ‘protected characteristics’.

You’re protected from discrimination:
 at work
 in education
 as a consumer
 when using public services
 when buying or renting property
  as a member or guest of a private club or association
You’re legally protected from discrimination by the Equality Act 2010. You’re also protected from discrimination if:
 you’re associated with someone who has a protected characteristic, for example a family member or friend
 you’ve complained about discrimination or supported someone else’s claim

Action against discrimination
You can do something voluntarily to help people with a protected characteristic. This is called ‘positive action’.
Taking positive action is legal if people with a protected characteristic:  are at a disadvantage
 have particular needs
 are under-represented in an activity or type of work
Related content
Solve a workplace dispute
Definition of disability under the Equality Act 2010
Disability rights Report hate crime
Reporting an accessibility problem on a public sector website

 Next
How you can be discriminated against

View a printable version of the whole guide

Explore the topic
Your rights and legal support
Disability rights and the Equality Act 2010 Work and disabled people
Your rights at work and trade unions

















Home  Crime, justice and the law  Your rights and legal support


Discrimination: your rights





What you can do
If you think you’ve been unfairly discriminated against you can:  complain directly to the person or organisation
 use someone else to help you sort it out (called ‘mediation’ or ‘alternative dispute resolution’)
 make a claim in a court or tribunal

Contact the Equality Advisory Support Service for help and advice.


Discrimination at work
Employees should talk to their employer first to try and sort out the problem informally. You may also want to read about workplace disputes.
If things cannot be sorted out informally, talk to Acas, Citizens Advice or a trade union representative.

You might be able to take a claim to an employment tribunal for discrimination.
Related content
Solve a workplace dispute
Definition of disability under the Equality Act 2010
Disability rights Report hate crime
Reporting an accessibility problem on a public sector website

Check if you can get legal aid to help with your legal costs if you think you’ve been discriminated against. You can get advice from Civil Legal Advice if you’re eligible.
Employers must follow the law on preventing discrimination at work.

 Previous
Discrimination at work

View a printable version of the whole guide


Explore the topic
Your rights and legal support
Disability rights and the Equality Act 2010 Work and disabled people
Your rights at work and trade unions
















THE POLICE RESPONSE TO CRIMEi
Megan O’Neill, University of Salford



INTRODUCTION



Nostalgia is a fun thing. When one thinks of the past, especially a past too far away to have experienced first-hand, all mistakes of the time are forgotten, details neatly smoothed over and all the answers to modern predicaments lay apparent. So this seems to be the case when politicians and policy-makers think of 1829, Sir Robert Peel and his Bobbies. ‘Policing by consent’, it was. Friendly constables, never distracted by squawking radios, never speeding by in police cars, would wander amiably around their patch. They would get to know everyone in their area, have access to all pertinent ‘intelligence’ (in modern terms) and could probably see off a good deal of trouble before it began. They were trusted, respected and a perfect model of community engagement.


Then lo, the bad times came in the form of the 20th century. The police were a reactionary, distant and forceful institution. Police constables changed their ‘patch’ as frequently as their radio batteries. The public was an unknown entity to police and of which to be wary. Patrolling was done from the safety of the squad car and ‘community engagement’ largely involved getting information out of paid informants, themselves dubious characters. Corruption scandals erupted on both sides of the Atlantic; encouraging performance targets and accountability measures, which deepened the bureaucratisation of the institution. While this became a new management age in policing, the poor, ignored, marginalized and discarded
communities lamented the loss of the their Bobbies; the blue sentinels that had stood firm and had signified to them (if not in words then in their being) that it was 6 o’clock and all was well.


Obviously, the above is an exaggeration of both scenarios. The political reasons for the origin of the Bobbies and their initial remits are of continuing debate (Brogden 1987, Styles 1987). But what is certainly clear is that all members of the ‘community’ did not openly embrace them (Rawlings 2001). In addition, Peel never intended for his police constables to engage with the community as partners in crime control (Tilley 2003). The constables were to patrol, checking doors and windows, and by their mere presence would deter thieves and other criminals (Emsley 2003). Thus this model is really a rather passive and reactive one (Manning 1997), which focused police attention on street crime and on the poorer sections of society for the origin of that crime. However, one could be forgiven for overlooking these points, considering the way politicians and policy makers seem to view this period in history as being policing in its ‘purest’ and ideal form.


While the description above of the 20th century may also be an exaggeration, there was indeed a ‘crisis’ of confidence in policing in the latter half (Wright 2002). The police in England and Wales moved from the old foot patrol beat system to a motorised patrol system in the 1960s. This enabled the officers to patrol larger geographical areas and provide a fast response to calls coming over their new personal radios. It was argued that this would improve police-community relations, but in fact the opposite happened (Newburn 2003). In addition to mobility and speed, the police acquired other new technologies in the subsequent years: computer assisted
dispatching, the centralised emergency telephone numbers (999 in the UK, 911 in the US) and other developments which, when combined with motorised patrol, resulted in a policing system which prioritised action and fast response to community engagement and service (Manning 1992, Newburn 2003). Despite the new technological advances, the police were still not able to exert much of an influence on the crime rate and were felt to be too distant from the people they served. Minority ethnic people in particular can have very problematic relationships with the police, as they frequently come under the police gaze as objects of suspicion rather than of protection. Something needed to change, and Peel, his Bobbies and nostalgia combined to provide a Golden Age of policing; long lost, but perhaps not irretrievable (Brogden and Nijhar 2005). The fact that the ‘community as partner’ was not a factor in Peel’s vision is quietly neglected here.


Thus we now find ourselves in the age of Community Orientated Policing. This, along with Neighbourhood Policing (in the UK), Intelligence-Led Policing, Zero Tolerance Policing and Problem Orientated Policing, make up a large proportion of the current police response to crime problems. Some of these are more prevalent in the UK or in North America, but all will be discussed here to examine how they are supposed to be a better way to address crime than what went on before. The basic idea is to get away from ‘reactionary’ crime control methods that deal with all incidents in isolation from each other (Tilley 2003, Wright 2002, although this is less so with Zero Tolerance Policing). Each has a different way of going about this, but none, as yet, seem to be an ideal answer to the question of how best to do policing in the 21st century. This chapter will be largely written from the UK perspective,
although there is considerable overlap with policing developments happening in other countries as well, most notably in the US and Canada.ii


THE TRADITIONAL AND THE MANAGERIAL



Before we can examine the more recent developments in policing, we should first have a brief look at policing in the ‘traditional’ sense and then in the age of New Public Management. These set the stage for what was to come, as many police reformers felt that the traditional model had essentially failed and the new management practices kept the police too distant from those who were policed. The term ‘traditional’ in this sense refers to the post-war era of policing when the police worked in beats in motorised patrols, rather than the Peelian approach described earlier.


A traditional approach to policing prioritises a ‘crime-fighting’ mentality in which crimes are usually handled independently of each other, and in a reactive (rather than proactive or preventative) way. Police officers mainly patrol in cars and minor infractions are seen as crimes to be pursued rather than as signs of larger social problems that need to be addressed (Manning 1997). Technology is highly prized as being essential to investigation to the extent that members of the public are often contacted electronically rather than in person. Investigation generally is seen as the epitome of police work while community activities have the lowest status. This enforcement approach to policing can have a limited impact on the crime rate and simply doing more of it (in terms of increased police budgets) does not improve this (Brogden and Nijhar 2005, Tilley 2003). Police culture tends to be viewed as
orientating itself around this vision of policing (O’Neill and Singh 2007), which was seen as unproblematic until the 1970s and 1980s. Communities were becoming increasingly socially and ethnically diverse, and the crimes that affected them had varying characteristics that the police were struggling to address. Crime rates continued to rise, as did the cost of policing (Brogden and Nijhar 2005). In addition to this now largely ineffective approach to policing, police officers themselves were coming under scrutiny for their behaviour (planting evidence, abuse of suspects, taking bribes, etc). Several corruption scandals have occurred on both sides of the Atlantic in the mid to late 20th century, leading to various attempts at reform, which usually met with limited success. Police morale was falling, as was the confidence of the public in them (Wright 2002).


In the 1980s and 1990s came the move towards ‘effectiveness and efficiency’ in the police service. This is the dawn of the New Public Management (NPM) era in the UK (and similarly with COMPSTATiii in the US), which sought to reconceptualise the police in terms of being a service (rather than a force) that was accountable to its customers (rather than to clients or the ‘public’). Public services were increasingly managed in ways similar to that of the private sector (O’Malley 1997) where performance was to be measured against pre-set targets to ensure best ‘value for money’. These locally set targets for policing were designed to meet nationally set objectives (Fielding and Innes 2006). This has had many implications for policing practice, some of which will be discussed in later sections of this chapter. While the move towards this kind of managerialism was intended to ensure that the police service performed more effectively, the types of police work that are most easily measured, evidenced and quantified are those that rely on traditional policing methods
(enforcement leading to better arrest rates, clear-up rates, etc.). Certain types of crime satisfy these targets better than others, known as the ‘volume crimes’ such as burglary or assault, and thus these tend to be prioritised. Police methods themselves remained largely unchanged in this management style, while their use is now more carefully held to account. The public’s role as consumers of a service who deserve to be satisfied that their needs are being met is essential. However, as policing objectives are set at a national level, there is only a certain amount of scope for how much the ‘community’ can influence policing in this model (Long 2003, Maguire and John 2006). So while the New Public Management was meant to be a great change in the police organisation (and in certain respects it is), it has left some of the key problems with policing unaddressed: enforcement-orientated methods into which the public has little real input are still valued. Manning (1999) has argued that not only is it not possible for the police to be ‘efficient and effective’, but that it is actually not desirable. For example, a public service that needs to be able to respond at a moment’s notice to any event must have extra resources and time at the ready to spend on it – something that is neither efficient nor effective in terms of officers’ overtime and public spending.


COMMUNITY ORIENTATED POLICING



Community Orientated Policing (COP, also known just as ‘community policing’) is meant to take the involvement of the public in their police service to a new and deeper level than that afforded in the new management styles (although it can help to meet some of the NPM accountability requirements), and to encourage non-traditional policing practice. As Skogan and Hartnett (1998) discuss, there was a coalescence of
factors that made community policing possible in the US from the 1970s onwards, but particularly in the 1990s. Much of this was mentioned above in relation to the problems of the traditional approach to policing. Minority ethnic groups had developed a history of conflict with the police, sometimes culminating in urban riots. Enterprising and aspiring senior officers who were willing to embark on new approaches to these communities found their career prospects enhanced. Top police officers now often had university degrees in subjects that encouraged a receptiveness to change. Police managers, policy makers, researchers and consultants had developed a robust network to communicate new ideas and share good practice across the country. The general move towards a more effective, efficient and accountable police service was also present here along with new technologies to improve communication with a local public. This ability to target police resources more directly towards community needs, as well as a growing willingness of police managers to do so, made a ripe situation from which community policing could emerge.


Unfortunately for the purposes of this chapter, it is very difficult to find a clear definition of community policing. Part of the reason for this is the nature of this type of policing, in that the needs of the local area are prioritised and thus any activities done in its name will be unique to that situation and its people. Thus the exact way in which community policing is done will vary not only between police forces but also within them.


Brogden and Nijhar (2005) offer the following as guidelines for identifying community policing:
Neighbourhoods or small communities serve as primary foci of police organizations and operations.
Communities have unique and distinctive policing problems that conventional police organizations and responses have not traditionally addressed.
Community consensus and structures should guide police response to the community’s crime and security problems.
Policing should be both locally accountable and transparent.

Police discretion is a fact and should be used positively to maximise community confidence in the police.
(Brogden and Nijhar 2005: 23-24)



The general idea then is to take policing down to a rather microscopic level of engagement, to be lead by these local actors in whichever way they see fit and to be held accountable to them. Thus it goes against much of the methods the police used to do their work before or, more importantly, goes against the kind of working practice the police value most highly: internally-driven, crime-fighting approaches where offenders are pursued and captured and the community is there mainly to give the police any information needed to do the job (Brogden and Nijhar 2005, Skogan 2006, O’Neill and Singh 2007). While the police have always to some extent been involved in ‘social work’ types of activities, these were not regarded very highly as being ‘true’ police work. The emphasis in community policing is to reverse that tendency, to see the ‘community’ as the main priority.
Perhaps more important than a definition of community policing here is a definition of ‘community’. As this concept forms the basis of all further police action, we must consider how exactly it is identified. Now while that is probably a task best left to a different volume of academic research entirely (and has been), a few thoughts will be considered here. There are different ways that the police can go about identifying and engaging a ‘community’, such as by using pre-existing networks or forums, approaching a specific geographical area to illicit its input or linking in with identity groupings (such as a specific religion or sexual orientation-based groups). All of these ‘communities’ come with their own inherent problems, such as finding suitable ‘leaders’, having internal fissures and competing demands, as well as difficulty in remaining stable for a reasonable length of time to allow work with the police to be successful. Community police officers may find themselves faced with different accounts and demands from the same group (Hughes and Rowe 2007). With pressure from above to engage with and reassure these nebulous entities, community officers have to do the best they can. It may be that ‘community is not so much a descriptive term as a process whereby key actors (police officers, community safety managers and such like) construct and mobilize selectively discourses of community and aim to make them conducive to the aims of government’ (Hughes and Rowe 2007: 338).
The result is that those areas that probably need more positive engagement with the police are least likely to do it. These would tend to be the more deprived areas, accustomed to seeing the police as oppressive law enforcers, rather than as partners in local area development. At the same time, those who are willing to work with the police are precisely those who least need it: well-organised community collations with comparatively less crime problems (Tilley 2003, Skogan 2006). It would appear in effect that a high level of social capital (strong social networks in a community that
bring about collective action and maintain social control) certainly helps make community policing easier, but areas with high social capital have less need of engaging with the police more than they already are.


While it may be difficult to find and motivate a ‘community’ into action that does not mean that it cannot be done. Many community policing initiatives have happened worldwide since its earliest inception in the 1970s. While ‘Community Orientated Policing’ was initially and American concept, it has been exported around the globe (Brogden and Nijhar 2005) and it even informs efforts at democratic policing in developing and failed nations through its concepts of community accountability and engagement (see Pino and Wiatrowski 2006iv). Judging the success of COP, however, is another matter. As mentioned before, activities that fall under the ‘community policing’ label are many and varied, so each would need to be assessed independently. As Tilly (2003) points out, however, this can be difficult to do as much of community policing is supposed to be based on police officer creativity and non-standardised outcomes. Supervising this kind of work, as well as monitoring it and judging its success can be a murky task. A further complication is that the officers doing the work with communities may focus their efforts on things that can be easily quantified and measured (under the guise of ‘community policing’), rather than on the actual problem-solving itself. Brogden and Nijhar (2005) report that many police forces in the US are no longer even trying to maintain a pretence of community policing, either changing it to ‘community problem solving’ or simply reverting back to traditional, crime-lead policing. This is especially so in areas of great deprivation, where the police may make gestures towards community
engagement, but then continue to police in a more traditional way as it is far easier to do so (see Skogan et al 1999).


Until recently in the UK, community policing was largely left out of a very powerful measurement of police success, Best Value Performance Indicators (BVPIs) (Herrington and Millie 2006). These are a product of the move towards New Public Management in the police, as discussed earlier. What is important for this section is the contrast between the types of policing activities measured by the BVPIs (response times, arrests, clear-up rates, etc) and those types of activities that are valued and ultimately more successful in a community-orientated approach (meeting with local residents, moving children away from crime hotspots, etc). These two approaches to policing ‘value’ exist in parallel to each other and ultimately are in competition with each other for resources (although the current incarnation of BVPIs make slightly more of an attempt at including community elements, to be discussed later). While success in a community policing approach may not actually be felt for several years as the changes take root and are not easily quantified, immediate and measurable outcomes can be gained from the more traditional policing methods (Herrington and Millie 2006). And it is by success in these latter activities that police services are measured and ultimately praised for their ‘effectiveness’, thus inadvertently encouraging more orientation towards them and less towards the vague, immeasurable and long-term solutions afforded by community policing (Fielding and Innes 2006).
The central UK government is in effect encouraging two competing policing ideologies, but reserving most of its praise (in terms of judging the ‘effectiveness and efficiency’ of a police force) for the one that relies upon traditional, reactionary policing methods.
Police officers themselves are aware of this tension and of the pressure upon the police force to adhere to both ideologies (while community policing might be being dropped in some forces in the US, it is still a national priority in the UK, more on this later). The above points to an inherent problem of community policing mentioned before: it largely works in conflict with traditional policing methods, culture and ethos. But after more than 20 years of COP, in one form or another in the US and UK, can some changes be detected in the overall institution to address this? Surely some efforts are being made to sell the idea to new recruits?


Chappell (2007) discusses police training in the US and reports that while training in the academy has started to incorporate community policing elements, these are largely missing from new recruits’ experiences in field training. The former is largely classroom based training while the latter involves the new officer out in public with a field training officer, a logical place to build upon the techniques learned at the academy. However, as Chappell argues, the field training method used in most police forces (San Jose model) has been largely unchanged since its inception in the 1970s, despite being designed to adapt to the local priorities of the agency using it. This is attributed to difficulties in changing the structure and priorities of bureaucratic police institutions, field training officers focusing on ‘the basics’, and cultural resistance to community policing. Peace (2006) analyses the initial induction period by evaluating how well andragogy is employed in training probationary officers in England and Wales and if this is successfully applied to furthering community policing skills.
Andragogy theory stipulates that adults learn differently than children and has been adopted by the police service as a guiding principle for its trainers. It can also fit very
well with developing skills that support a community-orientated policing approach, as it is student-lead. This mirrors the emphasis on police officer creativity and experimentation inherent in community policing. However, Peace found that despite a recent overhaul of probationer training in England and Wales to encourage community engagement, the (at the time) proposed new methods still prioritised traditional policing techniques largely based around law enforcement and that andragogy was not largely apparent in the training approach. Time will tell if the new decentralised training regime in England and Wales can meet expectations for a more community-savvy police service (see next section on Neighbourhood Policing). As it was only implemented nationally in April 2006, it is still too early yet to assess its effectiveness (Rogers and Lewis 2007)


If training does not yet show strong signs of changing to meet the new community policing ethos, what about individual performance evaluations? This would be another area where the institution could adapt to the ideological goals of community policing, by formally assessing how well police officers demonstrate the necessary skills or perform relevant tasks. Lilley and Hinduja (2006) argue that many police forces in the US are indeed modifying their appraisal processes to take community policing into account. Traditional appraisal schemes usually measure the more easily quantifiable side of policing (arrest rates, number of crimes solved, number of complaints lodged by the public, etc.). In this way, supervision and appraisal can be done at a distance, though indirect indicators, which are less resource-intensive. This can mean that police officers tend to avoid certain actions that may look bad on an appraisal, but this is not the same as engaging in high-quality policing. Appraisal schemes which do take community policing methods into account will look for ways
in which officers employ a problem-solving approach and who do work in quality of life issues, rather than just use law enforcement methods. They would also emphasise independent thought as well as good teamwork. Lilley and Hinduja (2006) conducted a survey of over 400 police organisations in the US to ascertain if the above was indeed happening in officer evaluations. The results paint a mixed picture: while police agencies that embrace a community policing ethos do indeed show a greater appreciation for innovation in their officers (such as through public speaking, leadership or creativity), all organisations surveyed rated this as less important than the more traditional factors such as avoiding trouble and following agency norms. In addition, community policing agencies have not reduced their use of law enforcements statistics in measuring officer performance, but merely added more qualitative measures to the assessment process. This would suggest that even in those police agencies that embrace community policing, the traditional policing methods and ethos have not diminished to the extent that they are devalued in the appraisal process.


Lilley and Hinduja (2006) are unsure if the above is due to organisational resistance, or more to a lack of motivation on the part of administrative officers to significantly alter the appraisal system. Pino and Wiatrowski (2006) argue that, for whatever reason, few police organisations in the US have truly embraced the overall organisational change that community policing invites and not much other than the status quo is a result. This may mean that any significant changes to the police institution to bring it more in line with the community policing ideology (such as in training and appraisal) will be difficult to achieve. Pino and Wiatrowski feel that this is happening in spite of dramatic organisational changes in other segments of the
public and private sector. Even if individual officers can overcome the usual cultural resistance to community policing (Chappell 2007) (such as seeing it as social work, middle managers fearing losing authority, conflicts with established expectations of police work) the organisation itself does not always change in ways to fully support officers in their community work (such as by providing adequate resources for it or valuing it in performance assessments). To truly embrace the ethos of community orientated policing, the entire institution needs to change to one orientated around the community it serves, and so far this does not seem to be happening in the US (Skogan 2006, Pino and Wiatrowski 2006, see also Manning 2007). Thus a picture emerges where community policing is either sitting alongside the traditional model of policing (and is often in conflict with it), or is merely providing window-dressing for the continued status quo.


NEIGHBOURHOOD POLICING



As mentioned above, community orientated policing has been in practice in the UK for a number of years. However, since The Police Reform Act of 2002 the central government has given it a new impetus, a new theoretical underpinning, as well as a new name. Could this be enough to end the mere lip service often paid to COP (as seems to be the case in some areas of the US) to make it truly an integral part of policing, the ‘golden thread’ that runs throughout what the police do (Herrington and Millie 2006)? This next section will explore some of the literature produced so far on this development.
Since the mid-1990s, overall levels of recorded crime have been falling in England and Wales. It was also just before and during this time that the police adopted their New Public Management approach to policing that put ‘efficiency and effectiveness’ to the fore. The result was that volume crimes (such as burglary and theft) were prioritised, as they would produce the more easily measured and quantifiable results, thus meeting the government’s demands for a reduction in crime and an increase in accountability. While this seems to have been a success in terms of the crime rate, it has also meant that relationships with community members were not high on the police priority list. Since that time when crime rates began to fall, a new factor was on the increase: fear of crime. The disparity between actual recorded crime levels and the perception the public had of crime is called the ‘Reassurance Gap’ (Herrington and Millie 2006). This propelled the government into action and it launched the National Reassurance Policing Programme (NRPP) in England and Walesv in April 2003. It ran for two years and its main objectives were to improve public confidence in the police while reducing the fear of crime (Fielding and Innes 2006). Integral to the reassurance project was a focus on ‘signal crimes’, a perspective developed by Martin Innes and colleagues at the University of Surrey (see Innes and Fielding 2002). Signal crimes can be anything that causes a person to feel alarmed or fearful of harm or disorder, such as graffiti, drug dealing or fly-tipping. The events or objects that become signals to a person do not necessarily bring about further or worse crimes (as is the premise of the ‘Broken Windows’ theory of Wilson and Kelling 1982, see later section on zero-tolerance policing), but can bring about changes in the person’s behaviour to avoid harm. Signal crimes do not necessarily signal the same kind of danger or disorder to all people, and thus the importance here is how events are interpreted and acted upon, rather than on their ability to further increase the crime
rate in an area. This leads to the importance of consulting with local areas to ascertain which events or objects are signals for them.


Reassurance policing as it was developed for the NRPP had reassurance as a core process in police work, rather than an outcome in itself. Reassurance was to be the style of policing that officers adopted, by helping local areas to address their signal crimes so that they felt more secure in their surroundings, more cohesive (collective efficacy) and had greater confidence in the police. In this approach, overall security is the master concept. This is in contrast to how a report by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary described reassurance (Herrington and Millie 2006). In Povey’s paper (2001), reassurance is a goal in itself, and by achieving it the public could be encouraged to engage with the police more fully, and potentially provide more intelligence and other assistance in reducing crime. By being ‘visible, accessible and familiar’, the police would begin a virtuous circle, whereby the more reassured the public felt, the more they would assist the police, the more the crime rate would reduce and the more the public would feel reassured (Povey 2001, cited in Herrington and Millie 2006). There is thus a subtle difference in these two types of approaches to reassurance (in the former it is a process, in the latter it is an outcome), but only one could win out in the end.


Towards the end of the NRPP, its five core elements were modified slightly from their original text to include a specific mention of tackling anti-social behaviour and a suggestion that tackling disorder is additional work. These suggest a narrowing of the scope of reassurance policing so that it is no longer purely based on the signal crimes identified in local areas, and that is not a ‘golden thread’ running throughout all
policing work, but needs specific allocation of resources of its own. It seems as though national priorities were having an influence on how reassurance policing was to be done. Researchers who assessed the success of the NRPP reported that the police officers involved did not show an awareness of the concept of reassurance as a policing style, instead of being a policing goal. Their respondents often spoke of achieving reassurance with the public, rather than embarking on overall neighbourhood security (Herrington and Millie 2006). Thus the philosophical underpinnings of reassurance and signal crimes were perhaps being lost to a more general focus on community policing as had been exercised in the past.


When the NRPP came to an end, it was deemed to be a success (Tuffin et al 2006), but was not implemented across England and Wales in exactly the same format as it was in the trail programme. What is now in place is a programme of ‘neighbourhood policing’. The signal crimes perspective is still named as an integral part of the approach, but the core principles have changed from those identified in Herrignton and Millie’s (2006) work to the following:


Neighbourhood Policing:

Is an organisational strategy that allows the police, its partners and the public to work closely together to solve the problems of crime and disorder, improve neighbourhood conditions and feelings of security
Is managed within mainstream policing activity, integrated with other policing services
Requires evidence based deployment of neighbourhood teams against identified need
Establishes dedicated identifiable, accessible and responsive neighbourhood policing teams which provide all citizens with a named point of access
Reflects local conditions and is flexible and adaptive

Allows the Police Service to work directly with local people to identify problems that are most important to them, thereby giving people direct influence over local policing priorities
Establishes a regime for engaging other agencies and the public in problem solving mechanisms
Uses the National Intelligence Model (NIM) as the basis for deployment.

Requires an effective engagement, communication and feedback strategy, and a clear explanation of where accountability lies
Should be subject to rigorous performance management including clear performance monitoring against a local plan and commitments made to neighbourhoods
(Neighbourhood Policing Programme websitevi)



While there is indeed a continued emphasis on consulting local people and reflecting local conditions, there is also repeated mention of joint working with other partner agencies and working in teams. Emphasis on evidence-based police deployment is clear, as is a commitment at the end to performance management and monitoring. So we can see here a mixture of the original reassurance philosophy of engaging the public and being flexible and adaptable to their needs, but also the New Public Management of policing with evidence-based deployment, working with partner agencies to spread the load and performance management. This ideological duality
also reflected in the way neighbourhood policing is presented in point two as being part of mainstream policing activity, but in point four requires dedicated policing teams. This echoes a finding in Herrington and Millie’s (2006) work in that while reassurance was to be the work of all police officers; it was in practice usually left to those with a ‘community’ role. Nowhere in the above list is there a mention of ‘reassurance’ in the principles of neighbourhood policing. While the focus of reassurance policing was largely around an improved sense of security for communities and reducing the ‘Reassurance Gap’, neighbourhood policing mentions crime and disorder in point one as a key principle, before mentioning feelings of security. It would appear that Herrington and Millie’s (2006) observation of a narrowing of the focus of reassurance policing towards national goals instead of a purely open-ended approach lead by local communities continued into the Neighbourhood Policing Programme. We can also note the continued struggle to make community-type policing activities fit within or at least alongside the traditional policing model, as evidenced in the US. Thus what is listed above needs to be seen as more of a ‘wish list’ than the reality of policing practice, as traditional policing methods do remain. There does not seem to be here a suggestion of altering the entire police institution to one focused on the community first and foremost.


What is perhaps unique to the Neighbourhood Policing Programme in England and Wales and is so far largely absent from other community policing initiatives is an attempt to integrate its goals into police service performance monitoring methods. As mentioned above, Best Value Performance Indicators were introduced and used in the late 80s and early 90s to assess if the police service was achieving ‘efficiency and effectiveness’ as determined by nationally-set organisational goals. A BVPI related to
‘public reassurance and quality of life’ was proposed in 2003 (Herrington and Millie 2006), but until then, the entire performance assessment programme was geared towards traditional policing goals and methods. All the BVPIs were condensed and renamed ‘Statutory Performance Indicators’ in 2004 in a new Policing Performance and Assessment Framework (PPAF) (Flanagan 2008). Included in the new SPIs are a measure of ‘public confidence’ (SPI 2) and three ‘quality of life’ measures (SPI 10a- c). While it is interesting to see a new recognition of reassurance-type measures, all of these indicators are assessed using specific elements of the British Crime Survey (Home Office 2006). This is an annual national survey of the public’s experiences of crime, and while it is largely regarded as a very valuable tool in measuring crime rates, it does not quite address the more qualitative aspects of reassurance, confidence and fear.vii Fielding and Innes (2006) have argued for the importance of qualitative measures of police performance, especially those which capture the opinions of key informants. These are people with a detailed knowledge of life in their community, especially as it has changed over time. Fielding and Innes (2006) feel that response reliability is greatly improved if the people targeted are in a position to know about performance under neighbourhood policing. These approaches can actually be more reliable than a random survey, if done well.


As mentioned above, the core principles of neighbourhood policing include ‘evidence-based’ deployment and employing the National Intelligence Model (NIM). These point to the relevance of another type of policing strategy within neighbourhood policing, specifically, that of ‘intelligence-led policing’. It is to this that we now turn, to discuss what it is and how it can co-exist with community- orientated approaches.
INTELLIGENCE-LED POLICING



In the early 1990s, the police in the UK were under increasing pressure to do their work more ‘efficiently and effectively’, as has been discussed above. Part of the response to this call came in the form of ‘intelligence-led policing’. This is designed to be a more proactive approach to policing than what had taken place before. Up until the 1990s, much police work was reactionary, taking each incident in isolation and responding to the particular crime in question. In intelligence-led policing, it is the criminal who matters first, as crimes do not always happen in isolation from each other and criminals can work in networks. It was theorised that by taking a more systematic approach, where certain people are investigated for their criminal activity, not only could more crimes be detected and cleared up, but also future crimes could be prevented. A small number of offenders account for a large number of crimes, so this would be a far more efficient way to address crime. The idea is to look at offending patterns and so assemble as much ‘intelligence’ as possible about certain offenders before police action is taken. That way it can be targeted far more ‘effectively and efficiently’ (Tilley 2003). As with other police innovations, this is the intention behind this method. As we shall see later it may not be the reality.


In order to ensure that there is consistency in the approach to intelligence-led policing across the UK, the National Criminal Intelligence Service developed the National Intelligence Model (NIM) on behalf of the Association of Chief Police Officers. It has been rolled out to all police forces in England and Wales since April 2004 and is also being introduced in Scotland. It is primarily a tool of law-enforcement, with a
focus on criminals and their crimes and disrupting criminal networks (Tilley 2003, Maguire and John 2006). There are three main levels at which the NIM works:


Level 1, covering local issues, including the while range of categories and levels of crime, notably volume crime
Level 2, covering cross-border issues, where crime issues cross jurisdictional borders and where intelligence needs to be shared, and
Level 3, covering serious and organised come operating on a national or international scale
(Tilley 2003: 322)



Thus all types of crime are included in the model – it is not just intended for ‘volume’ crime or just for organised crime. At each level is a Tasking and Coordinating Group (TCG), which, using advice from intelligence units and data from analysts, allocates appropriate resources. It is here that the main police ‘business’ takes place, and the TCG is also responsible for achieving the necessary ‘outcomes’. The NIM is a rather complicated model and rather than go into great detail on how it works, I shall quote a helpful summary:


[T]he Model splits policing into the two overarching fields of core policing ‘business’ and its required ‘outcomes’. The link between them is the Tasking and Coordinating Process. Tasking and Coordinating operates in two mutually dependent modes, strategic and tactical, and is informed by four key ‘intelligence products’. These, in turn, are based upon nine ‘analytical products’ (or techniques). The key resulting driver is the control strategy,
which is addressed through the tactical menu (or set of operational responses). This general structure is replicated at three distinct Levels of policing: Level 1 (local), Level 2 (cross border) and Level 3 (national/international). Mutual dependence is […] apparent, with priorities set at each level ultimately influencing those at the others. (Maguire and John 2006: 73).


Much of the NIM is orientated around traditional, enforcement-type policing methods. For example, the tactical menu includes managing specific hotspots, targeting specific offenders or investigating a series of crimes. It also includes, however, using preventative measures such as community action programmes (Tilley 2003).
Community intelligence is acknowledged to be one type of intelligence that can be fed into the model, and this is obtained from the general public when they report what they know to the police (Maguire and John 2006). As Hughes and Rowe (2007) have pointed out, community policing and intelligence-led policing used to be at odds with each other, in that the former was seen as a distraction from ‘real’ policing and the latter was seen as a more efficient and sophisticated policing method. However, since the terrorist attacks in 2001, the local and the global are increasingly viewed as linked. Local information can have an important relevance for national and international events. Thus the police are careful to ensure that all three Levels in the NIM influence the others, and that gains in community intelligence made through improved community relations with the police are fed into the NIM, wherever relevant (Hughes and Rowe 2007).


As intelligence-led policing is closely concerned with ‘efficient’ use of police resources and deployment, it was easy to develop it into a management tool as well, to
be used across the entire police organisation. Intelligence-led policing was intended to be applicable to all police officers and all areas of police work – not just to specialist units. This means that the police work which stems from intelligence-lead policing does not necessarily have to be enforcement orientated, or geared towards the traditional policing methods. Indeed, if intelligence generated about an area identifies a problem that needs to be solved, community action or partnership approaches may be better suited to the task. This shows that while intelligence-lead policing was designed to be proactive in nature, does not have to be and in some cases should not be. Thus one cannot assume the proactive police work and intelligence-led policing are the same thing (Maguire and John 2006).


However, this distinction seems to have been lost on some officers involved in intelligence-led policing. The NIM is associated with intelligence-led policing and therefore, by association, to proactive investigation methods, which are the preserve of specialist investigation units. Instead of becoming a tool by which the entire organisation could do its business more effectively, it is seen as an additional method and an imposition. During the time when the NIM was first introduced, reassurance policing had begun and it appears as though these methods initially were seen to conflict. As discussed above, however, reassurance policing’s heir, neighbourhood policing, should be based on intelligence gathered from the community. It can also provide intelligence to be fed into the NIM, so the two methods are not intended at all to be competitive (Maguire and John 2006).


As discussed earlier, a second development in policing in the early 1990s was the move towards New Public Management, directed by performance indicators and
focused on volume crimes (low-level crimes usually, such as burglary). There is an important difference in philosophy between this and intelligence-led policing.
Volume crime encourages the police to work on crimes that are likely to produce a good ‘result’ and clear up as many cases as possible with as few resources as possible. Thus prolific offenders who are more difficult to catch would not be pursued, as they might be in intelligence-led policing. This suggests that volume crime is more concerned with quantity (and meeting performance targets) than quality in intelligence terms. It also brings a return to reactive policing methods, where (volume) crimes are investigated independently of each other. Efforts are being made, however, to link volume crime approaches to the NIM. For example, by using intelligence to identify ‘crime series’, offenders can be charged with as many crimes as possible, as can their co-conspirators. However, nationally set performance indicators do still hold a strong influence over senior police officers and research suggests these may at times influence how the TCG sets its priorities. Some actions taken under the NIM would not show up on performance indictors and there is thus a risk that politics rather than intelligence could dictate policing at times (Maguire and John 2006).


Other problems have been identified with intelligence-led policing, besides (perceived) conflicts with community and volume crime methods and performance indicators. Generating intelligence itself can be problematic, in addition to keeping that flow of information coming. Police officers are still involved in reactive policing, as they must respond to crimes as they are reported. This does not always leave a lot of time for ‘proactive’ work. In addition, some of the roles and activities that stem from intelligence-led work may be less attractive than other, more reactive,
ones. It is still to early to know if the NIM has been successful, but it does have a number of inherent barriers to overcome. (Tilley 2003). However, Tilley argues that intelligence-led policing may come to sit better with the more traditionally-minded police officers than initiatives like neighbourhood policing. In its most narrow interpretation, intelligence-led policing is primarily concerned with enforcement, arrest and incarceration of offenders. More fuzzy concepts such as economic deprivation or low social capital do not come into play, and the offender is cited as the main root of the problem. The police as ‘intelligence-led’ can paint a flattering picture of their work, one that the public is likely to embrace. The police are hard on criminals, but especially the worst and most prolific criminals. However, as Tilley (2003) reminds us, this does not mean that it is necessarily a better way of dealing with crime. Enforcement alone is not always the best solution (Bittner 1967), and there is also the ethical issue that some covert methods employed to gather intelligence might disproportionately impact on privacy.


The NIM was designed to avoid the narrow interpretation of being intelligence-led. It is in fact a business model for the entire police organisation and can include community input as well as that from partner agencies, and focus resources on longer- term projects to solve community issues. There are efforts underway in some areas to join up the work of Community Safety Partnerships (of which the police are one of many members) with that of the NIM. Thus strategic planning could reflect the fears of communities, which are often focused on very low-level and isolated incidents. At the moment, however, this is more of an ideal picture than the reality of police work. There is no guarantee that the NIM will be used to its full potential and the above
mentioned problems and prejudices towards the NIM within the police do still exist (Maguire and John 2006).


ZERO TOLERANCE POLICING



The theme of being hard on criminals continues in the next policing method to be considered. While there has been some attempt at implementing it in the UK, the US has shown far greater interest in zero tolerance policing. The primary and oft-cited example of this comes from New York City and its dramatic fall in recorded crime, especially that of homicide, in the 1990s. The mayor, Rudolph Giuliani, and the chief of police for the NYPD, William Bratton, had enthusiastically embraced the ‘Broken Windows’ theory of Wilson and Kelling (1982). This theory stipulates that small acts of disorder, such as a broken window, can invite further acts of disorder if they remain uncorrected (more broken windows). Increasing numbers of small acts of disorder will eventually lead to greater acts of disorder (graffiti, vandalism) and then to serious crime (drug dealing, car theft), resulting in the demise of a neighbourhood or other area in terms of its social control and security. As the public grows increasingly fearful from the small acts of disorder, this leads them to use public areas less, which invites further acts of disorder and crime because informal social control is disappearing. The New York policing method developed in line with this theory was not labelled ‘zero tolerance’ as such. The original idea was for ‘quality of life policing’, but it has inextricably become known not only as zero-tolerance policing, but also as the epitome of this method (even though Bratton never used this term himself) (Newburn and Jones 2007). Some of the main elements in the New York method are:
Vigorous law-enforcement responses to minor crime and disorder

The use of civil remedies against those perceived to be involved in criminal activities
Enhanced accountability, using Compstat viii, of local police managers for crime and disorder in their areas
Public target setting in relation to crime reduction

Conspicuous use of the media as a public relations tool on behalf of the police and policing strategies; and
Aggressive enforcement action against street crimes (Newburn and Jones 2007: 226)


What lead to the label ‘zero tolerance’ being applied here was the first point – aggressive policing of minor incivilities such as begging, public urination or fare dodging. The police ‘cracked down’ on this kind of behaviour in a way that reflected ‘zero tolerance’ for it, in the hopes that it would prevent worse disorder or crimes from happening (Newburn and Jones 2007). This, combined with the other methods listed above, is credited with cutting the felony rate by half and dropping the homicide rate from 2245 in 1990 to 767 seven years later (Dixon 1999). It would appear on the surface that zero tolerance was a success, and wide widely heralded as such in the media at the time (Manning 2001).


Dixon (1999) warns against reading too much into this, however. First of all, there were significant crime rate drops in other cities in the US at the same time, which did not use zero tolerance policing methods. 17 of the 25 largest US cities reported a fall
in their crime rates, as did 12 of the 17 countries in advanced industrial development. While it is not certain why these falls happened, what is clear is that zero tolerance policing was not the main cause. Secondly, as the list of elements making up ‘quality of life’ policing indicates above, the police in New York were not just using new zero tolerance methods. Many other techniques had been implemented. Officers in the NVPD were suffering from an uncertainty in the extent to which they should use their powers for minor offences prior to Bratton’s arrival as chief of police due to fears of corruption allegations, breaches of freedom of speech and inadequate supervision. It can be argued that all these changes in policing contributed to an improvement in morale and to an overall reform in terms of laziness, corruption and incompetence in some areas. This newfound motivation for police officers to do their job may also play a part in the dramatic change in crime in New York (Dixon 1999).


Besides the above reasons for not attributing too much credit to the New York interpretation of zero tolerance policing, there is another important drawback to the method. ‘Crack down’ policing methods have been used before, and are not always received well by the community in question. The UK experienced widespread disorder in 1980-81, which was sparked by an intensive programme of stop and search by the Metropolitan Police in a predominately black area of London. The US experienced similar problems in the 1960s after a period of intensive policing. Even if disorder does not arise, intensive policing methods can have a very detrimental effect on relationships between the police and the communities they serve if these methods are unwelcome (Dixon 1999). This runs counter to the ethos of both community policing and intelligence-led policing where the public is a partner and key informant for the police (Taylor 2006).
It is to a fuller examination of the relationship between zero tolerance policing and community policing that we will now turn. The ‘Broken Windows’ theory was pitched as a type of community policing. By targeting nuisances and disorder that disrupt the ‘quality of life’ of residents, the police could help improve community life, social order and the local environment. This would enable crime control and social problem resolution to be achieved through the same policing method (Brogden and Nijhar 2005). However, zero tolerance is ultimately a law-enforcement approach to policing that usually takes an inflexible view of low-level disorder and incivilities. It is an aggressive policing method done in the name, but not in the spirit of, community policing. If we look at the New York experience in particular, it primarily involved new policing tactics, strategy and technology and not a great deal of community consolation or partnership working (Dixon 1999). If we also consider the negative repercussions zero tolerance policing can have on police-community relations, it is hard to see how this could ever be interpreted as a type of community policing.


Despite these problems with zero tolerance policing, it can be an attractive concept for police managers. It can be a method for meeting some performance targets and indicators in a very dramatic and direct way. As we have seen in earlier discussions, demonstrating efficiency and effectiveness is an ongoing pressure for police managers, and one they are highly motivated to meet. It may come as a surprise then that there have been very few attempts to implement zero tolerance policing in the UK. One attempt took place in the King’s Cross area in London in 1996 where the police took a harsh approach to both minor and major infractions of the law and incivilities for a six week period. The idea was to ‘clean up’ the area. A second
attempt at zero tolerance policing occurred in Hartlepool at around the same time. Detective Superintendent Ray Mallon wanted to protect the ‘decent’ and ‘respectable’ citizens, and so advocated an aggressive response to any low-level nuisances (Newburn and Jones 2007: 227). Other than these, zero tolerance policing has not been seriously implemented in any UK police force. The lure of the ‘New York miracle’ can be strong, but it is important to remember that New York is not indicative of the rest of the world. First of all, when zero tolerance was implemented in New York the population was not only highly criminalized, it was also highly armed. Therefore, taking police action against a person for a minor infraction had a good chance of revealing some more major ones (such as an illegal firearm). This will not be the case in all countries. New York also had a staggering homicide rate, which is also not the case elsewhere. As was mentioned above, the police in New York prior to the introduction of zero tolerance felt impeded by laws regarding personal freedoms and civil liberties. Police officers in other countries have more power to stop and search members of the public than this, and so do not feel restricted in their street policing in quite the same way (Dixon 1999). Thus zero tolerance policing has to be understood in the context in which it developed – the US, and New York in particular – and therefore it cannot be viewed as a magic fix for all policing problems.


What has proven to be a useful aspect of the ‘zero tolerance’ era is the language it uses. While the zero tolerance policing policies themselves did not transfer well to the UK, the terminology and the symbolism they employ did. Prior to their election in 1997, the Labour Party made use of ‘zero tolerance’ in reference to their approach towards failing educational standards and performance. Zero tolerance also surfaced
in a general way to paint New Labour as ‘tough on crime’, especially when discussing their policies on anti-social behaviour in the 1997 manifesto. It has also been used in reference to handling abuse of public sector workers and discipline in schools. The fact that it can be used in so many policy arenas shows the flexibility of the concept, as well as its simplicity and vagueness. It is appealing because it touches on contemporary concerns with disorder and lawlessness. But as any police officer could attest, ‘zero tolerance’ in its truest form is impossible. There is no practical way to police every single infraction that occurs in an area or institution. Nor is this desirable. Therefore, the terminology appeals more to politicians than to police officers and is very significant for its symbolic value. It conveys a ‘mood’, or policy narrative, rather than a realistic operational plan. It is more a form of expressive crime control, rather than effective crime control. Its power is in the image it conveys, rather than any actual police action (Newburn and Jones 2007).


PROBLEM ORIENTATED POLICING



One final policing method will be discussed, and this also touches on the issues of police effectiveness and efficiency. Like many of the others discussed so far in this chapter, it was an outcome of the call for an end to reactive policing that treated all incidents in isolation from each other. Problem orientated policing (POP) is often assumed to be the same as community orientated policing, but they are different in significant ways.


The main underlying principle in problem orientated policing is to look for the root

cause of problems in an area that result in multiple calls to the police. If the source of
the problems was addressed, then there would be an overall reduction or end to calls for police services. These calls can seem unrelated to each other, but may all stem from the same basic issue. For example, if an apartment complex is experiencing physical and social deterioration, multiple incidents may result such as burglary, vandalism, anti-social behaviour of residents, maybe even drug dealing. If the police stop reacting to each incident in turn and instead work with local residents and the building’s owner/manager to improve the conditions, then all the seemingly unrelated incidents might end. This makes for a more efficient use of police time and resources (Brogden and Nijhar 2005). There has been a increasing sense in recent years that the demands on the police far exceed their resources, and problem orientated policing is seen as one way to address this (Tilley 2003).


The key difference here between problem orientated policing and community policing is that the former focuses on the problem to be solved, while the latter focuses on the means. POP takes each situation in isolation and uses a range of options for solving the identified problems. Community policing is instead a force-wide agenda that (in theory) is the preserve of all officers and often employs the same kinds of approaches to all situations (such as public meetings). The community must be consulted and the police are to be lead by their concerns. Thus the process by which problems in an area are identified and solved through community policing is vital as it can improve police community relations and give residents a greater sense of security. This is as much the goal of community policing as addressing the specific community concerns is. In POP, the police may or may not consult or involve local residents in the problem identification and resolution (Brogden and Nijhar 2005).
Herman Goldstein was the main architect of problem orientated policing in the US, who felt that the traditional model of policing had serious shortcomings. He stressed the need for police officers to use their discretion and imagination, as well as community resources and data analysis to arrive at more effective ways of engaging police resources. Goldstein argued that the police had become more concerned with procedure and had lost sight of what policing was meant to be about. He describes the purposes of policing as being:


Prevent and control conduct threatening life and property
Aid crime victims and protect people in danger of physical harm
Protect constitutional guarantees

Facilitate the movement of people and vehicles

Assist those who cannot care for themselves

Resolve conflict between individuals, between groups of between citizen and their government
Identify problems that may become more serious for individuals, the police of the government; and
Create and maintain a feeling of security in the community (Tilley 2003: 318)


Goldstein argues for a systematic approach to policing to achieve these aims whereby relevant problems in a community are researched and understood and responses targeted according to this analysis. Enforcement is only one method that can be chosen, and often does not prove effective in the long-term as a way of solving community problems. Of course, identifying a ‘problem’ is a key part of the process,
and Goldstein felt that these would have patterns to them, which can vary widely. They can involve repeat offenders, repeat victims, repeat locations, high-demand products or even have a particular seasonality (which can be anything from time of day to time of year when problems are more likely to occur) (Tilley 2003). Each problem needs to be understood on its own merits and solutions chosen that are the most appropriate to each one.


Policing ‘tools’ have been developed to make the various stages in the problem orientated policing approach more systematic and accessible. The main ones are the Problem Analysis Triangle (PAT) and the SARA process, which stands for Scanning, Analysis, Response and Assessment. PAT is used to identify a problem, and SARA covers the entire problem orientated process. In PAT, the ‘crime triangle’ is comprised of an offender, a victim and a location (or related variations such as a class of victim or source of complaint). These three features of a problem are analysed to detect where a change might be made in one of them so as to solve the problem. In SARA, ‘scanning’ identifies a problem; ‘analysis’ brings about a deeper understanding of the problem (which may involve the use of PAT), which informs the subsequent ‘response’. The whole process is then ‘assessed’ for its effectiveness.
The steps in SARA are not always as clear-cut as this, but it provides the police a general framework in which to work (Tilley 2003).


While problem orientated policing has been embraced in both the US and the UK, there have been some difficulties in its implementation. It shares with community orientated policing the perception that it is not ‘real’ policing, as enforcement is not a preferred method in POP. Because of the cultural value placed on traditional,
enforcement type methods, the data police gather about crime incidents tend to have this in mind and are not geared towards an analysis of longer-term crime trends (Tilley 2003, Cordner and Perkins Biebel 2005). Thus the data itself can be problematic. This then makes the subsequent analysis difficult, which is an important part of the SARA process. Like the other policing methods above, problem orientated policing suffers from external pressures to meet performance targets, which often work against the philosophy of POP. For example, as enforcement is not always an ideal way to address an identified problem, there will be no subsequent arrest or crime ‘cleared up’. This leaves vital performance targets unmet. Police also report having little time to do problem-orientated work as they are still an emergency service and have to respond to calls when they come in (but this of course was one of the reasons for developing POP in the first place). A final obstacle to implementing problem orientated policing is the fact that it requires a serious change to the way the police operate, a change that takes commitment and resources which cannot happen overnight. If there is no concerted effort within a force to bring in a problem- orientated approach, it will not achieve significant results (Tilley 2003). Cordner and Perkins Biebel (2005) found in their research in San Diego that police officers tended towards small-scale ‘problem solving’ (favouring enforcement methods) instead of towards the intended comprehensive ‘problem orientated policing’, as the distinction had not been made entirely clear to them (see also Braga and Weisburd 2006).


While problem orientated policing does experience many barriers within the police service, the competing policing philosophies described in this chapter are not necessarily one of them. As Lancashire Constabulary has demonstrated, the POP process they had been promoting could be successfully linked into the National
Intelligence Model. Both stress the importance of gathering data about an issue or problem (over a comparatively long term) to better understand it and locate the best solution (Maguire and John 2006). As was mentioned above, problem orientated policing is often confused with community orientated policing as they can involve similar methods (but do not always do so). Zero tolerance policing, however, will not sit well next to POP as the former is heavily focused on short-term, enforcement methods.


CONCLUSION



This chapter has considered some of the recent innovations in policing methods in the UK and the US, most of which are designed to direct the police away from traditional, enforcement orientated approaches. The most established and influential is community orientated policing (COP). It has been employed in various forms, not only in these two countries, but across the globe (Brogden and Nijhar 2005) since its first inception in the 1970s. The other policing methods examined here all bear some relation to COP. Neighbourhood policing is currently the driving force of policing in England and Wales, and represents a very systematic and heavily resourced approach to police reform (in contrast to the patchy and sometimes under-resourced COP in the US). This method not only involves police officers, but also the new breed of Community Support Officers (CSOs) hired and trained specifically to work alongside the police in the community. CSOs are a response to the eternal call for more ‘Bobbies on the beat’, albeit with less power and authority than a fully trained police officer (and considerably cheaper). Police officers, CSOs, and other actors from local authority agencies all form part of a Neighbourhood Policing Team, which as of 2008
should be present in every ‘neighbourhood’ of every police force in England and Wales. Time will tell of the significance and effectiveness of this endeavour.


Intelligence led policing, while still being rather enforcement-orientated, can support community policing methods in providing ‘evidence’ on which action can be taken. ‘Community intelligence’, in turn, is one of many kinds of information on which this method relies for combating other kinds of crime. Problem orientated policing also relies on effective data gathering, and is usually community-focused and sees enforcement as only one option among many. However, direct engagement with a community experiencing a ‘problem’ is only initiated if it is deemed relevant to solving that problem. Thus these two methods can be complementary to community and neighbourhood policing, but this is not always the case. Zero tolerance policing was initially viewed as a type of community policing, in that addressing small signs of disorder or crime in a neighbourhood would ultimately lead to a better quality of life for the local residents. In practice, this method has tended to be heavily reactionary and enforcement driven, and actually risks doing damage to police relations with a community, rather than improving them.


While police officers themselves have, or are encouraged to have, a great deal of discretion in how they undertake these policing methods, the biggest influence on the manner in which these methods are enacted and ultimately on their success would seem to be performance indicators and management systems (New Public Management in the UK). At every turn we have seen how the philosophies and theories behind these policing systems have been undermined (or at best influenced by) centrally set performance targets. In some cases this is not necessarily
problematic – zero tolerance policing is only marginally a community orientated approach and acts very much in the short-term (although not exclusively). But for other systems, orientating one’s work towards nationally set priorities is in direct conflict with the underlying ethos of the policing method. Several authors mentioned in this chapter have questioned the wisdom of trying to fit these types of systems within a policing service so heavily monitored by targets. Measures are currently being taken in England and Wales to modify the targets so that some of them cover community methods, but it seems these will still to be in the minority. Traditional policing methods offer the best way to meet the majority of performance indicators.


There is another inherent contradiction in this situation. While, as mentioned above, police officer discretion and creativity is central to many of these policing methods, the methods themselves were imposed from above and usually with very little consultation with the staff who would be enacting them. Many new approaches to policing have been introduced in a rather short time frame, and it is not surprising that there has been resistance to them from police officers. Research has shown that the police as a whole and as individuals fare better if they have been involved in some way in the decision-making process for the organisation (Sklansky 2007). Not only do they seem to be happier workers, but the force has increased productivity and less citizen complaints. Wood and Marks (2007) have conducted research into ‘bottom up’ reform in the police and show very positive and promising results.


While the intention behind many of these new policing methods was admirable (moving towards proactive and/or citizen-led policing), it would seem that their implementation has some serious problems: multiple and overlapping methods,
imposed form above and in conflict with powerful performance targets. While no one method has emerged as the best way forward (nor can any of them claim to have been successfully implemented as yet), it would seem that most of them can work together if the effort is made to do so. It would also seem that engaging police officers directly in the strategic decision-making would support and encourage them in their operational decision-making as well. All of this requires a comprehensive and dramatic commitment to change from the police organisation and central government, which as yet does not seem to be the case.


REFERENCES



Braga, A.A. and Weisburd, D. (2006) ‘Problem-orientated policing: the disconnect between principles and practice’, in D. Weisburd and A.A. Braga (eds) Police Innovation: Contrasting Perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Brogden, M. (1987) ‘The emergence of the police: the colonial dimension’, British Journal of Criminology, 27(1): 4-14.


Brogden, M. and Nijhar, P. (2005) Community Policing: National and International Models and Approaches. Devon: Willan Publishing.


Bittner, E. (1967) ‘The police on skid-row: A study of peace keeping’, American Sociological Review, 32(5): 699-715.
Chappell, A. T. (2007) ‘Community policing: is field training the missing link?’, Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management: 30(3): 498- 517.


Cordner, G. and Perkins Biebel, E. (2005) ‘Problem-Orientated Policing in practice’,

Criminology and Public Policy 4(2): 155-180.



Dixon, D. (1999) ‘Beyond zero tolerance’, Paper presented at the 3rd National Outlook Symposium on Crime in Australia, Mapping the Boundaries of Australia’s Criminal Justice System, convened by the Australian Institute of Criminology and held in Canberra, 22-23 March 1999. Reprinted in T. Newburn (2005) Policing: Key Readings. Devon: Willan Publishing.


Emsley, C. (2003) ‘The birth and development of the police’, in T. Newburn (ed.)

Handbook of Policing. Devon: Willan Publishing.



Fielding, N. and Innes, M. (2006) ‘Reassurance policing, community policing and measuring police performance’, Policing and Society, 16(2): 127-145.


Flanagan, R. (2008) The Independent Review of Policing: Final Report. London: Home Office. URL: http://police.homeoffice.gov.uk/publications/police-
reform/Review_of_policing_final_report/flanagan-final-report?view=Binary



Herrington, V. and Millie, A. (2006) ‘Applying reassurance policing: is it “business as usual”?’, Policing and Society, 16(2): 146-163.
Home Office (2006) Guidance on Statutory Performance Indicators for Policing, 2006/07, Version 2.0. Home Office: Police Standards Unit.


Hughes, G. and Rowe, M. (2007) ‘Neighbourhood policing and community safety: researching the instabilities of the local governance of crime, disorder and security in contemporary UK’, Criminology and Criminal Justice, 7(4): 317-346.


Innes, M. and Fielding, N. (2002) 'From community to communicative policing: 'Signal Crimes' and the problem of public reassurance ‘ Sociological Research Online, www.socresonline.org.uk/7/2/innes.html.


Lilley, D. and Hinduja, S. (2006) ‘Officer evaluation in the community policing context’, Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, 29(1): 19-37.


Long, M. (2003) ‘Leadership and performance management’, in T. Newburn (ed.)

Handbook of Policing. Devon: Willan Publishing.



Maguire, M. and John, T. (2006) ‘Intelligence lead policing, managerialism and community engagement: competing priorities and the role of the National Intelligence Model in the UK’, Policing and Society, 16(1): 67-85.


Manning, P.K. (1992) ‘Technological dramas and the police: statement and counterstatement in organizational analysis’, Criminology 30(3): 327-346.
Manning, P.K. (1997) Police Work The Social Organization of Policing. (2nd ed.) Prospect Heights: Waveland Press.


Manning, P.K. (1999) ‘Part Two’, in B. Forst and P.K. Manning, The Privitization of Policing: Two Views. Washington DC: Georgetown University Press.


Manning, P.K. (2001) ‘Theorizing policing: the drama and the myth of crime control in the NYPD’, Theoretical Cirminology 5(3): 315-344.

Manning, P.K. (2007) ‘A Dialectic of Organizational and Occupational Culture’, in The Police Occupational Culture: New Debates and Directions, M. O’Neill, M. Marks and A-M. Singh (eds.). Oxford: Elsevier Science.


Moore, M. H. (2003) ‘Sizing up Compstat: an important administrative innovation in policing’, Criminology and Public Policy, 2(3): 469-494.


Newburn, T. (2003) ‘Policing since 1945’, in T. Newburn (ed.) Handbook of Policing. Devon: Willan Publishing.


Newburn, T. and Jones, T. (2007) ‘Symbolizing crime control: reflections on zero tolerance’, Theoretical Criminology, 11(2): 221–243.


O’Malley, P. (1991) ‘Policing, politics and postmodernity’, Social and Legal Studies

6(3): 363-381.
O’Neill, M. and Singh, A-M. (2007) ‘Introduction’ in The Police Occupational Culture: New Debates and Directions, M. O’Neill, M. Marks and A-M. Singh (eds.). Oxford: Elsevier Science.


Peace, R. J. (2006) ‘Probationer training for neighborhood policing in England and Wales: fit for purpose?’ Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, 29(2): 335-346.


Pino, N. and Wiatrowski, M. D. (2006) Democratic Policing in Transitional and Developing Countries. Aldershot: Ashgate.


Povey, K. (2001) Open All Hours: A Thematic Inspection Report on the Role of Police Visibility and Accessibility in Public Reassurance, Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary (HMIC), London.


Rawlings, P. (2001) Policing: A Short History. Devon: Willan Publishing.



Rogers, C. and Lewis, R. (2007) Introduction to Police Work. Devon: Willan Publishing.


Sklansky, D. (2007) ‘Seeing blue: Police reform, occupational culture and cognitive burn-in’, in M. O’Neill, M. Marks and A-M. Singh (eds) Police Occupational Culture: New Debates and Directions. Oxford: Elsevier Science.
Skogan, W.G. (2006) ‘The promise of community policing’, in D. Weisburd and A.A. Braga (eds) Police Innovation: Contrasting Perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Skogan, W. G., and Hartnett, S. (1998) Community Policing, Chicago Style. New York: Oxford University Press.


Skogan W. G., Harnett, S., Comey, J., Dubois, J., Kaiser, M. and Lovig, J. (1999) On the Beat: Police and Community Problem Solving. Oxford: Westview Press.


Styles, J. (1987) ‘The emergence of the police’, British Journal of Criminology, 27(1): 15-22.


Taylor, R.B. (2006) ‘Incivilities reduction policing, zero tolerance, and the retreat from coproduction: weak foundations and strong pressures’, in D. Weisburd and A.A. Braga (eds) Police Innovation: Contrasting Perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Tilley, N. (2003) ‘Community policing, problem-orientated policing and intelligence- led policing’, in T. Newburn (ed.) Handbook of Policing. Devon: Willan Publishing.


Tuffin, R, Morris, J. and Poole, A. (2006) ‘An evaluation of the impact of the National Reassurance Policing Programme’, Home Office Research Study 296. Home Office Research, Development and Statistics Directorate.
Wilson, J.Q. and G. Kelling (1982) ‘Broken Windows’, Atlantic Monthly March: 29– 38.


Wood, J. and Marks, M. (2007) ‘Cultural change through “Nexus” policing’, in M. O’Neill, M. Marks and A-M. Singh (eds) Police Occupational Culture: New Debates and Directions. Oxford: Elsevier Science.


Wright, A. (2002) Policing: An Introduction to Concepts and Practice. Devon: Willan.


i I would like to express my sincere thanks to Peter Manning and Anne-Marie Singh for their helpful comments on a previous draft of this chapter.
ii This is not meant to encourage the assumption that policing experiences in North America and the UK are largely same, nor that these systems are always appropriate for adoption by other cultures. Please see Brogden and Nijhar (2005) and Pino and Wiatrowski (2006) for more on the perils of ethnocentrism in police studies.
iii COMPSTAT is a police administrative software package in use in the US. It is linked to the success of zero tolerance policing in New York in the 1990s. See later section in this chapter on zero tolerance and Moore (2003) for more.
iv Democratic Policing, however, goes beyond the concepts of community policing to place issues of Human Rights and equity to the fore.
v Scotland and Northern Ireland have their own separate policing arrangements and as yet no centrally organised community-type policing programmes as those to be described for England and Wales.
vi Neighbourhood Policing Website, Accessed 20 June 2008, http://www.neighbourhoodpolicing.co.uk/publication.asp
vii The PPAF system is soon to be replaced with the Assessment of Policing and
Community Safety (APACS). This will measure the performance of all the public sector agencies involved in community safety under one system and is hoped to include more qualitative measures, a lack of which is a criticism of the PPAF (Flanagan 2008).
viii COMPSTAT is a computerised system in the US that gathers data on calls for police service and levels of police activity. This can be taken down to the precinct level and can be made available within about a week of the data being collected. It is used as a management tool as well to determine where the police are and perhaps should be focusing their resources (Moore 2003).
Menu


Home Crime, justice and law  Domestic abuse

Guidance
Domestic abuse: how to get help



Find out how to get help if you or someone you know is a victim of domestic abuse.

From: Home Oﬃce
Published 5 October 2018
Last updated 21 March 2025 — See all updates


Related content
Definition of domestic violence and abuse: g uide for local areas
Apply for the migrant victims of domestic abuse concession
Domestic Abuse Act 2021
Domestic abuse: recognise the signs Indefinite leave to remain or enter
(  domestic violence or abuse)




Translated guidance
If English is not your first language, information has been translated into several languages as well as an easy read version.
Women’s Aid also have g uidance documents on domestic abuse and coronavirus available in a number of languages for victims, family and friends, and community members of those aﬀected.
If you are deaf, you can access a British Sign Lang uage video that explains how to get help if you or someone you know is a victim of domestic abuse.

Recognise domestic abuse
Does your partner, ex-partner or someone you live with:
 cut you oﬀ from family and friends and intentionally isolate you?  bully, threaten, or control you?
 take control of your finances?
 monitor or limit your use of technology?  physically and/or sexually abuse you?
Domestic abuse is not always physical violence. It can also include:
 coercive control and ‘gaslighting’  economic abuse
 online abuse
 threats and intimidation  emotional abuse
 sexual abuse
Anyone can be a victim of domestic abuse, regardless of gender, age, ethnicity, religion, socio-economic status, sexuality or background.
If you believe that you are a victim of domestic abuse, there are signs that you can look out for including:
 being withdrawn, or being isolated from your family and friends  having bruises, burns or bite marks on you
 having your finances controlled, or not being given enough to buy food, medication or pay bills
 not being allowed to leave your house, or stopped from going to college or work
 having your internet or social media use monitored, or someone else reading your texts, emails or letters
 being repeatedly belittled, put down or told you are worthless  being pressured into sex or sexual contact
 being told that abuse is your fault, or that you’re overreacting See more signs to look for.
Get help and support
All forms of domestic abuse are not acceptable in any situation.
If you’re experiencing domestic abuse and feel frightened of, or controlled by, a partner, an ex-partner or family member, it’s important to remember that it’s not your fault and there is no shame in seeking help.
It may seem like a diﬃcult step to take, but there is support available and #YouAreNot Alone.
Free, confidential support and advice is available to victims and their concerned family members or friends, 24 hours a day.

Nation Helpline	Contact
England Refug e’s National Domestic Abuse Helpline

Northern Domestic and Sexual Abuse
0808 2000 247
Online live chat Web form
0808 802 1414
Ireland
Helpline
Online live chat help@dsahelpline.org
Scotland Domestic Abuse and Forced Marriage Helpline

Wales Live Fear Free Welsh
Government funded, 24 hour, 365 day service with
0800 027 1234
Online live chat helpline@sdafmh.org.uk
0808 80 10 100
Online live chat Text
specialists who make referrals info@livefearfreehelpline.wales and link to other services and
advice.
UK-wide The Men’s Advice Line run by Respect is a confidential helpline specifically for male victims.
0808 801 0327
info@mensadviceline.org.uk



Bright Sky app
Bright Sky is a mobile app and website for anyone experiencing domestic abuse, or who is worried about someone else.
The app can be downloaded for free from the app stores. Only download the app if it is safe for you to do so and if you are sure that your phone isn’t being monitored.

Women’s Aid local support services directory
Women’s Aid have a  directory of domestic abuse support services across the UK.
If you are experiencing domestic abuse or are worried about friends or family, you can access the Women’s Aid live chat service 7 days a week, 10am to 6pm.
helpline@womensaid.org.uk

Victim Support
Victim Support run these services for victims and survivors of any abuse or crime, regardless of when it occurred or if the crime was reported to the police:
 free, independent and confidential 24/7 Supportline 08 08 16 89 111  live chat service
 My Support Space - free online resource

Safe Spaces
Safes Spaces are safe, confidential rooms where victims can take some time to reflect, access information on specialist support services or call friends or family.
Safe Spaces are also available in Boots, Morrisons, Superdrug and Well pharmacies, TSB banks and independent pharmacies across the UK.
Find your nearest Safe Space.

Check whether someone has an abusive past
If you are concerned that a new, former or existing partner has an abusive past you can ask the police to check under the Domestic Violence Disclosure Scheme (also known as ‘Clare’s Law’). This is your ‘right to ask’. If records show that you may be at risk of domestic abuse, the police will consider disclosing the information. A disclosure can be made if it is legal, proportionate and necessary to do so.
If you are concerned about a friend or family member, you can apply for a disclosure on behalf of someone you know.
You can make a request to the police for information about a person’s previous violent oﬀending in person at the police station or elsewhere, by telephone, by email, online or as part of a police investigation. Support agencies and services can also help you ask the police about this.

Get a court order to protect you or your child
If you’re a victim of domestic abuse you can apply for a court order or injunction to protect yourself or your child from:
 your current or previous partner  a family member
 someone you currently or previously lived with This is called a non-molestation or occupation order. You can apply online, by email or by post.
Get a non-molestation or occupation order if you’ve been the victim of domestic abuse.

Domestic abuse protection orders
A domestic abuse protection order (DAPO) can:
 stop someone coming to or near your home  decide who can stay or return to your home
 order the person to attend a behavioural change programme
 order the person to wear an electronic tag to check they’re keeping to the conditions of the order
There are no court fees for applying.
You can only apply for a DAPO if the person you need protection from lives in one of the following areas:
 Hartlepool, Middlesbrough, Redcar and Cleveland and Stockton-on-Tees  Greater Manchester
 the London boroughs of Croydon, Bromley or Sutton Apply for a domestic abuse protection order.
Support someone you know
If you are worried that a friend, neighbour or loved one is a victim of domestic abuse, you can call the National Domestic Abuse Helpline for free and confidential advice, 24 hours a day on 0808 2000 247.
Or you can contact the other support services listed on this page.
Seeking help for someone you know can be challenging but #YouAreNotalone. Domestic abuse advisers will oﬀer confidential, non- judgemental information and advice on the options available to you helping you to keep safe and make informed choices.
If you believe there is an immediate risk of harm to someone, or it is an emergency, you should always call 999.
If someone confides in you, there is more information on how to support a friend who is being abused.

If you are an employer
Let your employees know that if they are facing domestic abuse you want to help them to get help. Stay in regular contact with employees you know, or fear, may be facing abuse and if you lose contact with them, take swift action to visit them. If you believe there is an immediate risk of harm to someone, or it is an emergency, always call 999.
Encourage employees to look out for others who may be facing domestic abuse and signpost them to support. Your staﬀ may also be worried about their own abusive behaviour at this time. There is no excuse for domestic abuse, no matter what stresses you are under and support is available.
Hestia’s Respond to Abuse Advice Line is a free resource for employers. Employers can call 020 3879 3695 Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm, or email adviceline.eb@hestia.org for support, guidance or information about domestic abuse and how to support employees and colleagues experiencing domestic abuse.
The  Employers’ Initiative on Domestic Abuse website provides resources to support employers including an employers’ toolkit.

If you are a professional working in the domestic abuse sector
SafeLives provides guidance and support to professionals and those working in the domestic abuse sector, as well as additional advice for those at risk.

Find additional information and support
If you want to access help specifically to cater to your background and needs or want support and help for specific types of abuse there are several organisations that can help - see Domestic abuse: specialist sources of support.
You can also find additional information and support here on topics including:  help for children and young people
 welfare benefits and housing advice
 help if you don’t have settled status in the UK  support for specific types of abuse

Get help if you think you might be an abuser
If you are concerned about your behaviour or the behaviour of someone you know, there is support available.
The  Respect Phoneline is an anonymous and confidential helpline for men and women who are abusing their partners and families. It is open Monday to Friday 9am to 8pm. The helpline also takes calls from partners or ex-partners, friends and relatives who are concerned about perpetrators.
A webchat service is available Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays from 10am to 11am and from 3pm to 4pm.
Telephone: 0808 802 4040

How to call the police when you can’t speak
If you are in danger and unable to talk on the phone, call 999 and listen to the questions from the operator and, if you can, respond by coughing or tapping on the handset.

Call 999 from a mobile
If prompted, press 55 to Make Yourself Heard and this will transfer your call to the police. Pressing 55 only works on mobiles and does not allow police to track your location.

Call 999 from a landline
If the operator can only hear background noise and cannot decide whether an emergency service is needed, you will be connected to a police call handler.
If you replace the handset, the landline may remain connected for 45 seconds in case you pick up again.
When 999 calls are made from landlines, information about your location should be automatically available to the call handlers to help provide a response.

If you are deaf or can’t use a phone
You can register with the emergencySMS. Text REGISTER to 999. You will get a text which tells you what to do next. Do this when it is safe so you can text when you are in danger.

Published 5 October 2018
Last updated 21 March 2025 + show all updates


Explore the topic
Domestic abuse
Violence against women and girls










Domestic Abuse
Statutory Guidance

July 2022




























© Crown copyright 2022

This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open- government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third-party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/domestic- abuse-act-statutory-guidance.

Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at domesticabuseenquiries@homeoffice.gov.uk.









2

Contents
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance
Contents	3
Contents in detail	6
Ministerial Foreword	11
Executive Summary	12
Purpose and legal status	12
Audience	12
Structure	14
Related material	14
Chapter 1 – Objectives	16
Objectives of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021	16
Objectives of the Domestic Abuse Statutory Guidance	17
Chapter 2 – Understanding Domestic Abuse	18
Background	18
Statutory definition	19
Types of domestic abuse	22
Chapter 3 – Recognising Domestic Abuse	28
Physical abuse, violent or threatening behaviour	28
Sexual abuse	29
Controlling or coercive behaviour	31
Harassment or Stalking	33
Economic abuse	35
Emotional or psychological abuse	37
Verbal abuse	37
Technology-facilitated abuse	38
Abuse relating to faith	39
‘Honour’-based abuse	42
Perpetrator tactics	44
Chapter 4 – Impact of Domestic Abuse	48
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance
Impact on Victims	48
Impact on child victims	52
Chapter 5 – Different experiences, needs and related considerations	57
Age	59
Disability	61
Deaf victims	63
Speech, language, and communication	63
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity	64
Sex	65
Pregnancy	67
Religion or belief	68
Race and ethnicity	69
Immigration status and migrant victims	70
Alcohol and substance misuse	75
Mental health	76
Socio-economic background	77
Chapter 6 – Agency Response to Domestic Abuse	78
Identifying and responding	78
Risk assessment	79
Responding to children and young people	80
Education	81
Social Care	85
Health	91
Housing	98
Local Criminal Justice Boards	104
Policing	104
Crown Prosecution Service	111
Domestic Abuse Best Practice Framework for Courts	113
Prison and Probation	114
Youth Offending Teams	116
Criminal and Civil Justice System – Criminal, Civil, and Family Courts	116


Chapter 7 – Multi-Agency Response to Domestic Abuse	127
Multi-agency working	127
Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conferences	130
Multi-agency working to safeguard children	131
Principles for multi-agency working	132
Addressing the behaviour of the perpetrator	141
Domestic Homicide Reviews	146
Annex A – Support Available for Victims	147
Annex B – Glossary of Acronyms	152
Annex C – Guidance Documents	154
Annex D – Table of Protective Orders	159
Contents in detail
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance




Contents	3

Contents in detail	6

Ministerial Foreword	11

Executive Summary	12
Purpose and legal status	12
Audience	12
Structure	14
Related material	14

Chapter 1 – Objectives	16
Objectives of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021	16
Objectives of the Domestic Abuse Statutory Guidance	17

Chapter 2 – Understanding Domestic Abuse	18
Background	18
Statutory definition	19
Types of domestic abuse	22
Intimate partner abuse	23
Teenage relationship abuse	23
Abuse by family members	24
Child-to-parent abuse	25
Chapter 3 – Recognising Domestic Abuse	28
Physical abuse, violent or threatening behaviour	28
Sexual abuse	29
Controlling or coercive behaviour	31
Harassment or Stalking	33
Economic abuse	35
Emotional or psychological abuse	37
Verbal abuse	37


Chapter 5 – Different experiences, needs and related considerations	57
Age	59
Disability	61
Deaf victims	63
Speech, language, and communication	63
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity	64
Sex	65
Female victims	65
Male victims	66
Pregnancy	67
Religion or belief	68
Race and ethnicity	69
Immigration status and migrant victims	70
Asylum Seekers	74
No recourse to public funds (NRPF) - change of conditions	74
Fee Waivers	74
Alcohol and substance misuse	75
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance
Mental health	76
Socio-economic background	77
Chapter 6 – Agency Response to Domestic Abuse	78
Identifying and responding	78
Risk assessment	79
Responding to children and young people	80
Education	81
Early Years and Childcare	81
Schools and colleges	82
Higher education	85
Social Care	85
Children’s Social Care	85
Adult Social Care	90
Health	91
Role and structures	92
Enquiries	93
Integrated response	94
Housing	98
Role and approach	98
Homelessness and domestic abuse victims’ priority need for accommodation	99
Housing response	101
Safe Accommodation	102
Local Criminal Justice Boards	104
Policing	104
Link between victimisation and offending	107
Victims with insecure immigration status	107
Domestic Violence Disclosure Scheme	108
Bail	108
Voluntary Attendance Interview	109
Protective Notices and Orders	109
Police and Crime Commissioners	111
Crown Prosecution Service	111
Victim’s Right to Review scheme	112
Domestic Abuse Best Practice Framework for Courts	113
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance
Prison and Probation	114
Youth Offending Teams	116
Criminal and Civil Justice System – Criminal, Civil, and Family Courts	116
Criminal courts and special measures in the criminal courts	116
Civil courts and special measures in the civil courts	117
Family courts and special measures in the family courts	118
Protective Orders	120
Jobcentre Plus	120
Employers	122
Financial services	124
Links with the voluntary sector	125
Chapter 7 – Multi-Agency Response to Domestic Abuse	127
Multi-agency working	127
Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conferences	130
Multi-agency working to safeguard children	131
Principles for multi-agency working	132
Seeing and responding to the whole picture	132
Designing interventions and responses around the needs of victims	134
A clear strategic focus	136
Participation as active and joined-up partners	137
Specialist skills	137
Safe and effective information sharing	138
Valuing and employing staff with the right values	139
Address the behaviour of the perpetrator	140
Addressing the behaviour of the perpetrator	141
Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements	141
Perpetrator Panels	142
Perpetrator Programmes	143
Behaviour Change Interventions	144
Domestic Homicide Reviews	146
Annex A – Support Available for Victims	147
Annex B – Glossary of Acronyms	152
Annex C – Guidance Documents	154
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance
Annex D – Table of Protective Orders	159
Ministerial Foreword
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance


Domestic abuse is cruel and complex, and can affect anyone, leaving physical and emotional scars that can last a lifetime. The 2019 to 2020 Crime Survey for England and Wales (CSEW) estimates that 2.3 million adults aged 16 to 74 in England and Wales experienced domestic abuse in the previous year, the majority of whom were female.1
We know that far too many individuals have their lives destroyed by domestic abuse. However, for so many, their experience of abuse has been stigmatised, diminished, or worse still, ignored. We also know domestic abuse has a devastating impact on children and young people. Growing up in a household of fear and intimidation can impact their health, wellbeing, and development, with lasting effects into adulthood. We need to build a society that has zero tolerance towards domestic abuse, and actively empowers victims, communities, and professionals to confront and challenge it, and provide victims of domestic abuse, including children, with the support they deserve. That is why the Government is committed to transforming the response to this terrible crime, seen through the introduction of the landmark Domestic Abuse Act 2021 (‘the 2021 Act’) and this accompanying statutory guidance. The 2021 Act is expected to help millions by strengthening the response across all agencies - from the police and courts to local authorities and service providers. It provides further protections for those who experience domestic abuse, and enhances measures in place to bring perpetrators to justice.
Anyone can be a victim of domestic abuse, regardless of sex, gender reassignment, age, ethnicity, socio-economic status, sexuality, or background. The 2021 Act introduces a statutory definition of domestic abuse, and together with this statutory guidance, provides clear case studies of what abuse looks like. Too often domestic abuse is spoken about in relation to those who are ‘high risk’ cases, but for many victims, the abuse they suffer is secret, it is subtle, and it is sustained.
This guidance has been subject to extensive engagement with experts from the sector, independent Commissioners, academics, and those on the frontline. We especially acknowledge and thank the organisations within the domestic abuse sector who collaborated with officials in drafting this guidance, providing feedback and looking at each section in detail in the development stages. We also thank everyone who responded during the consultation stage sharing their comments, insights and experiences to assist in finalising this document.
For as long as domestic abuse exists, support for victims must exist, and for those working to protect victims, this guidance will help ensure that we are all playing our part in tackling this abhorrent crime.
The Right Hon Priti Patel MP, Secretary of State for the Home Department


1 Office for National Statistics (ONS). Domestic abuse victim characteristics, England and Wales - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): Data year ending March 2020.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Executive Summary

Purpose and legal status

This statutory guidance is issued under section 84 of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021 (‘the 2021 Act’). It is intended to increase awareness and inform the response to domestic abuse. It also conveys standards and promotes best practice.
Section 84(4) of the 2021 Act requires persons exercising public functions, to whom the guidance relates, to have regard to the guidance in the exercise of those functions. Some organisations may also have specific statutory duties to safeguard victims of domestic abuse. This guidance should therefore be read in conjunction with other relevant guidance and codes of practice, several of which are signposted within the document.
This guidance focuses on support for victims. Not everyone who has experienced, or is experiencing, domestic abuse chooses to describe themselves as a ‘victim’ and other terms may be preferred such as ‘survivor’. We recognise both terms, however, the guidance predominantly uses the term ‘victim’ to be consistent with the terminology of the 2021 Act.

Audience

This statutory guidance is aimed at organisations working with victims, perpetrators and commissioning services, including the police, local authorities, and the NHS. It is also of relevance to organisations dealing with consequences of domestic abuse such as employers and financial institutions. A non-exhaustive list of who this guidance is intended for is set out below:
English and Welsh local authorities
Police forces and Police and Crime Commissioners (PCCs)
The Crown Prosecution Service (CPS)
Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) and Cafcass Cymru
Services for forms of violence against women and girls including any specialist domestic abuse services (including services serving men and boys)
Local housing and homelessness teams, registered social landlords
Early years, childcare, schools, colleges, and higher education settings
Adult social care and children’s social care providers
NHS England and NHS Improvement (from 2022, NHS England)
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Clinical Commissioning Groups (from July 2022, Integrated Care Boards)
Integrated Care Partnerships (from July 2022)
NHS Trusts, NHS Foundation Trusts
Employers
HM Prison and Probation Services
HM Courts and Tribunals Service
Youth Offending services
Jobcentre Plus
Financial services (banks, building societies etc.)
Community and faith groups (including faith leaders)
The guidance applies to England. It applies to Wales insofar as it relates to matters in Wales that are reserved to the UK Government – this is primarily policing, and criminal, civil and family justice. In Wales, it is aimed at persons exercising public functions relating to these matters and devolved Welsh authorities must have regard to this guidance in respect to these matters.
All organisations in Wales should refer to the relevant Welsh legislation and associated guidance in respect to devolved matters, such as the Violence Against Women, Domestic Abuse and Sexual Violence (Wales) Act 2015 (‘the 2015 Act’) and its associated guidance.
We expect those carrying out devolved and non-devolved functions to continue to work together to implement the purposes of both the 2015 Act and the 2021 Act where relevant and appropriate.
Box 1.1: Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance


Structure

The guidance is broken down into seven chapters: Objectives; Understanding Domestic Abuse; Recognising Domestic Abuse; Impact of Domestic Abuse; Different experiences, needs and related considerations; Agency Response to Domestic Abuse; and Multi- Agency Response to Domestic Abuse. Each chapter includes a chapter summary, setting out its purpose and content.
Case studies help illustrate some of the subject matter described. The case studies that concern the experiences of victims have been anonymised to help protect their identities. They present examples and are not intended to be exhaustive or representative of the experiences of abuse that can be encountered by any group of individuals, or of any form of abuse that they relate to.
Annexes are included at the end of the guidance. These signpost the range of support available for victims (Annex A), define acronyms used within the document (Annex B), highlight further guidance available to support frontline professionals (Annex C), and summarise different protective orders which can be issued (Annex D).

Related material

The Government has published a refreshed Tackling Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Strategy and a complementary Tackling Domestic Abuse Plan, through these aiming to transform the whole of society’s response to the issue of violence against women and girls (VAWG)2, and help prevent and reduce VAWG crimes including domestic abuse. The Welsh Government has published a refreshed National Strategy to tackle Violence Against Women, Domestic Abuse and Sexual Violence (VAWDASV) in line with the statutory duty created under the 2015 Act which also seeks to tackle cause and effect.
The Supporting Male Victims Position Statement, VAWG National Statement of Expectations and VAWG Commissioning Toolkit have also been refreshed. The Supporting Male Victims Position Statement (2022) is an updated iteration of the Male Victims Position Statement (2019). It provides a focus on the additional challenges that can be faced by male victims of crimes considered in the cross-Government Tackling VAWG Strategy and the Tackling Domestic Abuse Plan, and outlines the continued commitment to better enable male victims to come forward and receive the support they

2 The term ‘violence against women and girls’ refers to acts of violence or abuse that we know disproportionately affect women and girls. Crimes and behaviours covered by this term include rape and other sexual offences, domestic abuse, stalking, ‘honour’-based abuse (including female genital mutilation, forced marriage, and ‘honour’ killings), as well as many others, including offences committed online. While the term ‘violence against women and girls’ is used, this refers to all victims of these offences.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

need. The National Statement of Expectations, and accompanying VAWG Commissioning Toolkit, have also been updated to provide clear and consistent guidance for local areas on how to commission victim support services, and to help ensure their response to VAWG is as collaborative, robust, and effective as it can be.
As part of developing the Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance, the Welsh Government and the Office of the Domestic Abuse Commissioner have been consulted and we thank them for their contributions. We thank the domestic abuse sector for their engagement in the consultation and sharing of best practice ways of working which has informed this guidance. We also thank the many victims and survivors who shared lived experiences and testimonials which were instrumental in the development of this guidance.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Chapter 1 – Objectives




Objectives of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021

The prevention of domestic abuse and the protection of all victims lies at the heart of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021 (‘the 2021 Act’) and its wider programme of work. The measures in the 2021 Act3 seek to:
promote awareness - putting domestic abuse at the top of everyone’s agenda, by introducing a statutory definition which includes economic abuse and recognising children as victims in their own right;
protect and support victims - establishing in law the office of Domestic Abuse Commissioner (DAC), introducing a new Domestic Abuse Protection Notice (DAPN) and Domestic Abuse Protection Order (DAPO), and placing a new duty on tier one local authorities to provide support to victims of domestic abuse, in refuges and other safe accommodation;
hold perpetrators to account - extending the controlling or coercive behaviour offence to cover post-separation abuse, extending the offence of disclosing private sexual photographs and films with intent to cause distress to cover threats to disclose such material, creating a new offence of non-fatal strangulation or suffocation of another person, clarifying by restating in statute the general position that a person may not consent to the infliction of serious harm and, by extension, is unable to consent to their own death;
transform the justice response - helping victims to give their best evidence in the criminal courts through the use of video evidence, screens and other special measures, and ensuring that victims of abuse do not suffer further trauma in family court proceedings by being cross-examined by the perpetrator; and
improve performance - driving consistency and better performance in the response to domestic abuse including by putting the guidance for the Domestic Violence Disclosure Scheme (DVDS) on a statutory footing and providing for a

3 Factsheets have been published providing more information about the provisions of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/domestic-abuse-bill-2020-factsheets.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

statutory code of practice relating to the processing of domestic abuse data for immigration purposes.

The measures of the 2021 Act will come into effect at different points following the completion of steps required for their implementation. The commencement schedule for provisions of the legislation has been published on GOV.UK. At the time of issuing this guidance not all provisions of the 2021 Act are in legal force.
Those with a duty to give regard to this guidance, and others, should also refer to the commencement schedule.

Objectives of the Domestic Abuse Statutory Guidance

Provide clear information on what domestic abuse is and how to identify it, including the behaviours that can amount to domestic abuse and the impact on adult and child victims. Individuals may not be aware that they are a victim of domestic abuse, they might blame themselves, fear the consequences of leaving the perpetrator, not know where they can seek help, or fear that they will experience stigma and shame if they do try to seek help. This guidance aims to provide clear information on what domestic abuse is and how to identify it.

Provide guidance and support to frontline professionals, and other organisations, including signposting to further resources. The guidance will support frontline professionals who have responsibilities to safeguard victims of domestic abuse. It outlines some of the strategic and operational frameworks key to providing a response, and the commissioning of domestic abuse services. It also signposts frontline professionals and wider organisations to other relevant resources relating to domestic abuse.

Convey standards and promote best practice for agency and multi-agency response. There is a significant amount of work underway to improve the response of frontline staff to domestic abuse for all agencies, and to promote multi-agency responses and best practices. Tackling domestic abuse requires a whole system approach.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Chapter 2 – Understanding Domestic Abuse




Background

Domestic abuse is a high harm, high volume crime that remains largely hidden. The Crime Survey for England and Wales (CSEW)4 for the year ending March 2020 estimated that 2.3 million adults aged 16 to 74 had experienced domestic abuse in the previous year.5 Childhood Local Data on Risks and Needs estimated that, between 2019 and 2020, approximately 1 in 15 children under the age of 17 live in households where a parent is a victim of domestic abuse.6
The police recorded over 1.5 million domestic abuse related incidents and crimes in England and Wales in the year ending March 2021.7 This is an increase of 6% from the previous year. Domestic abuse related incidents cover reports where, after initial investigation, the police have concluded that no notifiable crime was committed. Domestic abuse related crimes are defined as any incidence of threatening behaviour, violence or abuse (psychological, physical, sexual, financial, or emotional) towards another “personally connected” person, where it has been identified that an offence has taken place.
While domestic abuse is not itself a specific criminal offence, criminal offences may be committed by perpetrators. Related offences could include but are not limited to




4 The Crime Survey for England and Wales (CSEW) is a nationally representative face-to-face victimisation survey, in which people resident in households in England and Wales are asked about their experiences of a range of crimes in the 12 months prior to the interview. This includes self-completion modules on certain topics, including domestic abuse.
5 ONS. Domestic abuse in England and Wales overview - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk). Data year ending March 2020.
6 Children’s Commissioner. CHILDRN – Local and national data on childhood vulnerability. Data from 2017 to 2019.
7 ONS. Domestic abuse in England and Wales overview - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk). Data year ending March 2021.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

controlling or coercive behaviour8, harassment, stalking, criminal damage, physical assault, sexual assault, rape and murder.

Anyone can be affected by domestic abuse – regardless of age, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender reassignment, race, religion or belief. In addition, domestic abuse can manifest itself in different ways within different communities.

Whilst both men and women can be affected by domestic abuse, females are disproportionately the victims. The latest CSEW data for the year ending March 2020 estimates that 1.6 million females and 757,000 males aged 16 to 74 experienced domestic abuse in the previous year.9 According to this data, around one in four women aged 16 to 74 had been a victim of domestic abuse in their lifetime, compared with around one in seven men.10

The majority of domestic homicide victims are women.11 Data for the period March 2018 to 2020 showed that 276 women were victims of domestic homicide and in 97% of cases the suspect was male.12 Over the same period, 86 men were killed in domestic homicides. In 62% of the cases the suspected perpetrator of these homicides was male, and in 38% of the cases the suspect was female.13

Domestic abuse remains under reported. There can be many barriers to disclosing abuse, seeking criminal justice outcomes, and accessing services. Consideration is given to this in ‘Chapter 5 – Different experiences, needs and related considerations’.

The CSEW data can be taken to provide estimates of the prevalence of domestic abuse in England and Wales. It is clear that the scale of domestic abuse is vast and its impact is significant. Research published by the Home Office estimated the social and economic costs of domestic abuse to be in the region of £66 billion for victims identified in England and Wales within the year 2016 to 2017. Physical and emotional harms (the fear, anxiety and depression experienced by victims as a result of domestic abuse) were estimated to account for the overwhelming majority of the overall costs. The impact on individual victims is severe and can be wide-ranging and long-lasting. Further detail is set out in ‘Chapter 4 – Impact of Domestic Abuse’.

Statutory definition

Sections 1 to 3 of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021 (‘the 2021 Act’) create a statutory definition of domestic abuse. This definition is set out in Box 2.1 below.

8 Controlling or coercive behaviour in an intimate or family relationship may amount to a criminal offence under section 76 of the Serious Crime Act 2015.
9 ONS. Domestic abuse in England and Wales overview - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): Data year ending March 2020.
10 ONS. Domestic abuse prevalence and victim characteristics - Appendix tables - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): Data year ending March 2020.
11 ONS. Domestic abuse victim characteristics, England and Wales: Data year ending March 2020.
12 ONS. Domestic abuse victim characteristics, England and Wales - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): Data from 2017 to 2019.
13 ONS. Domestic abuse victim characteristics, England and Wales - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): 1.1 Domestic homicide: Data from 2017-2019.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance


In the definition person “A” refers to the perpetrator of the abuse, and person “B” refers to the victim of the abuse. The term ‘victim’ is used in the 2021 Act to denote someone who has experienced domestic abuse. This includes children who have seen, heard, or experienced the effects of domestic abuse, and are related to either the victim of the abusive behaviour, or the perpetrator (section 3 of the 2021 Act).
Section 1(3) of the 2021 Act provides for what constitutes behaviour that is abusive. This behaviour might consist of a single incident or a course of conduct. Section 1(3)(c) refers to controlling or coercive behaviour. This behaviour might amount to an offence under section 76 of the Serious Crime Act 2015. In order for the offence to be committed the behaviour must satisfy the test set out in section 76(1), this means it must be repeated or continuous and that the other elements of the criminal offence in the section must be made out.
Section 1(5) provides that, for the purposes of the 2021 Act, A’s behaviour may be behaviour “towards” B despite the fact that it consists of conduct directed at another person – for example B’s child, other family member, friend or colleague.
Section 2 of the 2021 Act provides the definition of “personally connected” and this includes those who would constitute a “relative” of the victim. The definition of “relative” has the meaning given under section 63(1) of the Family Law Act 1996 (‘the 1996 Act’) which includes immediate biological family, stepfamily and extended family of an individual including such family members of their present or former spouse, civil partner or cohabiting partner.
	“A” and “B” do not need to be living together, or co-habiting, to be “personally connected” under the 2021 Act.
Section 2(3) of the 2021 Act, for the purposes of the definition of “personally connected”, defines a “child” as a person under the age of 18 years. This will include a person aged 16 or 17.

Section 3 provides that a child (a person under the age of 18 years), is for the purposes of the 2021 Act, recognised as a victim of domestic abuse if they see, hear, or experience the effects of the abuse, and is related to “A” or “B”.

The 2021 Act does not create a single criminal offence of domestic abuse, and frontline responders should continue to consider the full range of existing legislation and safeguards to protect children. Offences to be considered could include common assault, assault occasioning actual bodily harm, and causing, or allowing, death or serious harm, or child cruelty, neglect, and violence. This last offence, under section 1 of the Children and Young Person Act 193314 was amended in 2015, to include causing a child emotional or psychological suffering, including through exposure to domestic abuse. Pursuant to section 31(9) of the Children Act 1989 “harm” means ill- treatment or the impairment of health or development of the child as a result of seeing or hearing the ill-treatment of another person. “Development” means physical,

14 Section 1 of the Children and Young Person Act 1933 concerns cruelty to persons under sixteen.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

intellectual, emotional, social or behavioural development; “Ill treatment” includes sexual abuse and forms of ill-treatment which are not physical.


Box 2.1: Domestic Abuse Act 2021 – Part 1 – Definition of domestic abuse


Section 1: Definition of “domestic abuse”

This section defines “domestic abuse” for the purposes of this Act.

Behaviour of a person (“A”) towards another person (“B”) is “domestic abuse” if—
A and B are each aged 16 or over and are “personally connected” to each other, and
the behaviour is abusive.

Behaviour is “abusive” if it consists of any of the following—
physical or sexual abuse;
violent or threatening behaviour;
controlling or coercive behaviour;
economic abuse (see subsection (4));
psychological, emotional or other abuse;

and it does not matter whether the behaviour consists of a single incident or a course of conduct.
“Economic abuse” means any behaviour that has a substantial adverse effect on B’s ability to —
acquire, use or maintain money or other property, or
obtain goods or services.
For the purposes of this Act, A’s behaviour may be behaviour “towards” B despite the fact that it consists of conduct directed at another person (for example, B’s child).
References in this Act to being abusive towards another person are to be read in accordance with this section.
For the meaning of “personally connected”, see section 2.


Section 2: Definition of “personally connected”

Two people are “personally connected” to each other if any of the following applies —
they are, or have been, married to each other;
they are, or have been, civil partners of each other;
they have agreed to marry one another (whether or not the agreement has been terminated);
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

they have entered into a civil partnership agreement (whether or not the agreement has been terminated);
they are, or have been, in an intimate personal relationship with each other;
they each have, or there has been a time when they each have had, a parental relationship in relation to the same child (see subsection (2));
they are relatives.
For the purposes of subsection (1)(f) a person has a parental relationship in relation to a child if —
the person is a parent of the child, or;
the person has parental responsibility for the child.
In this section —
“child” means a person under the age of 18 years;
“civil partnership agreement” has the meaning given by section 73 of the Civil Partnership Act 2004;
“parental responsibility” has the same meaning as in the Children Act 1989; “relative” has the meaning given by section 63(1) of the Family Law Act 1996.

Section 3: Children as victims of domestic abuse
This section applies where behaviour of a person (“A”) towards another person (“B”) is domestic abuse.
Any reference in this Act to a victim of domestic abuse includes a reference to a child who –
sees or hears, or experiences the effect of, the abuse, and
is related to A or B.
A child is related to a person for the purposes of subsection (2) if –
the person is a parent of, or has parental responsibility for, the child, or
the child and the person are relatives.
In this section –
“child” means person under the age of 18 years;
“parental responsibility” has the same meaning as in the Children Act 1989 (see section 3 of that Act);
“relative” has the meaning given by section 63(1) of the Family Law Act 1996.


Types of domestic abuse
To deliver an effective response, professionals and agencies should be aware of the different types of domestic abuse.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Intimate partner abuse

Domestic abuse most commonly takes place in intimate partner relationships, including same sex relationships.15 Intimate relationships can take different forms, partners do not need to be married or in a civil partnership and abuse can occur between non- cohabiting intimate partners. As with all forms of abuse, abuse in intimate relationships can vary in severity and frequency, ranging from a one-off occurrence to a continued pattern of behaviour.
Abuse can continue or intensify when a relationship has ended or is in the process of ending. This can be a very dangerous time for a victim including an increased risk to their physical safety. It is a highly critical period for ensuring support for victims, as they may consider returning to perpetrators during the period immediately after fleeing or ending the relationship. Separation can raise both the likelihood and consequences of risk because of the perpetrator’s perceived lack of control.
	Post-separation abuse may involve a range of abusive behaviour, see ‘Chapter 3 – Recognising Domestic Abuse’ for further detail. It may be facilitated by technology and without effective intervention it can be ongoing and may escalate. In the year ending March 2021, 57 women and 10 men were recorded as being victims of homicide by a current or ex-partner.16 According to the Femicide Census, 38% of the women killed by their ex-partner or ex-spouse from 2009 to 2018 were killed within the first month of separation and 89% in the first year.17 18
Teenage relationship abuse

Young people can experience domestic abuse within their relationships. Teenagers may not self-identify as victims. They may perceive their relationships to be ‘casual’, for example engaging in multiple romantic and sexual partners through dating apps. Those who engage in abusive behaviour may seek to minimise or deny the abuse by stating that they were not in a relationship.
Teenage relationship abuse is not a term that is defined by the 2021 Act, or elsewhere in law. However, if the victim and perpetrator are at least 16 years old, abuse in their relationship can fall under the statutory definition of domestic abuse. Whilst young people under the age of 16 can experience abuse in a relationship, it would be considered child abuse as a matter of law. Abusive behaviours by one young person toward another, where each are aged between 16 and 18 could be both child abuse and domestic abuse as a matter of law. Ultimately, in responding to cases of abuse involving those under 18, child safeguarding procedures should be followed. See the


15 ONS. Domestic abuse prevalence and victim characteristics - Appendix tables - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): Data from year ending March 2020.
16 ONS. Appendix tables: homicide in England and Wales - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): Data year ending March 2021.
17 Femicide Census: UK Femicides 2009-2018.
18 To note that there is no agreed definition of ’femicide’. For the Femicide Census, ‘femicide’ relates to any killing of women and girls by men. The Census relies on the media and information that is publicly available and accessible, and therefore may represent an incomplete picture of all ’femicides’.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

section ‘Multi-agency working to safeguard children’ in ‘Chapter 7 – Multi-Agency Response to Domestic Abuse’ for further detail.
Abusive behaviours within relationships between young people can include similar incidents or patterns of behaviours as adult relationships. For teenagers in particular, abuse to harass or control victims can occur through using technology, this includes social media, or location-based tracking apps, such as Find My Friends. Young people’s lives are often heavily online-based and perpetrators of abuse may exploit this, demanding access to passwords and monitoring online activity. Young people may also experience intimate image abuse within their relationships, including threats to expose intimate images.19
Teenage relationship abuse often occurs outside of a domestic setting. Victims may feel that domestic abuse occurs only between adults who are cohabiting or married. Teenage victims may find it difficult to identify abusive behaviour, for instance, controlling or jealous behaviour may be misconstrued as love.
Domestic abuse in teenage relationships can be just as severe and has the potential to be as life threatening as abuse in adult relationships. Young people who experience domestic abuse do so at a particularly vulnerable point in their lives.20 They may experience a complex transition from childhood to adulthood which impacts on behaviour and decision making. It may impact on the way that they respond to abuse or if and how they engage with services.
Due to the stigma attached to LGBT (Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Trans) identities, young people from the LGBT community may lack relevant and accurate information on healthy relationships, which may inform behaviour and decision making. LGBT young people may face unique obstacles to seeking help, especially in a context of a first relationship or when first coming out as they may be unable to confide in their peers or family, owing to the reaction they might receive due to their sexuality or gender identity.21 See ‘Chapter 5 – Different experiences, needs and related considerations’ for further information. In addition, for more information on responding see the section ‘Responding to children and young people’.
Abuse by family members

Domestic abuse may also be perpetrated by a family member: by children, grandchildren, parents, those with “parental responsibility”, siblings, or extended families including in-laws.22 The definition of “personally connected” at section 2 of the 2021 Act makes reference to relatives and relative has the meaning given by section 63 of the Family Law Act 1996 (‘the 1996 Act’), as explained in the ‘Statutory definition’

19 Threats to disclose private sexual photographs and films, without the consent of the relevant individual, and with the intent to cause distress, has been made a specific offence under section 69 of the 2021 Act. For further information, see the section ‘Technology- facilitated abuse’.
20 SafeLives. Safe Young Lives: Young People and domestic abuse. 2017.
21 Magic, J, Kelly, P. LGBT+ people’s experiences of domestic abuse: a report on Galop’s domestic abuse advocacy service: Galop: 2017.
22 As will be reflected in the updated child-to-parent abuse guidance, while this statutory definition of domestic abuse applies to perpetrators aged 16 or above, children under 16 can engage in abusive behaviours.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

section of this guidance. Abuse may be perpetrated towards a victim by more than one relative.
Abuse within a family set up can encompass a number of different harmful behaviours. Abuse may be perpetrated as a perceived means to protect or defend the ‘honour’ of an individual, family or community against alleged or perceived breaches of the family or community’s code of behaviour. It can therefore include ‘honour’-based abuse, forced marriage, female genital mutilation, and other harmful practices such as reproductive coercion (and as part of this, forced abortion). See 'Chapter 3 – Recognising Domestic Abuse' for further detail on these forms of abuse.
Young people may be at an increased risk of abuse perpetrated by family members.23 Young people may be inherently more vulnerable because it is harder for them to distinguish between normal and abusive behaviours, and this may especially be the case where the perpetrator is a trusted family member. A young person may find it more difficult to report or disclose abuse by an adult. There may be no safe channel for disclosure, young people may fear the repercussions of disclosure or may not want other family members to get into trouble. There may be an increased risk of abuse by family members for young LGBT people. Research by Galop suggests that young LGBT people (aged 13 to 24) disclose disproportionately higher levels of abuse from immediate family members compared to other age groups.24
In responding to abuse by family members, services should consider the ways in which the patterns of abuse may differ from, or in cases relate to, patterns of abuse found in cases of intimate partner abuse. Services should ensure assessment procedures are used appropriately to identify risk. For example, professionals should be aware that family members are not always protective figures for those who experience intimate partner abuse, as in some circumstances family members may constitute a risk themselves and be complicit in abuse.
Child-to-parent abuse

	Abuse within the family includes child-to-parent abuse, also commonly referred to as Adolescent to Parent Violence/Abuse (APV/A) and Child and Adolescent to Parental Violence and Abuse (CAPVA). Child-to-parent abuse can involve children of all ages, including adult children, and abuse toward siblings, grandparents, aunts, uncles as well as other family members such as those acting as kinship carers. If the child is 16 years of age or over, the abuse falls under the statutory definition of domestic abuse in the 2021 Act.
There is no specific legal definition of child-to-parent abuse but it is generally accepted to involve some of the patterns of behaviour that can be found in other relationship contexts. Behaviours can encompass, but are not limited to, humiliating and belittling

23 ONS. Domestic abuse prevalence and victim characteristics - Appendix tables - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): Data from year ending March 2020.
24 The research is based on analysis of 626 LGBT+ victims who received advocacy support from Galop’s domestic abuse service in Greater London. Magic, J, Kelly, P. LGBT+ people’s experiences of domestic abuse: a report on Galop’s domestic abuse advocacy service: Galop: 2017.

Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

language, violence and threats, jealous and controlling behaviours, damage to property, stealing and heightened sexualised behaviours. Child-to-parent abuse appears gendered, with the majority of cases being perpetrated by sons against their mothers, although men and boys are victims too.25
Like other forms of abuse, child-to-parent abuse is characterised by shame and stigma which could mean parents are less likely to report the abuse to the police. Parents may fear being blamed, disbelieved, or conversely having their child taken away from them or criminalised leaving them reluctant to seek help. Recorded incidents likely represent only a small number of real cases as families facing crisis point make the difficult decision to disclose their abuse. Victims of this type of abuse should also receive appropriate domestic abuse response and support.
The Home Office intends to update the guidance on child-to-parent abuse. For more information on responding to children see ‘Chapter 6 – Agency Response to Domestic Abuse’.

Box 2.2: Case Study

Case Study

Between 2017-2019, Caroline experienced escalating abusive behaviours from her adolescent daughter, including physical and verbal attacks, as well as threats to kill. During this time, Caroline struggled to find help and support from services and statutory agencies.
When Caroline’s youngest son was assaulted by her daughter, she made the decision that she could not remain at home safely with the family but was met with the threat of abandonment prosecution by her local authority. Despite the police also raising concerns, social care services stated she was to remain at home, leaving the family to deal with high- risk incidents.
Caroline was forced to home educate her daughter as she had stopped attending school. Throughout this time, her daughter’s abusive behaviour was increasing and Caroline and her family were living in constant fear. Caroline had to give uFp her job as she could not leave her daughter at home alone for fear of further risk to the family. Caroline’s requests for more support, and for her daughter to be voluntary accommodated by the local authority under section 20 of the Children Act 1989, were ignored.
Caroline’s daughter’s behaviour was a daily battlefield of physical and verbal attacks. She could not leave her other children in the same room with her and had to install CCTV. Eventually provision at a care home was offered to Caroline’s daughter for two nights a week, giving the family some respite. However, she soon stopped attending when told she did not have to.


25 Baker, V , Bonnick, H. Understanding CAPVA: A rapid literature review on child and adolescent to parent violence and abuse for the Domestic Abuse Commissioner’s Office: Respect: 2021.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Chapter 3 – Recognising Domestic Abuse





Domestic abuse can encompass a wide range of behaviours. It can but does not have to involve physical acts of violence and can include threatening behaviour, controlling or coercive behaviour, emotional, psychological, sexual and/or economic abuse. Domestic abuse can involve abuse facilitated and perpetrated online or offline. It is widely recognised that the perpetrator’s desire to exercise power and control over the victim is at the centre of abusive behaviours. Many victims will experience abusive behaviours simultaneously, perpetrators may demonstrate a wide range and use different tactics to gain power and control.

Physical abuse, violent or threatening behaviour
Physical abuse and violent or threatening behaviour can involve but is not limited to:

Being, or threatened to be, kicked, punched, pinched, pushed, dragged, shoved, slapped, scratched, strangled, spat on and bitten;
Use, or threats of use, of weapons including knives and irons;
Being, or threatened to be, burned, scalded, poisoned, or drowned;
Objects being thrown at or in the direction of the victim;
Violence, or threats of physical abuse or violence, against family members;
Causing harm by damaging or denying access to medical aids or equipment – for example a deaf person may be prevented from communicating in sign language or may have their hearing aids removed; and
Harming someone whilst performing ‘caring’ duties, which are often performed by relatives. This is especially relevant for individuals who are heavily dependent on others, such as disabled and older people and may involve force feeding, over-medication, withdrawal of medicine or denying access to medical care.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Section 70 of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021 (‘the 2021 Act’) amends Part 5 of the Serious Crime Act 2015 to create an offence of non-fatal strangulation. Non-fatal strangulation can be used as a form of assault in domestic abuse and a history of strangulation can increase the risk of an eventual fatality.26 Visible marks are not always present; the absence of marks should not undermine an account of non-fatal strangulation.
Non-fatal strangulation is often used to instil fear and exert power and control.27 Victims who experience non-fatal strangulation may believe at the time that they will die as a result.28 Loss of consciousness, even temporary, can cause brain damage, this includes long-term neurological damage such as memory loss and facial droop. In addition, loss of consciousness can create an increased risk of miscarriage and stroke.
The occurrence of non-fatal strangulation in a sexual context is also addressed within the 2021 Act, see the section on ‘Sexual abuse’.29

Sexual abuse
	Victims of domestic abuse may experience behaviour that is sexually abusive.30 This abuse can involve:
Rape and sexual assaults;
Being pressured into sex, or sexual acts, including with other people;
Being forced to take part in sexual acts because of threats to others, including children;
Unwanted sexual contact or demands;
‘Corrective’ rape (the practice of raping someone with the aim of ‘curing’ them of being LGBT);
Intentional exposure to HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) or sexually transmitted infections;
Being pressurised or being tricked into having unsafe sex, including deception over the use of birth control;
Forced involvement in making or watching pornography; and
Hurting a victim during sex including non-fatal strangulation.


26 Glass, N, et al. Non-fatal strangulation is an important risk factor for homicide of women: J Emerg Med: 2008 Oct; 35(3):329-335.
27 See Strangulation and suffocation - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk).
28 Williams, R, Monkton-Smith, J. Non-fatal Strangulation: A summary report on data collected from SUTDA survey. Stand up to domestic abuse: 2020.
29 The Domestic Abuse Act 2021 commencement schedule sets out the actual and planned timing for commencement of the provisions of the Act: Domestic Abuse Act 2021 commencement schedule - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk).
30 The year ending March 2020 Crime Survey shows that, since the age of 16, an estimated 4% of adults aged 16 to 74 had been victims of domestic abuse related sexual assault since the age of 16. Women were more likely to report being victims; with 7.3% of women and 0.7% of men reporting domestic abuse related sexual assault in their lifetime. ONS. Domestic abuse prevalence and victim characteristics - Office for National Statistics: Data year ending March 2020.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Sexual abuse can coexist with sexual exploitation. Forced sex acts may involve activities such as being forced to perform pornography or to strip in person, via webcam or live streaming platform. Perpetrators may force or coerce a victim into exchanging sex for drugs, alcohol, or money, or coerce them into committing a crime, such as theft, to pay, for example, for the perpetrator’s drugs or alcohol.
“Rough sex”, including sadomasochistic activity, can involve the infliction of pain or violence, simulated or otherwise with the aim of providing sexual gratification for the parties involved. This type of activity can encompass a wide range of behaviours. Although it may occur in private and be consensual, section 71 of the 2021 Act, which states that the infliction of serious harm resulting in actual bodily harm (ABH) or other more serious injury31, means that the person responsible for those injuries will be liable to a criminal prosecution, irrespective of whether consent had been given by the person in receipt of the injuries or not. The matter of consent may be challenging, as victims of domestic abuse may be unable to recognise where they have been coerced into providing consent.
Non-consensual or harmful non-fatal strangulation can arise in a sexual context. Section 70 of the 2021 Act makes a change to the Serious Crime Act 2015 to provide that a person commits the offence of strangulation or suffocation if they intentionally strangle another person or do any other act that affects another person’s ability to breathe. These actions constitute battery. Whilst it is a defence for the person accused to show that the other person consented, this does not apply where that other person suffers serious harm as a result of the strangulation or any other act, and the person accused intended to cause that other person harm or were reckless as to whether that other person would suffer serious harm.
Victims of domestic abuse can also be the subject of reproductive coercion, which can involve:
restricting a partner’s access to birth control;
refusing to use a birth control method;
deception regarding the use of birth control including falsely claiming to be using contraception; and
forcing a partner to get an abortion, IVF or other related procedure; or denying access to such procedures.
Reproductive coercion can take less overt forms – for instance, a perpetrator may not actively force the victim to have an abortion, but the general cycle of abuse may leave her feeling she has no choice. Women from ethnic minority groups may be more likely to experience reproductive coercion, including forced abortion for ‘honour’-based





31 Causing death is already an offence.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

practices, however, there is at present limited research.32 Further information on coercion is included in the 'Controlling or coercive behaviour' section.

Controlling or coercive behaviour
Controlling or coercive behaviour can amount to an offence under section 76 of the Serious Crime Act 2015. The offence carries a maximum penalty of five years imprisonment. It is only applicable where:
The victim and perpetrator are “personally connected” at the time the behaviour takes place;
The behaviour has had a serious effect on the victim, meaning that it has caused the victim to fear violence will be used against them on two or more occasions, or it has had a substantial adverse effect on the victim’s usual day to day activities; and
The behaviour takes place repeatedly or continuously.

The perpetrator must have known that their behaviour would have a serious effect on the victim, or the behaviour must have been such that he or she ought to have known it would have that effect. Section 76 of the Serious Crime Act 2015 sets out in full the offence of controlling or coercive behaviour.
Section 68 of the 2021 Act will amend the definition of “personally connected” in section 76 of the Serious Crime Act 2015. It will remove the “living together” requirement. This means that the offence will apply to partners, ex-partners, or family members, regardless of whether the victim and perpetrator live together. It will therefore apply in contexts where controlling or coercive behaviour by an intimate partner takes place post-separation or is perpetrated by a family member who does not live with the victim.33
Controlling or coercive behaviour also forms part of the definition of domestic abuse at section 1(3)(c) of the 2021 Act. The following examples are within the range of behaviours that might be considered controlling or coercive behaviour. This list is not exhaustive:
Controlling or monitoring the victim's daily activities and behaviour, including making them account for their time, dictating what they can wear, what and when they can eat, when and where they may sleep;
Controlling a victim’s access to finances, including monitoring their accounts or coercing them into sharing their passwords to bank accounts in order to facilitate economic abuse;



32 See The Halo Project. “Definition of Honour Based Violence”.; SafeLives. Spotlight Report #Hidden Victims: Your choice: ‘honour’- based violence, forced marriage and domestic abuse: 2017.
33 This amendment to the controlling or coercive behaviour offence is planned to come into force later in 2022 and the relevant guidance and training material for frontline agencies will be updated. Statutory guidance issued by the Government under section 77 of the 2015 Act, outlining what constitutes controlling or coercive behaviour, will also be updated.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Isolating the victim from family, friends and professionals who may be trying to support them, intercepting messages or phone calls;
Refusing to interpret and/or hindering access to communication;
Preventing the victim from taking medication, or accessing medical equipment and assistive aids, over-medicating them, or preventing the victim from accessing health or social care (especially relevant for disabled victims or those with long-term health conditions);
Using substances to control a victim through dependency, or controlling their access to substances;
Using children to control the victim, e.g. threatening to take the children away;
Using animals to control or coerce a victim, e.g. harming or threatening to harm, or give away, pets or assistance dogs;
Threats to expose sensitive information (e.g. sexual activity or sexual orientation) or make false allegations to family members, religious or local community including via photos or the internet;
Intimidation and threats of disclosure of sexual orientation and/or gender identity to family, friends, work colleagues, community and others;
Intimidation and threats of disclosure of health status or an impairment to family, friends, work colleagues and wider community – particularly where this may carry a stigma in the community;
Preventing the victim from learning a language or making friends outside of their ethnic or cultural background;
Threatening precarious immigration status against the victim, withholding documents, giving false information to a victim about their visa or visa application, e.g. using immigration law to threaten the victim with potential deportation;
Using the victim’s health status to induce fear and restrict their freedom of movement;
Threats of institutionalisation (particularly for disabled or elderly victims); and
Physical violence, violent or threatening behaviour, sexual abuse, emotional or psychological abuse, economic abuse and verbal abuse (as further detailed in this chapter).

Controlling or coercive behaviour is a pattern of behaviour often perpetrated alongside other forms of abuse. A victim may not be aware of the abusive behaviours or be prepared to make a disclosure. In supporting victims to address controlling or coercive behaviour, agencies should give consideration to the cumulative impact of a
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

perpetrator’s behaviours (including those that may seem harmless) and the pattern of behaviour within the context of the relationship.

Controlling or coercive behaviour should be dealt with as part of safeguarding and public protection procedures. Professionals should be aware of the impact of this behaviour on victims, including children and young people.

Box 3.1: Case Study

Coercive or controlling behaviour is common in domestic abuse and can act as a driver for many of the other behaviours, as illustrated in the case study below.

Case Study

Susan had been with her partner for almost 20 years and he had been abusive towards her from early on. She was forced to borrow money from close family as he emptied her account as soon as her wages went in every month. Her partner was incredibly jealous whenever she left the house, even to go to work. He would insist on driving her to the front door of her workplace and picking her up from exactly the same place. “He’d sexually abused me from early on in our relationship. I think I’d just really become numb to it. He was always angry and rude with me; he’d often hit or kick me and several times burned me and tried to strangle me. He thought I was seeing other people at work. Because of my job I had to take time off if he’d beaten me up really bad. I didn’t want anyone to know. But sometimes I would use the old lines that I’d accidentally fallen down the stairs or walked into a door. Silly things. Maybe they all knew. But no one ever said.”
Because she was dependent on her partner to get to work this often meant he refused to take her or she was late and, coupled with the time off she had when she’d been physically assaulted, this caused problems with her employer. Eventually they said that she had to leave as she was too unreliable to be part of the team. “This was my life, what I’d always wanted to do. And a break from everything back home. I was completely floored when I lost it all. Plus, it meant we couldn’t pay for the house or anything. My ex completely lost it when he realised what this meant.”
Following a further attack where Susan was stabbed with a kitchen knife and feared for her life, she called the police. She then moved to a refuge.


The statutory guidance on controlling or coercive behaviour, once updated, will provide greater detail on recognising this form of abuse.

Harassment or Stalking

Where harassment or stalking occurs, and the perpetrator and victim are 16 or over and “personally connected”, this behaviour falls within the scope of the statutory definition of domestic abuse in the 2021 Act. For example, it may constitute physical
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

abuse, threatening behaviour, controlling or coercive behaviour, or emotional or psychological abuse.
There is no statutory definition of harassment but it includes repeated attempts to impose unwanted communications and contact upon a victim, in a manner that could be expected to cause distress or fear. It is generally acknowledged that harassment involves behaviour that is intended to cause a person alarm or distress or to cause them to fear violence when the perpetrator knows or ought to know that their conduct amounts to harassment. Where there is evidence to show that such conduct has occurred on more than one occasion, the perpetrator could be prosecuted under the Protection from Harassment Act 1997 (‘the 1997 Act’).
The perpetrator’s behaviour may follow a pattern, such as sending messages which the recipient finds alarming or distressing, or which causes them to fear violence. Alternatively, the perpetrator’s behaviour may differ on each occasion, for example they could use a variety of means to harass the victim such as sending threatening messages (for example via text or social media) or emails, making abusive phone calls, damaging property or falsely reporting a person to the police when they have done nothing wrong.
Similarly, there is no statutory definition of stalking. Examples of the type of behaviour considered in particular circumstances to be acts, or omissions, associated with stalking are set out in section 2A of the 1997 Act. This list is not exhaustive, nor does the offence require a personal connection, which means it is wider than, and differs from, domestic abuse:
Following a person;
Contacting, or attempting to contact, a person by any means;
Publishing any statement or other material —
relating or purporting to relate to a person, or
purporting to originate from a person;
Monitoring the use by a person of the internet, email or any other form of electronic communication;
Loitering in any place (whether public or private);
Interfering with any property in the possession of a person; and
Watching or spying on a person.
The police and the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) have also adopted the following description, which appears in the statutory guidance on Stalking Protection Orders, issued under the Stalking Protection Act 2019: stalking is a pattern of unwanted, fixated and obsessive behaviour which is intrusive. It can include harassment that amounts to stalking or stalking that causes fear of violence or serious alarm or distress to the victim.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

	Stalking behaviours may vary but are often motivated by obsession and their behaviour shares a consistent set of characteristics involving Fixated, Obsessive, Unwanted and/or Repeated (FOUR) behaviours, online and/or offline. Victims of domestic abuse may be vulnerable to stalkers, particularly when a relationship has ended.
There is no ‘typical’ stalking perpetrator or stalking victim. This crime disproportionately affects women and girls, but it is important to recognise that men and boys are victims too, and that both men and women can be perpetrators. CSEW data for the year ending March 2020 found that since the age of 16, 9% of women and 3% of men aged 16 to 74 had experienced domestic stalking.34 Stalking affects people of all ages, and victims come from a wide range of backgrounds – it is not restricted to public figures and celebrities.
More information on stalking can be found in Annex A of the statutory guidance on Stalking Protection Orders. Stalking behaviour may on the surface appear ‘harmless’, particularly if it is considered in isolation rather than as part of a wider pattern of potentially abusive and harmful behaviour. The context of the behaviour, including the motivations behind the behaviour and the impact on the victims should be considered.

Economic abuse
Economic abuse refers to behaviour that has a substantial adverse effect35 on an individual’s ability to acquire, use or maintain money or other property, or to obtain goods or services.36 This can include an individual’s ability to acquire food or clothes, or access transportation or utilities. These behaviours can include an attempt to control through restriction, exploitation and/or sabotage.
Economic abuse can also amount to the offence of controlling or coercive behaviour, under section 76 of the Serious Crime Act 2015, where it takes place repeatedly or continuously, the victim and the perpetrator are “personally connected” and the behaviour has a serious effect on the victim. This means that the behaviour causes the victim to fear violence will be used against them on two or more occasions, or it has a substantial adverse effect on the victim’s usual day to day activities and the perpetrator knows, or ought to know, that it will have a serious effect on the victim.


34 ONS. Domestic abuse prevalence and victim characteristics - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): Data year ending March 2020.
35 Economic abuse can be prosecuted under the offence of controlling or coercive behaviour in section 76 of the Serious Crime Act 2015 (‘the 2015 Act’). As defined in the 2015 Act, the offence of controlling or coercive behaviour states that:
An offence is committed by ‘A’ if:
A repeatedly or continuously engages in behaviour towards another person, ‘B’, that is controlling or coercive;
At the time of the behaviour, A and B are “personally connected”;
The behaviour has a serious effect on B; and
A knows or ought to know that the behaviour will have a serious effect on B.
Once in force, section 68 of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021 will amend the definition of “personally connected’’ in section 76 of the 2015 Act to remove the “living together’’ requirement, which means that the offence of controlling or coercive behaviour will apply to partners, ex-partners or family members, regardless of whether the victim and perpetrator live together.
36 See Adams, AE, Sullivan, CM, Bybee, D, Greeson, MR. Development of the Scale of Economic Abuse: Violence Against Women: 2008: 14(5):563-588.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Examples of economic abuse might include the following:

Controlling the family income;
Not allowing a victim to earn or spend any money unless ‘permitted’;
Denying the victim food or only allowing them to eat a particular type of food;
Running up bills and debts such as credit or store cards in a victim’s name, including without them knowing;
Refusing to contribute to household income or costs;
Deliberately forcing a victim to go to the family courts so they incur additional legal fees;
Interfering with or preventing a victim from regularising their immigration status so that they are economically dependent on the perpetrator;
Preventing a victim from claiming welfare benefits, or forcing someone to commit benefit fraud or misappropriating such benefits;
Interfering with a victim’s education, training, employment and career so that they are economically dependent on the perpetrator;
Not allowing a victim access to mobile phone/car/utilities;
Damaging the victim’s property;
Not allowing a victim to buy pet food or access veterinary care for their pet;
Coercing the victim into signing over property or assets;
Refusing to make agreed or required payments, for example mortgage repayments or child maintenance payments; and
Deliberately frustrating the sale of shared assets, or the closure of joint accounts or mortgages.
Economic abuse can make a victim economically dependent on the perpetrator, and/or create economic instability, thereby limiting their ability to escape and access safety. This can result in a victim staying with a perpetrator and experiencing more abuse and harm as a result. Some forms of economic abuse may take place or persist after the victim has separated from the perpetrator. Children can experience the effects of economic abuse; this includes where it creates an environment where they lack essentials, and which may in cases escalate to severe forms of deprivation or child poverty.

A nationally representative survey on the impact of economic abuse highlighted that 57% of victims of economic abuse were in or had been in debt, 26% had a negatively impacted credit score, and 25% had experienced abuse related to spending and credit,
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

such as having debt put in their name without their knowledge, or due to coercion.37 The organisation Surviving Economic Abuse, in partnership with Money Advice Plus, has created a guide to understanding economic abuse for victims.

Emotional or psychological abuse
Domestic abuse often involves emotional or psychological abuse. Some of these behaviours will also be controlling or coercive behaviour. Emotional or psychological abuse can include:
Manipulating a person’s anxieties or beliefs or abusing a position of trust;
Hostile behaviours or silent treatment as part of a pattern of behaviour to make the victim feel fearful;
Being insulted, including in front of others. This includes insulting someone about their race, sex or gender identity, gender reassignment, sexual orientation, disability, age, faith or belief or undermining an individual’s ability to parent or ability to work;
Repeatedly being belittled;
Keeping a victim awake/preventing them from sleeping;
Using violence or threats towards assistance dogs and pets to intimidate the victim and cause distress, including threatening to harm the animal as well as controlling how the owner is able to care for the animal;
Threatening to harm third parties (for example family, friends or colleagues);
Using social media sites to intimidate the victim; and
Persuading a victim to doubt their own sanity or mind (including ‘gaslighting’).

Verbal abuse
Verbal abuse may amount to emotional or psychological abuse, threatening behaviour, or controlling or coercive behaviour. Examples include:
Repeated yelling and shouting;
Abusive, insulting, threatening or degrading language;
Verbal humiliation either in private or in company;
Being laughed at and being made fun of; and
Discriminating against someone or mocking them about their disability, sex or gender identity, gender reassignment, religion or faith belief, sexual orientation, age, physical appearance etc.

37 Butt, E. Know economic abuse: 2020 Report: Refuge: 2020.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Technology-facilitated abuse
Perpetrators can use technology, including social media to abuse victims. This can happen during and after the relationship. A representative survey conducted by Refuge found that one in six women experiencing at least one behaviour suggestive of online abuse or harassment, reported that the abusive behaviour was perpetrated by a current or ex-partner.38 Some examples of technology-facilitated abuse include:
Placing false or malicious information about a victim on their or others’ social media;
Setting up false social media accounts in the name of the victim;
'Trolling’ with abusive, offensive or deliberately provocative messages via social media platforms or online forums;
Image-based abuse – for example, the creation of false/digitally altered images and the non-consensual distribution, or threat thereof, of private sexual photographs and films with the intent to cause the person depicted distress (‘revenge porn’);
‘Upskirting’ which involves someone taking a picture under another person’s clothing without their knowledge;
Hacking into, monitoring or controlling email accounts, social media profiles and phone calls;
Blocking the victim from using their online accounts, responding in the victim’s place or creating false online accounts;
Use of spyware or GPS locators on items such as phones, computers, wearable technology, cars, motorbikes and pets;
Hacking internet enabled devices such as PlayStations or iPads to gain access to accounts or trace information such as a person’s location;
Using personal devices such as smart watches or smart home devices (such as Amazon Alexa, Google Home Hubs, etc) to monitor, control or frighten; and
Use of hidden cameras.
Section 69 of the 2021 Act, amended the offence under section 33 of the Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015, of disclosing a private sexual photograph or film with intent to cause distress to an individual who appears in the photograph or film, so as to include threats to disclose such photographs and films. This means it is a criminal offence for an individual to threaten to share intimate images without the consent of the individual depicted, with the intent to cause distress.
Threats to share intimate or sexual images and films may be used as a part of a pattern of behaviour to control, coerce or distress the victim during a relationship with a

38 Refuge. 2021. Unsocial Spaces: Make online spaces safer for women and girls.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

perpetrator and following separation. A survey undertaken by Refuge39 found that one in 14 adults in England and Wales have experienced threats to share intimate images or videos – equivalent to 4.4 million people.
The same survey found that threats to share intimate images are most prevalent amongst young people (aged 18 to 34), with one in seven young women, and one in nine young men experiencing such threats. ‘Revenge porn’ and forms of abuse carried out online can have a significant and long-term impact on a victim. This includes re- traumatisation and is in part due to long-lasting privacy violations. Victims may need to be supported in taking action to report and remove material published online.
Whilst technology can be used as a means of perpetuating abuse, it can also be used by victims when reporting it. There are several live chat functions run by service providers to facilitate reporting and discrete online tools and live sessions for victims to receive advice anonymously, should they choose to.
The Government is taking steps to further protect victims of abuse facilitated by technology through the Online Safety Bill.40 This legislation will put in place strengthened measures for technology firms to safeguard online service users.
Refuge provide guidance on technology facilitated abuse and technology safety resources to support victims of abuse and professionals working with victims.

Abuse relating to faith
Whilst an individual’s faith can be a source of support and comfort to victims, domestic abuse can occur in relation to it, and through using, manipulating, or exploiting it. This abuse can have a deeply damaging impact on victims, and might include, but is not limited to, the following examples:
Manipulation and exploitation through the influence of religion;
Requirements for secrecy and silence;
Marital rape and the use of religious scripture to justify that;
Coercion to conform or control through the use of sacred or religious texts/teaching e.g. theological justifications for sexual coercion or abuse;
Causing harm, isolation and/or neglect to get rid of an ‘evil force’ or ‘spirit’ that is believed to have possessed the victim; and
Requirement of obedience to the perpetrator of domestic abuse, owing to religion or faith, or their ‘divine’ position.


39 Refuge. The Naked Threat: It’s time to change the law to protect survivors from image-based abuse: 2020.
40 See Online Safety Bill: factsheet - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk).
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

	Domestic abuse can also involve preventing a victim from practising their faith or religious obligations. This may include the perpetrator:

Forcing the victim to act or behave in ways which contradict religious beliefs and or spiritual rituals and practice (e.g. forcing the victim to transgress religious dietary observations);
Preventing the victim from performing acts of worship, prayers and/or attending communal worship;
Forcing sexual acts which contradict religious observance and or religious law (e.g. during and after menstruation or pre-marital sex); and
Forcing or limiting access to abortion, birth control or sterilisation when this will contravene religious observance.

Religious marriage and divorce

Religious-only marriages, being unregistered marriages that are conducted in accordance with the rites of a particular religion but without legal status, can be used by perpetrators to:
Actively discourage or prevent the marriage being registered in English and Welsh law ensuring that victims are denied their legal rights and protection in the event of a breakdown in the marriage. Many women are unaware that their marriage does not have legal status because they are coerced or deceived into thinking their marriage is legal. This along with an insecure immigration status of the victim can act as a powerful tool for coercion and control.
Coerce or trick women into being part of a polygamous marriage where the husband believes he can have more than one wife at the same time.
A perpetrator may coerce a victim to enter into a marriage, through the use of faith or in the context of values held within a religious community, and young people can be at increased risk of pressure to marry. Although this may be on the grounds of purported religious motivations, no major faith condones forced marriage. Some beliefs or practices within traditions may be misappropriated or exploited. For further information see the 'Forced Marriage' section.
A form of domestic abuse may include the withholding of a religious divorce, as a means to control and intimidate victims. This can be present in different forms under different faiths. In some cases, it will be accompanied by other manifestations of abuse within the marriage. Abuse relating to faith can amount to psychological or emotional abuse and to coercive or controlling behaviour.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

In Judaism this concerns the Get41 and instances whereby a recalcitrant husband may refuse to give his wife a Jewish bill of divorce (or a wife may unreasonably refuse to accept a Jewish bill of divorce).

The ability to refuse to give a Get has been recognised as a specific issue providing abusive husbands with power and control and will sometimes be used to exert leverage in relation to other aspects of the divorce. The refusal will have a significant impact on the wife’s wider living conditions: she will often be severely restricted in her social and personal life.42 It affects her ability to re-marry and directly affects the status of any children she may have in the future. In such cases, women are able to consult at the earliest opportunity their Beth Din on the matter of issuing the Get. Batei Din, as religious court authorities, are able to advise couples on the position in Jewish law for dissolution of the religious marriage.

In Islam this can involve a husband refusing to grant his wife a religious divorce, talaq,43 which is the annulment of a nikkah,44 as a way of prolonging the process of divorce. The threat of talaq being uttered and the arbitrary use of this by perpetrators may also be cited by some victims. Whilst Islamic law enables women to obtain a religious divorce of their own accord, they may find that they are prevented from doing so, and victims may fear the repercussions of seeking to do so or fear being disowned by family or community members.

In some Christian traditions, divorce is either highly discouraged or not recognised at all. In some traditions, separating from an abuser may be tolerated, but divorce is not recognised and therefore any consequent remarriage is not recognised by the Church. In some cases, without the community’s acceptance of the divorce, a victim may be left to remain in the marriage or be isolated by the community and prevented from participating in the Church.
	Safeguarding remains the highest priority in all cases. Victims of all faiths should be encouraged by professionals and services they engage with to take steps to protect themselves from harm.






41 ‘Get’ – a Jewish bill of divorce. Without such a document, a couple remain married religiously, even if they have been divorced in the civil courts. Jewish couples have their marriages registered civilly at the time of their religious marriage. However, divorce is a twin track process, involving a civil divorce and a religious one (a ‘Get’). In Orthodox Judaism, a Get must be given and received with consent. If the husband does not consent, the wife is unable to remarry under Orthodox Jewish auspices and any children she has in a future relationship will face severe restrictions as to whom they are able to marry.
42 ‘Aguna’ - a woman denied a Get is known as an ‘Aguna’ (chained woman). She is prohibited from having intimate relations with a man other than her husband and cannot remarry under Orthodox Jewish auspices. Any children of a future relationship she may have are affected with a status in Jewish law known as ‘Mamzer’, meaning that they face severe restrictions as to whom they can marry. This situation can continue indefinitely through subsequent generations.
43 ‘Talaq’ translated as "repudiation" or simply "divorce". Under Islamic law it refers to the husband's right to dissolve the marriage by simply announcing to his wife that he repudiates her.
44 ‘Nikkah’ – under Islamic law, a contract of marriage between a man and woman.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

‘Honour’-based abuse

	‘Honour’-based abuse45 is a crime or incident which has or may have been committed to protect or defend the perceived honour of the family and/or community, or in response to individuals trying to break away from constraining ‘norms’ of behaviour that their family or community is trying to impose.
‘Honour’-based abuse can include physical, emotional or psychological abuse and occur in specific contexts, not all of which represent domestic abuse under the 2021 Act, for example in cases where the victim and perpetrator are not “personally connected”. However, ‘honour’-based abuse is typically carried out by a member or members of the family or extended family and is likely to involve behaviours specified in the statutory definition of domestic abuse in the 2021 Act. Perpetrators may use a range of tactics against the victim, this can include restrictions to their freedom, isolation, physical abuse, and threats to kill. For more information on abuse carried out by a family member(s), please see the ‘Abuse by family members’ section in ‘Chapter 2 – Understanding Domestic Abuse’.
There is currently no reliable measure of the prevalence of ‘honour’-based abuse; police recorded crime data shows that in the year ending March 2021 there were 2,383 ‘honour’-based abuse related offences in England and Wales (excluding Greater Manchester Police).46 This represents an increase of 18% compared to the year ending March 2020. However, this increase could in part reflect wider factors such as general improvements in crime recording and identification of ‘honour’-based abuse. Of the 2,725 offences recorded by the police in the year ending March 2021, there were 78 Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) offences and 125 forced marriage offences.47
This type of abuse can happen to anyone. It has in cases been identified with close-knit or closed communities with a strong culture of ‘honour’ and ‘shame’, such as some minority groups, or closed ethnic/religious groups and other particularly isolated social groups.48 Victims from such groups and communities may face additional barriers in reporting the abuse or accessing support services. ‘Honour’-based abuse has been identified to stem from traditional notions of patriarchy and gender roles.49 However, victims may be female or male and those at risk can include individuals who are LGBT. Conversion therapy and the so-called corrective rape of LGBT victims may be a form of ‘honour’-based abuse.50


45 The term ‘honour’-based abuse is used here, as is a widely recognised term, and in order to delineate this type of abuse, with the unique issues which arise with it, to enable an effective response from statutory agencies. It is important here to emphasise that there is no honour in abuse and that is why the term ‘so-called ‘honour’-based abuse’ is also often used.
46 Greater Manchester Police were unable to provide data for year ending March 2020 following the implementation of a new IT system in July 2019.
47 ONS. Statistics on so called ‘honour-based’ abuse offences, England and Wales, 2020 to 2021 - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk): Data year ending March 2021.
48 SafeLives. Spotlight Report #Hidden Victims: Your choice: ‘honour’-based violence, forced marriage and domestic abuse: 2017.
49 Mayeda, D, Vijaykumar, R. A Review of the Literature on Honor‐based Violence. Sociology Compass: 2016: 10(5): 353– 363.
50 The Government will be introducing a ban on conversion therapy in law. The detail of the legislative provisions will be set out in the draft Bill when it is published.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Forced marriage and FGM are potential forms of 'honour'-based abuse. More information about forced marriage and FGM can be found in the multi-agency statutory guidance and practice guidelines on forced marriage and the multi-agency statutory guidance on FGM.
Forced Marriage

Forced marriage is an offence under section 121 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (‘the 2014 Act’). Forced marriage typically occurs in the context of ‘honour’-based abuse, and involves the use of violence, threats or any other form of coercion against a person with the intention or belief that the conduct may cause a person to enter into a marriage without consent. This includes non-binding traditional, or unofficial marriages. Forced marriage is recognised as a form of domestic abuse - if carried out by someone with a personal connection to the victim and where both parties are at least 16 years old.
Usually someone must use violence, threats or another form of coercion to carry out the offence of forced marriage. However, if a person is unable to consent to marry, under the Mental Capacity Act 2005, any conduct aimed at causing them to marry may be forced marriage, even if it is not violence, threats or another form of coercion. In all cases, forcing someone into marriage could include making arrangements; the offence could be considered to have occurred even where the marriage does not end up taking place.
Victims of forced marriage can be of any age, and many are under 18. Young victims may for example be coerced to marry under the threat of physical violence or the fear of dishonouring their families.
In addition, once the provisions of the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Minimum Age) Act 2022 are brought into force, it will be deemed a forced marriage, and thus illegal, for someone to cause a child under the age of 18 to enter into a marriage in any circumstance, even if the person does not use violence, threats or another form of coercion to do so.
The Government’s Forced Marriage Unit can provide advice and support to individuals who are at risk of, or who have experienced, forced marriage, and to the professionals and others seeking to help them. Guidance on forced marriage is published on GOV.UK.
On forced marriage, the multi-agency practice guidelines have specific sections for children’s social care and education professionals and teachers, providing clear advice to practitioners to help inform an effective response to safeguard children who may be at risk of forced marriage. This guidance is referenced in Keeping Children Safe in Education.51 The multi-agency practice guidelines make clear throughout the

51 In Wales, guidance for local authorities and governing bodies on arrangements for safeguarding children is under Keeping Learners Safe.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

importance of the ‘one chance rule’: that someone may only have one opportunity to speak to a victim or potential victim and may possibly only have one chance to save a life.
Female Genital Mutilation (FGM)

FGM is a form of violence against women and girls which is both a cause and consequence of gender inequality.52 It typically occurs within the context of ‘honour’- based abuse. As FGM is generally inflicted upon children, the Government considers it to be a type of child abuse.53 However, it is also carried out on women for a variety of reasons such as giving a woman social acceptance before marriage or ensuring her chastity. Whilst FGM may be an isolated incident of abuse within a family, it can be associated with other behaviours that discriminate against, limit or harm women and girls. These may include other forms of ‘honour’-based abuse and domestic abuse. A Female Genital Mutilation Protection Order (FGMPO)54 is a civil order which may be made for the purposes of protecting a girl or woman against the commission of an FGM offence – that is, protecting against the risk of FGM or providing protection where an FGM offence has been committed. Further information can be found in the statutory guidance on FGM and in the FGM resource pack.

Perpetrator tactics

There is never any justification for perpetrating domestic abuse and although the perpetrator and others may blame the victim for causing their behaviour, it is never the victim’s fault. Some perpetrators do not recognise that their behaviour constitutes domestic abuse, however, all perpetrators are responsible for their behaviour and should be held accountable for it.
A desire to exert power and control is commonly recognised as the key motive for perpetrators. Younger males are more likely to be perpetrators and there are multiple complex risk factors that can influence whether someone may perpetrate domestic abuse.55 Research highlights individual, interpersonal and community level risk factors, such as experience of child abuse, exposure to violence at home, neighbourhood deprivation and societal or cultural norms that condone violence and gender inequality.56 It is important to acknowledge that simply because an individual is exposed to any one of these risk factors, it does not necessarily mean they will experience or carry out domestic abuse.




52 World Health Organisation. Female genital mutilation: 2020.
53 NHS Digital. Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) Annual Report – April 2020 to March 2021 (experimental statistics report): 2021. To note that only 40% of individual women and girls have a known age when FGM was undertaken.
54 Get a female genital mutilation protection order - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk).
55 ONS. Crime in England and Wales: Appendix tables - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk).
56 See Home Office. 2022. Tackling Domestic Abuse Plan – CP 639 (publishing.service.gov.uk) for a breakdown of risk factors.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

An evaluation of a programme focusing on high-risk, high-harm perpetrators, Drive57, shows that 22% of service users at intake reported housing needs. Just under one fifth of service users had employment difficulties or misused alcohol. Around one in seven reported having mental health difficulties, with some service users having needs across multiple categories.58 In many cases it cannot be fully determined what has caused an individual to choose to engage in abusive behaviours. Therefore, there remains a limited understanding of perpetrators, and their motivation should not be considered to be limited to the reasons listed although these factors, amongst others, can be relevant in regard to identifying the interventions that may be required.
Perpetrators may manipulate victims and/or those around them to hide or normalise abusive behaviours. Domestic abuse perpetrators can be particularly adept at manipulating professionals, agencies and systems and may use a range of tactics to perpetuate contact with, and exert control over, the victim. Perpetrators may seek to minimise allegations, normalise the behaviour and discredit reports of abuse.

Mixed methods research published by the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC) and Refuge suggests that perpetrators of domestic abuse may also target and undermine parents’ relationships with their children, using power and control dynamics, for example using vexatious applications to the family court to prolong proceedings.59 Perpetrators can also use contact with children as a form of abuse.

Perpetrators may also seek to take advantage of, or manipulate, victims because of their protected characteristics or personal circumstances to prevent them from speaking out or accessing support. For more information, see ‘Chapter 5 – Different experiences, needs and related considerations’.

Perpetrator behaviours can potentially include:

Disguised compliance, missing or cancelling appointments, non-attendance, playing different professionals off against one another;
Making false or vexatious allegations against victims and convincing professionals that their controlling tactics are for the victim’s own safety and/or for the safety of their children;
Using the courts to continue abuse, for example not turning up to court dates, sending unnecessary and repeated legal letters and making threats around contact;
Making counter-allegations against the victim;

57 Drive Project developed, by Respect, SafeLives and Social Finance, out of a need to address perpetrators repeatedly offending with either the same or new victims.
58 Hester, M, et al. Evaluation of the Drive Project – A Three-year Pilot to Address High-Risk, High-harm Perpetrators of Domestic Abuse: University of Bristol: 2020.
59 Radford, L, et al. Meeting the needs of children living with domestic violence in London: London: NSPCC/Refuge/City Bridge Trust: 2011.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Exploiting interpretations of religion or faith to maintain control of victims and perpetuate harm;
Using children as a form of control – e.g. access visits, seeking to manipulate children’s feelings towards ex-partner (the victim);
Attempting to frustrate or interfere with a police investigation, including attempting to undermine the victim’s statements by claiming they are mentally ill;
Use of family members, new partners, or others to indirectly communicate with or threaten the victim, especially in cases where the perpetrator is under investigation, subject to a protection order or detained;
Use of false profiles on social media or other technology platforms;
Telling the victim that they will not be believed because they have mental health issues, learning difficulties or disabilities, or issues with substance abuse;
Threatening to ‘out’ the victim as a form of coercive control, telling the victim that they will not be believed because they identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual and/or trans, or manipulating the victim’s knowledge of what support is available for LGBT people and using myths and stereotypes around LGBT domestic abuse to make professionals believe that abuse between same-sex couples does not exist60;
Threatening to remove care or not undertake caring responsibilities where the victim is reliant on this, threatening the victim around the withdrawal of medicines;
Exploiting the communication support needs of the victim or manipulating the victim’s knowledge of what support is available and making professionals believe that the victim does not have capacity to report accurately or that reports are not credible due to communication difficulty;
Using threats to manipulate the victim, for example, by telling the victim they will not be believed by the police or other agencies, that they will inform social services, that their children will be taken away;
Seeking to control the victim’s finances, ability to access funds or obtain an income; and
Manipulating the victim’s immigration status as a form of coercive control, including withholding ID, passports and visas from the victim, lying about their status, purposely letting a victim’s visa lapse or failing to act on sponsorship duties for immigration purposes.
Factors such as alcohol and drugs misuse can increase the likelihood and severity of domestic abuse.61 However, there is not a causal relationship between substance

60 Galop. Myths and Stereotypes About Partner Abuse Among LGBT People: 2019.
61 See Guedes, A., Bott, S., Garcia-Moreno, C., Colombini, M., 2016. Bridging the gaps: a global review of intersections of violence against women and violence against children. Global Health Action, 9(1); Capaldi, D. Knoble, N. Shortt, J. Hyon, K., 2012. A systematic review of risk factors for intimate partner violence. Partner Abuse. Volume 2, Issue 3, pp 231-280.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

misuse and domestic abuse. Substances can act to disinhibit, rather than act as a cause of violence and abuse. Many people believe that alcohol and/or drugs increase aggression and physical violence and therefore perpetrators are likely to use this as an excuse for their abusive behaviour.

Given the frequent coexistence of domestic abuse, drugs and alcohol, it is important that responding agencies understand the subtle ways in which a perpetrator may use the victim’s substance use as an explanation or a moral justification for their abuse.62 Some of the ways in which a perpetrator may use reliance on or abuse of substances include:
Perpetrators may use the disinhibiting effects of substances as an excuse for their violence and abuse, e.g. ‘I’m not usually like that, but I was off my head’;
Alcohol in particular can act as a pre-emptive justification for violence towards a victim. A perpetrator may drink when already frustrated or angry at their victim and then use the alcohol to wind themselves up towards violence – should they then act violently they will have a ready-made excuse for their behaviour;
A victim’s substance use can be presented as an excuse for violence by the perpetrator or to undermine a victim’s credibility;
Perpetrators may also –
control or withhold substances as a means of abuse;
force victims to use substances against their will, or by administering them without their knowledge;
sabotage victims undergoing treatment for substance use; and
force or coerce a victim into exchanging sex for drugs, alcohol, or money, or committing a crime, such as theft, to pay for the perpetrator’s drugs or alcohol.
Addressing a perpetrator’s drug or alcohol use alone is unlikely to reduce or solve the problem of their abusive behaviour. It is important that alongside any alcohol or drugs treatment programmes for perpetrators, addressing the causes of the substance abuse, interventions also address the complex dynamics of power and control which underpin domestic abuse, for example, through domestic abuse perpetrator programmes. For more information, see the section on ‘Addressing the behaviour of the perpetrator’ in ‘Chapter 7 – Multi-Agency Response to Domestic Abuse’.









62 Against Violence and Abuse (AVA). Stella Project Toolkit: Domestic Abuse and Substance Use: 2007.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Chapter 4 – Impact of Domestic Abuse




Impact on Victims

Physical

Domestic abuse can cause serious and devastating long and short term physical and mental, emotional, and psychological health impacts on adults and children.
For victims who suffer physical health issues, injuries can include bruises and welts, lacerations and abrasions, abdominal or thoracic injuries; fractures and broken bones or teeth; sight and hearing damage and head injuries.63 Victims can be seriously physically injured as a result of domestic abuse and experience long-term injuries.

Victims may suffer from functional disorders or stress-related conditions such as irritable bowel syndrome, gastrointestinal symptoms, fibromyalgia, chronic pain syndromes and exacerbation of asthma. Psychological harms can be associated with poorer physical health and this can include psychosomatic symptoms such as numbness and thrombosis, shaking and nervous twitching, cramps and paralysis.64
Psychological

Not all domestic abuse begins with or results in physical abuse. Domestic abuse and associated trauma can have a significant impact on a victim’s emotional, psychological and mental wellbeing. This may involve feelings of isolation, worthlessness and dependency on the perpetrator. It can also include depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder65, and sleeping and eating disorders.66

63 World Health Organisation (WHO). Intimate Partner Violence: 2012; ONS. Partner abuse in detail – Appendix tables - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk); data year ending March 2018.
64 Stöckl, H., & Penhale, B. (2015). Intimate partner violence and its association with physical and mental health symptoms among older women in Germany. Journal of interpersonal violence, 30(17), 3089-3111.
65 Bacchus, L., Ranganathan, M., Watts, C., Devries, K. Recent intimate partner violence against women and health: a systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. BMJ: 2018: 8.
66 Bundock, L., Howard, L. M., Trevillion, K., Malcolm, E., Feder, G., & Oram, S. Prevalence and risk of experiences of intimate partner
violence among people with eating disorders: a systematic review. Journal of psychiatric research, 2013: 47(9), 1134–1142; McGarry, J., Simpson, C., Hinchliff-Smith, K. The impact of domestic abuse for older women: a review of the literature. Health & Social Care in the Community: 2010:19(1), pp.3-14; Wood, S., Sommers, M.. Consequences of Intimate Partner Violence on Child Witnesses: A Systematic Review of the Literature. Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Nursing: 2011 24(4), pp. 223-236.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance


A victim’s day to day life can be affected by trying to manage the abuse, leading to increased anxiety and a focus on adapting their behaviour to appease the perpetrator. This can subsequently lead to a victim adopting the perspective of the perpetrator and starting to blame themselves for the abuse67 and may result in the victim questioning or doubting their own experiences and developing low self-esteem.68 See also the ‘Mental health’ section in ‘Chapter 5 – Different experiences, needs and related considerations’.
Suicide

The psychological impact of domestic abuse can be so severe that it leads to suicide ideation and attempt. The severity and time span of the abuse, and existing mental health needs of the victim, may be specific risk factors.

For the year ending March 2018, 11% of male and 7% of female victims of partner abuse attempted suicide in the previous year.69 The Domestic Homicide Project found that there were 39 suspected victim suicides following domestic abuse in the year to 31 March 2021. The majority (35) were female, with four cases involving male victims. This is likely an underestimate of all victim suicides with a history of domestic abuse, as it excludes suicides where a prior history of domestic abuse was not known to police.70 Refuge gathered data on over 3,500 of its service users and found that 24% had felt suicidal at one time or another, 18% had made plans to end their life and 3% had made at least one suicide attempt.71 There is increasing awareness of the links between domestic abuse and suicide and the need for early intervention.
Long-term trauma may not always be recognised in victims, who may be facing multiple disadvantages, such as, but not limited to, disabled victims, those with cognitive issues, mental ill health and/or issues with substance misuse. The impact of trauma may similarly be overlooked in children and young people. Prior experiences of physical or psychological trauma, because of bullying, discrimination and hate crime, may make victims of domestic abuse less likely to seek help. Adopting a trauma- informed approach to responding to domestic abuse is therefore essential, recognising the signs and symptoms of trauma and, in acknowledging this, providing appropriate support seeking not to re-traumatise.







67 Kelly. L (1999). Domestic Violence Matters: an evaluation of a development project, pp.35-37
68 See Women’s Aid. Women’s Aid responds to Prime Minister’s commitment to toughen laws on gaslighting: 2018.
69 ONS. Domestic abuse: findings from the Crime Survey for England and Wales - Appendix tables - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): Data year ending March 2018.
70 Domestic Homicides and Suspected Victim Suicides During the Covid-19 Pandemic 2020-2021 (publishing.service.gov.uk).
71 Aitken, R, Munro, V. Domestic abuse and suicide: exploring the links with refuge’s client Base and work force. London; University of Warwick, School of Law: Refuge: 2018.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Addiction

Some victims develop addictions, for example, they may begin smoking or using drugs or alcohol to help cope with abuse and this dependency may progress.
Perpetrators can try to exploit a victim’s addictions. With drugs or alcohol, a perpetrator may try to sustain a victim’s dependency or threaten to expose this to professionals. This can be particularly threatening to victims with children, or those from cultural backgrounds where drinking alcohol or misusing substances may be particularly condemned. Case research on perpetrators has shown that first responders can find it difficult to correctly identify perpetrators of abuse due to a tendency to see the perpetrator as the individual who is abusing alcohol.72 Alcohol use by women has in other studies been found to be a response to experience of abuse from partners. Alcohol is also used by male victims as a coping mechanism.73 See also the section on 'Alcohol and substance misuse'.
Offending

There are links between women’s experience of domestic abuse and offending and reoffending. Data from the Ministry of Justice suggests that 57% of female offenders and 6% of male offenders have suffered domestic violence.74 Women can be coerced or pressured into criminal activity by perpetrators, increasing their vulnerability and the risk of further abuse. This situation is often worsened by poverty, substance dependency or poor mental health. Women in prison are more than twice as likely as men to say they have committed offences to support someone else’s drug use as well as their own.75
More than half (53%) of female and a quarter (27%) of male prisoners responding to the Surveying Prisoner Crime Reduction Survey (SPCR) reported experiencing emotional, physical, or sexual abuse during childhood.76 Some victims may come into contact with the criminal justice system where they have used violent resistance in self- defence. Data has shown that many women who kill their partners were themselves victims of often sustained and violent, domestic abuse by those partners.77 Consideration of what age-appropriate, gender and trauma-informed responses to girls and young women at risk of domestic abuse whilst in contact with the criminal justice system entails (including examples of good practice) is included in the Young Women’s Justice Project Literature Review. The link between domestic abuse and a woman’s offending should be recognised at the earliest opportunity to divert women from the criminal justice system, where this is appropriate.

72 Hester, M. Who Does What to Whom? Gender and Domestic Violence Perpetrators, Bristol: University of Bristol in association with the Northern Rock Foundation: 2009.
73 Humphreys, C, Regan, L, River, D, & Thiara RK. Domestic Violence and Substance Use: Tackling Complexity, British Journal of Social Work: 2005: 35, 1303-1320.
74 Ministry of Justice. Supporting data tables: Female Offender Strategy: Data from 2013 to 2018. 2018.
75 Light, M., Grant, E., & Hopkins, K. Gender differences in substance misuse and mental health amongst prisoners: Results from the Surveying Prisoner Crime Reduction (SPCR) longitudinal cohort study of prisoners. Ministry of Justice.
76 Williams, K, Papadopoulou, V, Booth, N. Prisoners’ childhood and family backgrounds: Results from the Surveying Prisoner Crime Reduction (SPCR) longitudinal cohort study of prisoners: Ministry of Justice: 2012.
77 Centre for Women’s Justice. Women Who Kill: How the State Criminalises Women We Might Otherwise Be Burying: 2021.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance


Experience of abuse is a mitigating factor in sentencing and the Ministry of Justice is taking steps to ensure that Pre-Sentence Reports highlight such factors.

Livelihood

Many victims can be made homeless by domestic abuse. Annual statutory homelessness statistics for 2020 to 2021 show that 12% of households in England recorded ‘domestic abuse’ as their main reason for being homeless or threatened with homelessness.78
Victims who are homeless are vulnerable to being further targeted by perpetrators of both physical and sexual abuse. Survey research conducted across England reported that some homeless women had formed an unwanted sexual partnership to get a roof over their heads or by engaging in sex work to raise money for accommodation.79 Evidence based on 500 interviews with homeless people found that 61% of homeless women and 13% of homeless men have experienced domestic abuse from a partner.80
The risk of homelessness can prevent a victim from leaving a home shared with a perpetrator, a victim may remain living with the perpetrator to avoid homelessness for them and their children. See the 'Housing' section in ‘Chapter 6 – Agency Response to Domestic Abuse’ for further information on homelessness, housing response and safe accommodation.
Victims may suffer from the effects of economic abuse resulting in unemployment, diminished employment prospects, debt or coerced debt, or poverty. The impact can lead to devastating and long-term consequences and can severely limit access to finance and financial independence,81 see the section on ‘Economic abuse’.
As set out throughout this guidance, victims with multiple and/or complex needs can face additional barriers to identifying abuse, seeking help, or accessing support services.
Victims may not recognise the abuse they face as domestic abuse or underrate their experience or the experience of forms of abuse that are not physical. They may be unclear on how to seek help, therefore continued efforts are required to help ensure that resources and services are accessible and that communications about what help is available give consideration to how to reach people within local areas including minority groups and communities.



78 DLUHC. Statutory homelessness in England: financial year 2020-21 - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk). 2021.
79 Reeve, K., Casey, R., Goudie, R. Homeless Women: Still being failed yet striving to survive. Crisis: 2006.
80 Mackie, P, Thomas, I. Nations Apart? Experiences of single homeless people across England and Wales. University of Wales, Crisis: 2014.
81 Surviving Economic Abuse. ’Economic abuse is your past, present and future’: A report on the practical barriers women face in rebuilding their lives after domestic abuse: 2018.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Impact on child victims

Domestic abuse has a significant impact on children and young people of all ages (up to 18 years old). Section 3 of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021 (‘the 2021 Act’) recognises children as victims of domestic abuse for the purposes of the Act if the child sees, hears, or experiences the effects of the abuse, and is related to, or falls under “parental responsibility” of, the victim and/or perpetrator of the domestic abuse. A child might therefore be considered a victim of domestic abuse under the 2021 Act where one parent is abusing another parent, or where a parent is abusing, or being abused by, a partner or relative.
There is limited data on the prevalence of children and young people experiencing domestic abuse being perpetrated by or directed towards a relative. Estimates suggest that between March 2017 to 2019, 7% of children aged ten to 15 years old were living in households where an adult reported experiencing domestic abuse in the previous year.82 For the year ending March 2018, victims of partner abuse were asked whether any children in the house heard or saw what happened during the most recent victimisation. In 41% of cases where adults aged 16 to 59 reported having experienced partner abuse, there was at least one child under the age of 16 living in the household. Where children were living in the household, one in five were reported to have either seen or heard what had happened.83 The presence of domestic abuse has been identified as a risk factor for child physical abuse, with children who were exposed to domestic violence being more likely to be physically abused and neglected.84

In their 2020 annual report, the Child Safeguarding Practice Review Panel found that domestic abuse was featured in 43% of incidents involving serious harm and 41% of fatal incidents.85 For the most high-risk cases of domestic abuse that are referred locally to Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conferences (MARAC), there were an estimated 13 children for every ten cases (2019 to 2020), further highlighting the prevalence of children and young people affected by domestic abuse.86 It should be noted that evidence suggests many children who experience domestic abuse are not identified and may therefore miss out on support.
Children are not a homogenous group, and there is a range of factors that may determine the nature of their experience - including age, sex, disability, race and socio- economic context. Professionals should develop an individual response for every child and young person affected, including for siblings.87


82 ONS. Childhood vulnerability to victimisation in England and Wales - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): data year ending March 2017 to year ending March 2019.
83 ONS. Partner abuse in detail, England and Wales - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): Data year ending March 2018.
84 Holt, S., Buckley, H., Whelan, S., 2008. The impact of exposure to domestic violence on children and young people: A review of the literature. Child Abuse & Neglect, 32(8), pp. 97-810.
85 Child Safeguarding Practice Review Panel. Annual Report 2020: Patterns in practice, key messages and 2021 work programme: 2021.
86 SafeLives. Q3 2019 Focus on Children in the Household.pdf (safelives.org.uk): 2019.
87 The Young People’s Family Justice Board have produced some top tips for professionals working with children and young people who have experience of and been affected by domestic abuse.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

A review of 877 child abuse cases between February 2011 to September 2013 showed that the majority (97%) of children living with domestic abuse are exposed to that abuse. Of the children exposed to the abuse, two thirds were directly harmed, most often physically or emotionally abused, or neglected. When looking at all children that were exposed to domestic abuse, over half had behavioural problems, or felt responsible or to blame for negative events. Difficulties adjusting at school were found in over a third of cases.88
Non-physical forms of domestic abuse like coercive control have a significant impact on children89 and professionals focused on physical acts of violence may fail to understand the daily experience of victims and children, how it is affecting them, and the level of risk posed by perpetrators.
Experiencing domestic abuse perpetrated by or directed towards a relative can have devastating consequences for children. Experience of domestic abuse is recognised as an Adverse Childhood Experience (ACE). Other ACEs include physical, psychological, and sexual abuse, or household dysfunction such as having incarcerated relatives or relatives experiencing substance abuse or mental illness. Research suggests that ACEs can often overlap, occurring in clusters.90 A child’s relationship with a trusted adult who has capacity to support them, wider family networks, friendship groups, and the type and frequency of the abuse are important factors.
Broadly, some of the impacts that domestic abuse can have on children can include91:
Feeling anxious or depressed;
Low self-esteem and difficulties with forming healthy relationships;
Hypervigilance in reading body language or changes in mood and atmosphere;
Having difficulty sleeping, nightmares;
Physical symptoms such as stomach aches or bed wetting;
Delayed development or deterioration in speech, language and communication;
Reduction in school attainment, truancy, risk of exclusion from school;
Increased application to activities outside the home, including academia or sports, as a distraction;



88 Co-ordinated Action Against Domestic Abuse (CAADA). Insights into domestic abuse 2: In plain sight: The evidence from children exposed to domestic abuse: 2014.
89 The multi-agency response to children living with domestic abuse September 2017 Gov.uk; Department for Education. Pathways to
harm, pathways to protection: a triennial analysis of serious case reviews 2011 to 2014: University of Warwick and University of East Anglia: 2016.
90 Asmussen, K, Fischer, F, Drayton, E, McBride, T. Adverse childhood experiences: What we know, what we don't know, and what should happen next: Early Intervention Foundation: 2020.
91 NSPCC. Signs that a child has witnessed domestic abuse: 2022.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Inconsistent regulation of emotions, including becoming distressed, upset or angry;
Becoming aggressive or internalising their distress and becoming withdrawn;
Managing their space within the home so they are not visible; and
Using alcohol or drugs, or self-harming.


Children who are cared for by family members other than their parents and looked after children may also have additional needs that professionals should consider.
Children and young people of different ages may respond in different ways to domestic abuse, depending on their stage of development. Babies and young children may be particularly vulnerable when living with domestic abuse, with protective factors often minimal for this age group (unable to seek help or remove themselves from danger, often ‘out of sight’ of regular contact with professionals, dependent on others and may not be able to recognise abusive behaviour). Babies experiencing the effects of domestic abuse may be more likely to have difficulty sleeping, have higher levels of excess crying and disrupted attachment. Children of pre-school age tend to show the most behavioural disturbance such as bed wetting, sleep disturbances and eating difficulties and are particularly vulnerable to blaming themselves for the adult violence. Older children may be more likely to show the effects of the disruption in their lives through under performance at school, poorly developed social networks, self-harm, running away and engagement in anti-social behaviour.92
Children with special educational needs and disabilities (SEND) may find it difficult to express their feelings or may express them in different ways.93 Particularly if the child is autistic, has a sensory impairment, a learning disability or has complex or profound difficulties and are, for example, non-verbal. Distress can be presented in different ways, including through challenging behaviour, becoming more withdrawn, difficulties concentrating or other changes to their usual behaviours or ways of communicating. Professionals must take the individual needs of the child into consideration to support them to communicate in a way they feel comfortable. This may include drawing on multi-agency approaches, working with educational psychologists and drawing on the knowledge of those who know the child best, such as their teacher or any therapists currently involved in their support. It is important that children and young people have the communication tools appropriate to report abuse and engage with professionals trained to aid their communication where needed.
Experiencing domestic abuse in childhood or adolescence has been shown in some research papers to increase the likelihood of experiencing or perpetrating domestic abuse later in life.94 However, it is important to acknowledge that many victims do not

92 Cafcass Cymru. Impact on Children of Experiencing Domestic Abuse: Welsh Government: 2019.
93 See information on support for Children with special educational needs and disabilities (SEND) published on GOV.UK.
94 Costa, B. M, et al. Longitudinal predictors of domestic violence perpetration and victimization: A systematic review: Aggression and Violent Behavior: 2015; 24, 261-272; Guedes, D et al. Experiences of violence across life course and its effects on mobility among participants in the international mobility in aging study. British Medical Journal Open; 2016; (6)10.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

go on to perpetrate abuse and individual experiences, and how these can present differently, should be recognised. Children’s Insights England and Wales data from 2015 to 2018 suggests that 60% of the children accessing domestic abuse related services experienced behavioural problems and around half (52%) experienced problems with social development and relationships. Over a third were undertaking risk taking behaviour.95
The Children’s Insights England and Wales report shows that a trauma-informed approach, including receiving help from specialist children’s services reduces the impact of domestic abuse on these children and young people and improves their safety and health outcomes. A trauma-informed approach recognises that people who have survived significant childhood adversity may experience a triad of entwined social, physical, and psychological injuries. While these injuries are typically studied independently, they are better understood as interlocking and interdependent, shaping people’s subjective experiences in complex ways across their lifespan. The result can be ‘harm building upon harm’, reducing the ‘shock absorbers’ available to cope at times of stress.
For children of separated parents where domestic abuse is a factor, the impact of the abuse may intensify after separation. Therefore, providing support to both children and the non-abusive parent is essential and the child’s voice, their safety and the safety of the non-abusive parent should always be considered. There should be a focus on the importance of joint and parallel work for victims, including children and a range of services to sensitively address and overcome the harm domestic abuse has caused to the non-abusive parent-child relationship. This should also include appropriate access to relevant services for the perpetrator alongside clear accountability that the perpetrator is responsible for the harm caused.
The Ministry of Justice published the report ‘Assessing Risk of Harm to Children and Parents in Private Law Children’s cases’ which considers how the family courts identify and respond to allegations of domestic abuse and other serious offences in cases involving disputes between parents about the arrangements for their children. The findings included identifying the need to ensure that children’s needs and wishes are at the centre of private law children proceedings and that procedures are designed to include domestic abuse as one of the central considerations where relevant (for further information, see the section ‘Family courts and special measures in the family courts’).
Young people can also experience abuse in their own relationships (see the ‘Teenage relationship abuse’ section). Experiencing abuse in their own intimate relationships can be hugely damaging for young people and abuse in teenage relationships should be taken just as seriously as in adult relationships.
The way children are treated by first responders and other professionals can have a significant impact on the extent to which they trust them and whether they feel safe

95 SafeLives. Children’s Insights England and Wales dataset 2015-18: Specialist children’s domestic abuse services: 2019.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

disclosing future experiences of abuse (see the ‘Responding to children and young people’ section in ‘Chapter 6 – Agency Response to Domestic Abuse’ for more information).

Box 4.1: Case Study

Case Study

Carrie was supported by a specialist therapeutic counselling service aimed at children and young people, after experiencing her father abusing her mother, who are now separated. Carrie had been present when her father was abusive towards her mother and had also been directly affected by her father’s coercive and controlling behaviours. Carrie has contact with her father, and wanted this, but she was struggling to make sense of her feelings. It was felt that independent counselling would help her to understand her emotions and manage how she was feeling.
Carrie was offered over ten counselling sessions which took place at her school. Her counsellor used creative interventions like mindfulness, therapeutic play, and metaphoric image work (which can help people to step outside of themselves and process feelings at a safe distance).
Through these interventions, Carrie and her counsellor explored her fears and anxieties; her relationships at home and at school; things within and beyond her sphere of control; and feeling and staying safe.
By the end of the counselling sessions, Carrie had an improved sense of what is and what is not within her control, and better able to identify abusive behaviours. She became less anxious and fearful at home, and more able to manage difficult and complicated emotions. She also felt more confident communicating her own wants and needs.


Further information about responding to domestic abuse, supporting and safeguarding victims, including children as victims, is set out in ‘Chapter 6 – Agency Response to Domestic Abuse’ and ‘Chapter 7 – Multi-Agency response to Domestic Abuse’.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Chapter 5 – Different experiences, needs and related considerations





As outlined in ‘Chapter 3 – Recognising Domestic Abuse’, individuals can be the victims of multiple and different abusive behaviours. It is important to consider the different protected characteristics and related experiences of victims, and how these may intersect and overlap particularly in relation to accessing services and support if they are not adequately designed to meet specific needs. Age, disability, gender reassignment, marriage and civil partnership, pregnancy and maternity, race, religion or belief, sex and sexual orientation are protected characteristics under the Equality Act 2010. Other factors, such as an individual’s immigration status or socio-economic position can also impact access to services. The impacts of abuse can be compounded, for example, where victims face multiple disadvantages.
Commissioners, service providers and statutory agencies should consider different experiences, needs and voices when developing their responses to both adult and child victims, to fully identify the experiences of all victims, vis-à-vis the abusive behaviour they are subject to and ensure that services are provided to victims without discrimination. Under the Code of Practice for Victims of Crime (‘the Victims’ Code') all victims have the right to be offered support when they report a crime to the police and to be referred to services that support victims. The offer of support should be based on the victim’s needs and all services should be offered without discrimination of any kind. For further information on the Victims Code see ‘Chapter 6 – Agency Response to Domestic Abuse’.
As outlined in ‘Chapter 4 – Impact of Domestic Abuse’, there are many practical and psychological barriers that victims may face when accessing support, including for example: feelings of shame or guilt, fear of what the perpetrator will do to them, or a belief that the situation might get better.
Other factors that can create additional barriers to a victim accessing support are listed below:
Impact of coercive control and trauma – the abuse may make the victim feel isolated, worthless, to feel they are to blame for the abuse and/or be convinced they cannot look after themselves;
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Shame and stigma – including fear of not being believed, feeling shame around disclosing abuse and/or being able to access support;
Economic dependence/instability – the victim may not have access to resources they need to be able to support themselves or their children independently, or may not be able to afford legal representation;
Living in a rural community – a victim may face increased isolation from support networks and lack of access to services if they are living in a rural community compared to an urban setting or if they have not been allowed to mix freely with wider society. Victims living in rural communities may also find it difficult to access support or report abuse online due to poor digital connectivity. Victims may also lack privacy to make disclosures in close knit communities and may fear others knowing that they have sought support;
Language and communication – the victim may face specific challenges in communicating the abuse which may hinder them from accessing or seeking assistance;
Connections to local area – the victim may fear leaving their local area where they have a network of support (friends/family) and where their children are settled in schooling, as well as worrying about the upheaval to their children’s lives;
Religious/community/family pressures – the victim may be under pressure from religious or community figures, or members of their extended family, not to leave, or to return if they have left;
Immigration status – if the victim has insecure immigration status, they may be fearful of seeking help from statutory agencies due to fear of being detained in immigration centres and being deported and/or having their children removed from their care;
Impact of alcohol, drugs, substance misuse and mental health problems – domestic abuse can lead to or exacerbate a number of health-related issues for the victim, including the development of mental health issues; and
Other considerations – or protected characteristics discussed below.
‘By and for’ services are specialist services that are led, designed, and delivered by and for the users and communities they aim to serve (for example victims and survivors from ethnic minority backgrounds, deaf and disabled victims and survivors, male victims, and LGBT victims and survivors). The involvement of specialist 'by and for' services is key to ensuring a local area can meet the needs of victims with different protected characteristics or situational characteristics. A list of organisations providing support to victims is available in Annex A.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Age
The definition of domestic abuse in the Domestic Abuse Act 2021 (‘the 2021 Act’) includes a minimum age for the victim and the perpetrator of 16 years old. In addition, for the purposes of the Act, section 3 of the 2021 Act recognises children (up to 18 years old) as victims of domestic abuse if they see, hear, or experience the effects of the abuse and are related to one or both of the victim and perpetrator or the victim and/or perpetrator have “parental responsibility” of the child.
CPS guidance, however, applies to all cases of domestic abuse irrespective of the age of the perpetrator or victim (including those under 16). This approach means it is possible for protective orders such as Restraining Orders to benefit victims under 16 and where the behaviour of a perpetrator, including perpetrators under 16 years of age, is abusive they may be prosecuted or diverted to appropriate interventions.
Children and young people can face different types of abuse. See the 'Types of domestic abuse' section for further detail. Young people may face barriers, relating to their age or another protected characteristic, in disclosing abuse or accessing services. They may also be inherently more vulnerable to abuse because it is harder for them to distinguish between normal and abusive behaviours. For further information relating to children, see the sections ‘Impact on children’, ‘Responding to children and young people’ and ‘Multi-agency working to safeguard children’.
Older people can be victims of intimate partner abuse, or abuse by family members including adult children. This abuse may include controlling or coercive behaviour, economic, emotional, psychological, sexual or physical abuse or neglect and can affect both men and women. SafeLives’ Insights data indicates that victims aged 60 and over were less likely to attempt to leave the relationship in the year before getting help and are more likely to be living with the perpetrator after getting support.96
The CSEW does not currently collect data on adults over 74, therefore does not present estimates for the prevalence of domestic abuse amongst this age group.97 The CSEW year ending March 2020 suggests that prevalence reduces by ages, with 3.2% of respondents aged 60 to 74 having experienced abuse in the previous year.98 This compares to 4.6% of 55 to 59-year-olds and is around a third of the prevalence for those aged 16 to 19 (9.5%). However, combined data from year ending March 2018 to 2020 shows that nearly 1 in 5 (18%) domestic homicide victims were 70 years or older.99
Support services should avoid making assumptions about a victim’s condition or health based on their age. For instance, injuries or mental health issues may be viewed


96 SafeLives. Spotlights Report #HiddenVictims: Save Later Lives: Older people and domestic abuse: 2016.
97 Once it is possible to return to the face-to-face mode of delivery for the CSEW, ONS will immediately remove the current upper age limit for respondents to the self-completion modules.
98 ONS. Domestic abuse victim characteristics, England and Wales - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): Data year ending March 2020.
99 ONS. Domestic abuse prevalence and victim characteristics - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): data year ending March 2018 to 2020.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

as the result of a victim’s health and social care needs, without enquiries being made around domestic abuse.
A Women’s Aid survey of 134 domestic abuse service organisations suggests that older victims are not being seen by specialist support services in the numbers that we would expect and can face significant barriers when asking for help or when trying to leave a relationship with a perpetrator.100 Barriers can include that victims:
have experienced years of prolonged abuse;

are isolated within a particular community through language or culture;

have experienced long term health impacts or disabilities; or

are reliant on the perpetrator for their care or money.

Evidence also indicates that older people with protected characteristics such as being LGBT, from an ethnic minority background, or having a disability may be at greater risk of abuse, or face additional barriers that may prevent them from accessing support.101
It is crucial that older victims can get the support they need, and that their experiences are supported. Research by the Centre for Age, Gender and Social Justice emphasises the importance of enabling access and supporting older people to make safe and informed choices when seeking help.102 Dewis Choice provides practitioner guidance on supporting older victims and responding to domestic abuse in later life.
Box 5.1: Case Study





100 Women’s Aid. The Domestic Abuse Report 2019: The Annual Audit: Bristol: 2019.
101 See Older People’s Commissioner for Wales. 2021. Support Services for Older People Experiencing Abuse in Wales.
102 The Centre for Age, Gender and Social Justice. Transforming the response to domestic abuse in later life: Practitioner Guidance: 2020.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

David had difficulty with his coordination and mobility and his wife purposefully left items positioned to cause him to trip or fall, sustaining bruises to his arms and face. She would also shout and ‘humiliate’ him, telling him he was useless as he could no longer carry out jobs around the home. David was fearful about the future. Particularly, that he would become more isolated and dependent on his wife as he developed care needs and was no longer able to leave his home without support. He wanted to be able to spend time with his adult children, who were discouraged from visiting by his wife. David had become increasingly depressed and wanted to leave his wife but he didn’t know how to access support.
The social worker recognised that David was experiencing domestic abuse and explained that she felt he would benefit from support from a specialist service for older victims of abuse. David agreed, so she contacted the organisation to discuss a referral. As David had communication difficulties, the social worker assisted with arranging safe face-to-face contact with a support worker.
The support worker explained David’s options and rights and went with him to apply for housing, helping him to explain that he was a victim of abuse and ensuring that he was assessed correctly as eligible for assistance. It took time to locate housing suitable for David’s long-term needs. Whilst still living with his wife, he was supported with safety planning, advice and support to access health benefits and services and to help manage the move safely.
After David was re-housed the specialist service provided support for a further six months, which included long-term safety, recovery, and wellbeing, and help to re-engage with the community.


Disability
Disabled victims (this may include, but is not limited to victims with physical or sensory impairments, mental health issues, learning disabilities, cognitive impairments, long-term health conditions and neuro diverse victims103) can face additional forms of abuse where the perpetrator is exploiting the victim’s particular vulnerabilities to abuse them.
CSEW data from the year ending March 2020 shows that those with a disability were more likely to have been victims of domestic abuse in the previous year (11.8%) than those without (4.6%).104 Disabled victims may also be more likely to continue living with the perpetrator.105 Deaths involving disabled victims may be recorded as



103 Section 6 of the Equality Act 2010 defines a person as having a disability if he or she has a physical or mental impairment and the impairment has a substantial and long-term adverse effect on his or her ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities. This is for the purposes of this Act and the legislative framework it creates to advance equality of opportunity.
104 ONS. Domestic abuse victim characteristics, England and Wales - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): Data year ending March 2020.
105 SafeLives. Spotlight Report #HiddenVictims: Disabled Survivors Too: Disabled people and domestic abuse: 2017.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

‘due to neglect’, rather than being captured as a domestic homicide, or without acknowledgment as a domestic abuse case.
Disabled victims may be at increased risk in relation to particular examples of abusive behaviour, either from an intimate partner, family member, or carer (who is “personally connected” to them),106 or face specific risks relating to their disability and related circumstances including: control of medication; refusal to interpret; denial of access to health services or equipment; actions which makes the person’s health condition worse; and otherwise using the person’s disability to control them.
For example, blind victims and partially sighted individuals may be at greater risk of harm than a sighted person would be in some circumstances. They may be more at risk of physical abuse in terms of awareness of the threat of harm and the extent of harm caused. Where information and services are not accessible, they may need to rely on others, such as a partner or family member, to read information for them. Disabled victims, particularly disabled young people, may experience coercive or controlling behaviours involving infantilisation and denying their independence, which may go unnoticed. Unequal power relations and a relationship of dependency are recognised as common factors in such cases.
Disabled victims face multiple barriers to seeking and receiving help to escape domestic abuse, for example, accessible accommodation and transport, the need for assistance with personal care, access to mobility support, and possibly, for specialised emotional support, and fear of losing their children. These factors could impact an individual’s decision and ability to leave a relationship with a perpetrator or to seek help. Disabled victims can be more isolated and/or have smaller support networks and may be more vulnerable to domestic abuse as a result.107
Disabled victims may be unable to leave or access a refuge because of poor access to safe accommodation, or because they rely on a perpetrator for care or support. Like any victim who is a parent, they may not want to move because they do not want to move their children away from school and friends, or because the school understands their needs as a disabled parent.
Disabled victims may have had negative experiences with services in the past which can create a feeling of distrust or impact their perception of the help that can be provided. Professionals and services should be aware of these factors and other barriers and proactively explore issues in coordination with other services to ensure the right support is offered. They should seek to engage with the victim privately, without a carer or other family member, as this may prevent or hinder disclosure, and have good knowledge of how to meet access, communication, and support needs. Sharing details of these needs with partner agencies, where this is possible, can avoid the same barriers being repeated and deterring the victim from accessing support.


106 The relationship between carers and the cared is not covered by the definition of domestic abuse in the 2021 Act unless there is also a personal connection between them.
107 Public Health England. Disability and domestic abuse: Risk, impacts and response: 2015.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

The experiences of disabled victims will be individual and may be specific to their disability, disabled victims should never be seen only in light of their disability. Risk assessments should be holistic and consider the whole person, including any intersecting needs.108

Deaf victims
It is helpful to highlight the experiences of deaf victims who as a community are a linguistic minority based on their language and many deaf people experience personal and structural barriers in accessing help and reporting abuse. Deaf people may encounter specific barriers to accessing support when experiencing controlling or coercive behaviour as they might not be aware of the available support and/or professionals may not know to use appropriate communication methods.
There is likely to be underreporting of abuse by deaf victims due to communication and information barriers. Professionals and service providers should be aware that deaf victims need specialist support services who can understand their cultural and linguistic needs. Where possible, professionals working with deaf victims should be expected to have some personal experience of deafness, as having to relive their trauma time and again with new people (e.g. sign language interpreters) can be disruptive to their healing and may result in them disengaging from much needed support. This may also be relevant for those with a learning disability who may use an advocate or carer to support their process of talking about their experience.
Following best practice, deaf individuals should be signposted or referred on to a domestic abuse service specialised in supporting deaf people or a deaf-led specialist service in the first instance. To achieve optimum outcomes, professionals working with deaf victims should be able to communicate fluently using sign language, without the need for third party communication support. Organisations and agencies should also consider collaborative working relationships with other specialist services, so that they are able to jointly meet the needs of their clients through the sharing of resources, knowledge, and complementary skillsets.

Speech, language, and communication
People with speech, language, and communication needs may be actively targeted by perpetrators or experience abuse for longer periods of time because of difficulties they face in explaining what has happened to them, asking for help, and accessing the support available. Services, including local authorities should ensure that good practice includes the identification of, and appropriate support for, communication needs, including:




108 For example, Stay Safe East provide a Disability and Domestic Abuse risk assessment to be used alongside the Domestic Abuse, Stalking, Harassment and ‘Honour’-Based Violence (DASH) risk assessment.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

the links between domestic abuse and speech, language and communication needs;
the impact of witnessing domestic abuse on children’s speech, language and communication; and
the services available to support people with those needs, including children (this may involve ensuring the availability of independent interpreters).
Many speech and language difficulties are unidentified and undiagnosed. Services should seek to understand the needs of people with these difficulties, including the risk that they may not be, or have been, taken seriously in their reports because of the way that they communicated them.

Speech, language, and communication needs can be a risk factor and are often hidden. They can result from lifelong or acquired conditions and for children and young people they may be part of a special educational need or disability.

Speech, language, and communication services for children and young people with special educational needs and disabilities are covered by joint commissioning arrangements set out in the Special Educational Needs and Disabilities Code of Practice,109 which brings education, health and local authorities, and Youth Offending Teams together to assess needs and agree a local offer. Joint commissioning gives agencies the opportunity to consider the wider factors and interdependencies, such as domestic abuse, and design services accordingly. For more information on special education needs and disabilities, and the impact on children expressing their feelings see the ‘Impact on children’ section of the guidance.

Organisations and agencies should give consideration to communication in its broadest sense. There is a need to understand the communication environment and the various barriers which may prevent information, thoughts and ideas from being put across, received and understood successfully.

Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
LGBT victims can have a similar experience of domestic abuse to heterosexual victims. CSEW data for the year ending March 2020 suggests that LGBT victims were more likely to report being victims of domestic abuse. 8.4% of gay men and lesbian women were victims of domestic abuse in the previous year, as were 15.2% of bisexuals.110 This compares to 5.2% of heterosexual respondents.111



109 The code, which applies to England, is for: headteachers and principals, governing bodies, school and college staff, special educational needs and disability (SEND) co-ordinators, early years providers, other education settings, local authorities and health and social services staff.
110 There is currently no nationally representative data on prevalence of domestic abuse for trans victims.
111 ONS. Domestic abuse victim characteristics, England and Wales - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): Data from year ending March 2020.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Whilst there are many similarities between heterosexual and LGBT people’s experiences of domestic abuse, LGBT victims may also experience abuse of power and control closely associated with having their sexuality, gender identity or gender reassignment used against them. This may include the following abusive behaviours:

Threats of disclosure of sexual orientation and gender reassignment to family, friends, work colleagues, community and others;
Disclosing gender identity history, sexual orientation or HIV status without consent;
Limiting or controlling access to LGBT spaces or resources;
Using immigration law to threaten with deportation to the country of origin, which might be unsafe, due to, for example, anti-gay legislation; and
Violent physical or sexual acts motivated by beliefs about an individual’s sexual orientation or gender identity.
As with all victims, it is important that LGBT people are not viewed as a homogenous group. Abuse disclosed by lesbian women may be different to that of bisexual and trans women. Equally, gay men’s experiences may be different to that of bisexual or trans men. Trans specific abuse may include coercing a person into not pursuing gender transition including denying or withholding access to medical treatment or hormones, ridiculing, or exotifying their body or assaulting medically altered body parts or forcing exposure.

LGBT people experience distinct personal and structural barriers in accessing help and reporting abuse. This may include services lacking quality referral pathways with LGBT specialist sector and low visibility and representation of LGBT issues within services. It can also include lack of understanding and awareness by professionals around unique forms of coercive control targeted at sexual orientation, gender identity or gender reassignment, and professionals minimising the risk experienced by LGBT people.

Sex
The statutory definition of domestic abuse is not specific to sex. Female victims
We recognise that more women than men are affected by domestic abuse. Statistics from the last ONS bulletin showed that in the previous year, women were around twice as likely to have experienced domestic abuse than men.112





112 ONS. 2020. Domestic abuse prevalence and victim characteristics - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk).
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Child-to-parent abuse appears gendered, with the majority of cases being perpetrated by sons against their mothers, although men and boys are victims too. See the 'Types of domestic abuse’ section in ‘Chapter 2 – Understanding Domestic Abuse’.
In the CSEW data for the year ending March 2020, women were significantly more likely than men to be victims of each type of abuse asked about113, with the exception of sexual assault by a family member where, although higher, the difference between males and females was not significant.114 From the year ending March 2018 to the year ending March 2020, the majority of victims aged 16 and over of domestic homicides were female (76%). This contrasts with non-domestic homicides where the majority of victims were male (86%). When looking at perpetrators of female domestic homicide, 78% were a partner or ex-partner, 16% a parent and 7% a child or other family relative, such as a brother or sister.115
Male victims

Men and boys who are victims of domestic abuse may face specific fears of stigmatisation, concerns about being believed, not recognising that they are victims of domestic abuse and lack of promotion of services to support them. The CSEW for year ending March 2018 shows that only half (50.8%) of male victims of partner abuse told anyone that they were a victim of partner abuse, compared to 81.3% of female victims.116
Different systemic, environmental and cultural barriers can impact groups of victims, including men and boys, and taking into account their other characteristics. Therefore, it is important that men and boys are not viewed as a homogenous group as their experiences will be unique and cannot be defined in terms of sex alone. The Supporting Male Victims document sets out more detailed information on potential impacts on male victims of crimes considered in the Government’s Tackling VAWG Strategy and Tackling Domestic Abuse Plan and highlights actions the Government is taking to support male victims more effectively.














113 Types of abuse asked about were non-sexual domestic abuse which includes non-sexual partner abuse and non-sexual family abuse, domestic stalking which includes stalking by a partner and stalking by a family member and domestic sexual assault which includes sexual assault by a partner and sexual assault by a family member.
114 ONS. Domestic abuse victim characteristics, England and Wales: Data year ending March 2020.
115 ONS. Domestic abuse victim characteristics, England and Wales - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): data year ending March 2021.
116 ONS. Domestic abuse: findings from the Crime Survey for England and Wales - Appendix tables - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): Data year ending March 2020.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Box 5.2: Case Study


Case Study

Sam’s former wife abused him, both physically and mentally, for over a decade. Their relationship began like any other. They were both teachers working at the same school, and nothing seemed out of the ordinary. At first, she was caring but then things started to change.

She began to lock him out of their home or leave him on the side of the road, miles from home with no money. He was locked out of the house around 60 times over the course of almost ten years. She sometimes would take his wallet and keys, so he had no way of getting home. He found himself walking on eggshells, being coerced into situations he did not want to be in. He was often told he would never see his daughter again if he didn’t do what she wanted. He felt he could not leave the family home for the sake of their daughter.

Sam realised he had to take action after he suffered serious injury when his wife attacked him with a hair dryer. Colleagues at the school he worked at came to know about the issues he was facing, and they were supportive towards him. After the attack, the school offered him paid time off to recover and paid for him to receive counselling. The school also provided him with further time off so that he could appear in court. This meant that he was able to give vital evidence of the abuse he had been subject to for nearly a decade.
Sam feels that his situation shows that in coming forward male victims will be taken seriously and given the right support.


Pregnancy
Being pregnant may put women at increased risk of abuse, although the data available on prevalence of domestic abuse amongst pregnant individuals is limited. Some studies suggest prevalence as high as 40% to 60% of pregnant women experiencing abuse during pregnancy117, while others suggest it is much lower, ranging between 1% and 20%.118 Whilst data is mixed, other evidence suggests unplanned pregnancy to be one of only two predictors of domestic abuse that were both statistically and clinically significant.119
Domestic abuse experienced during pregnancy in utero and in the earliest years is harmful to birth outcomes and babies’ early development. Whilst pregnancy may increase risk of abuse, it should also be recognised that the interaction with health professionals may provide an opportunity for women to seek support, as well as for professionals to reach out to women who may be experiencing domestic abuse. Health and social care professionals should also be alert to the need to offer support and safeguarding to the child post-birth if necessary.


117 SafeLives, A cry for health: Why we must invest on domestic abuse services in hospitals. 2016.
118 Depending on the country and how prevalence is calculated.
119 Yakubovich, A, et al. Risk and protective factors for intimate partner violence against women: Systematic review and meta-analyses of prospective-longitudinal studies. American Public Health Association: 2018.108(7): 1-11.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Access to trauma-informed support during pregnancy, post-birth and into childhood can be of benefit to adult and child victims. For further information on the impact of domestic abuse on children see the ‘Impact on children’ section.
Evidence linking intimate partner violence to abortion varies, does not offer clear evidence of predictors or causes, and is often conducted in countries other than the UK. Evidence from a research review does indicate that intimate partner violence is associated with early termination of pregnancy. The association between intimate partner violence and repeat abortion indicates that there is sometimes a repetitive cycle of abuse and pregnancy.120 Experience of intimate partner violence and loss of pregnancy can have further compounding impacts on the victim’s emotional state and has been linked with negative mental health outcomes such as depression and suicidal ideation.121
Health and social care professionals should be aware of these factors and ensure that specialised mental health support, including post-abortive counselling, is in place for victims who have experienced abortion or other perinatal loss. Guidelines from the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists recommend that healthcare services should identify issues such as domestic abuse among women seeking abortion and refer them to appropriate support services. See the ‘Health’ section for further information about the role of health professionals including in exercising their professional curiosity and reaching out to pregnant women to offer support in relation to domestic abuse.

Religion or belief
Victims who follow a religion or are from faith backgrounds may experience additional barriers to receiving help or reporting abuse due to issues with accessing support related to their religious identity and their faith group. They might fear their faith being misunderstood or have concerns around whether they will be believed.
For the year ending March 2020, those reporting their religion as Buddhist, or an ‘Other’ religion not listed (9.6% and 9.1% respectively) were more likely to report domestic abuse within the last year. This compares to 6.4% of those with no religion, 4.8% of Christians, 3.7% of Muslims, and 3.2% of Hindus.122
Specialist services should seek to understand the varying manifestations of domestic abuse relating to faith and how a mix of culture, religious tradition and holy scripture can be used as tools of abuse by perpetrators.123


120 Hall M, Chappell, LC, Parnell. BL, Seed, PT, Bewley, S. Associations between intimate partner violence and termination of pregnancy: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLOS Medicine: 2014;11(1):e1001581.
121 Gulliver, P, Fanslow, J. Exploring risk factors for suicidal ideation in a population-based sample of New Zealand women who have experienced intimate partner violence. Aust NZ J Public Health 37: 2013; (6):527-33.
122 ONS. Domestic abuse prevalence and victim characteristics - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): Data year ending March 2020.
123 An example of such practice includes the Faith and VAWG coalition, a partnership of organisations across the VAG sector and faith communities, centering the experiences of victims of faith in their work: Home - Faith and VAWG Coalition.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

It is important that specialist services communicate their understanding of a victim’s religion to ensure they feel emotionally safe and supported. Support services should be aware that a lack of understanding of different experiences and needs can lead to silencing victims from faith backgrounds and reinforce barriers to receiving support from agencies such as the police, courts, social care, and housing. See the 'Abuse relating to faith' section for further detail in ‘Chapter 3 – Recognising Domestic Abuse’.

Race and ethnicity
Victims from ethnic minority backgrounds may experience additional barriers to identifying, disclosing, seeking help or reporting abuse. This may include:
A distrust of the police and other statutory agencies;
Suspicion towards the police due to lack of perceived or real support for their community historically and/or currently;
Concerns about racism and fear of racial stereotyping;
Fears about immigration and/or asylum status and risk of deportation;
Language and cultural barriers;
Being disproportionately impacted by certain forms of VAWG, including forced marriage, staying in a marriage with a perpetrator, ‘honour’-based abuse and FGM) (see also the section ‘'Honour’-based abuse’);
Feeling ashamed and/or concerned about family finding out; and
Fear of rejection by the wider community.

Domestic abuse is often under-reported within minority communities. Stereotypes and assumptions can be made about the victim’s culture and in some cases, experiences of domestic abuse have been treated as housing or immigration cases by public authorities.124 Professionals working with minority communities should be aware of barriers and actively seek to ensure the right support is made available to overcome them, including appropriate interpretation and translation support where this may be needed. There are distinct structural barriers that minority communities face in accessing support.
CSEW data for the year ending March 2020 suggests that those from a Mixed ethnic background were more likely to have experienced domestic abuse within the previous year (7.6%) than those from white (5.7%), black (3.7%), or Asian (3.6%) ethnic backgrounds. However, the presence and impact of additional barriers across all groups, and particularly within ethnic minority communities, may lead to underreporting of abuse.

124 Thiara, RK, Roy, S, Ng, P. Between the lines: Service responses to Black and Minority Ethnic (BME) Women and Girls experiencing Sexual Violence: University of Warwick and Imkaan: 2015.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

There is a growing understanding amongst wider society about domestic abuse within Gypsy, Roma and Traveller communities and barriers faced by people within these communities in accessing help.125 Services should consider their particular support needs, including language or literacy support arising from disadvantages in relation to education, access to refuge spaces, and helping victims in building other support networks outside the community.

Immigration status and migrant victims

Victims who have entered the UK from overseas may face barriers when attempting to escape domestic abuse relating to their immigration status or lack thereof.126 Some victims may have the no recourse to public funds (NRPF) condition imposed due to the type of leave they have been granted. This can lead to greater dependence on the partner or family if they have supported their being in the UK. They may also face greater economic impact of leaving a perpetrator if they are unable to claim benefits or access housing, or if they lose their immigration status by leaving their partner, including destitution and homelessness. This may be exploited by partners or family members to exert control over victims. Examples of how perpetrators can exert control over migrant victims include:
Threatening to no longer provide support for their stay in the UK;

Falsifying a victim’s immigration status and/or purposefully bringing a victim into the UK with an incorrect visa to ensure they remain vulnerable to immigration enforcement, and without options for regularisation;
Withholding key immigration documents from a victim, including their passport, so they are unable to ascertain what rights they may have;
Withholding accurate information from a dependent, for example, when their visa lapses;
Purposefully mismanaging a victim’s immigration status and/or application, so they become overstayers and/or without valid status. This might involve purposefully missing a deadline to renew a dependent’s visa;
Deliberately using the immigration system to control and threaten a victim. For example, actually and/or threatening to report their insecure status to the Home Office;





125 The Traveller Movement have published a good practice guidance on improving service provision for Gypsy, Roma and Traveller domestic abuse survivors: 20220225-da-good-practice-guide_0.pdf (travellerstimes.org.uk).
126 Domestic Abuse Commissioner. Safety Before Status: Improving pathways to support for migrant victims of domestic abuse: 2021.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Providing misinformation or mistruths to a victim about their rights or to multi-agency professionals involved in working with the victim. For example, falsely stating that the victim has NRPF when this is not the case; and
Subjecting a victim to so called ‘honour’-based violence or abuse within a transnational context. For example, ensuring that a victim is at high risk of ‘honour’-based violence or abuse in their country of origin, and subsequently using the threat of deportation and the likelihood of additional harm as a tool to control them.

There are support mechanisms in place for migrant victims of domestic abuse, including specific support for asylum seekers, local authority support, a change of NRPF conditions, fee waivers or support for victims of modern slavery (which encompasses human trafficking and slavery, servitude and forced or compulsory labour) through the National Referral Mechanism.
Migrant victims on some partner visas are eligible for the Destitution Domestic Violence concession (DDVC). This concession enables these victims to apply for leave to remain without the NRPF condition when their relationship has broken down because of domestic abuse, they are destitute, and where they are eligible for, and intend to subsequently make, an application for indefinite leave to remain as a victim of domestic abuse. Under this concession, leave is granted for three months. These victims can then apply to claim public funds (benefits) for up to three months while they make an application to settle in the UK. This helps migrant victims on certain partner visas to fund a refuge space with the housing element of the benefits they can claim because their leave will not be subject to a NRPF condition. These victims can then apply for settlement (Indefinite Leave to Remain) under the Domestic Violence Indefinite Leave to Remain Rules.
Victims may be reluctant to report abuse due to the fear of information sharing by the police and other statutory and non-statutory services with the Home Office for the purpose of immigration control. The Home Office has undertaken a review into the data-sharing arrangements between the police and Immigration Enforcement when encountering migrant victims of crime, in response to the super-complaint submitted by Liberty and Southall Black Sisters. The review concluded that the Home Office will not be establishing a firewall but will seek to implement an Immigration Enforcement
Migrant Victims Protocol which puts safeguarding needs first. See also the ‘Victims with insecure immigration status’ section.
A key barrier to migrant victims of domestic abuse accessing support is the difficulty organisations face in funding bed spaces and ancillary services in a refuge for victims with NRPF. That is why the Government launched the Support for Migrant Victims Scheme in April 2021. The Support for Migrant Victims scheme is designed to provide support to those individuals who may be unable to access other support mechanisms, such as the DDVC. It provides a safety net of support through provision of accommodation in a refuge or other relevant accommodation. Additionally, the scheme
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

can offer wrap around provisions, including emotional support, and more practical support in forms such as immigration advice to aid victims in their recovery and navigation of advice and the options available to them to move on from that support. The support provided can be tailored to the needs of individual victims. An evaluation of the scheme is in progress, and its findings will inform future policy decisions.

Box 5.3: Case Study

Case Study

Ms K reached out to the police, and a specialist ‘by and for’ service providing support to migrant victims, for help after experiencing domestic abuse upon relocating to the UK. She was able to access emergency accommodation, counselling, and legal advice.
Ms K was born in Amritsar and moved to the UK to study when a family friend she viewed as her ‘uncle’ offered to pay for her studies. She obtained a student visa and arrived in the UK and went to stay with her ‘uncle’. During her stay, her ‘uncle’ arranged her marriage by advertising on a matrimonial website.
Within three weeks of her marriage, Ms K was subjected to physical, verbal, and emotional abuse and forced into domestic servitude. Her mother-in-law continuously verbally harassed her; she called her names and encouraged her husband to use her as a slave.
Ms K was often forced to cook all the family’s meals, do all the laundry, and clean the entire house. She fell pregnant but was forced to continue to do all the housework late into her pregnancy.
Ms K’s husband, who had previously been jailed for murder, was physically abusive in a manner that intensified during the course of their marriage. The abuse towards Ms K escalated during her pregnancy. Her ‘uncle’ visited her occasionally to intervene and to beg them to stop the abuse.
When she was around seven months pregnant, Ms K’s husband assaulted her because she was sitting down on the sofa. She attempted to leave, but her mother-in-law forced her to sit down again, telling her she had to stay until she gave birth and then give the baby to them. Ms K managed to leave the room and called her ‘uncle’ to collect her. When her ‘uncle’ arrived, her husband stood in the doorway to prevent her from leaving the house.
He became extremely angry and threw her belongings onto the driveway and told her not to return. Ms K’s ‘uncle’ took her to the hospital for a check-up and she also gave a report at a local police station. The police referred her to SBS, but later, she reconciled with her husband following coercion from her in-laws and retracted her complaint.
However, soon after reconciling, her husband began to abuse her again. To ensure that she had no opportunity to disclose the abuse to anyone outside the family, her mother in- law accompanied her to her GP appointments. However, the domestic abuse had a significant impact on Ms K’s mental health, causing her to become depressed and anxious. She lived in constant fear for her life and that of her child.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Asylum Seekers

Asylum seekers and their dependants who would otherwise be destitute are provided with accommodation and a weekly cash allowance to meet their essential living needs under the arrangements, as set out in section 95 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (‘the 1999 Act’). This includes asylum seekers who are victims of domestic abuse. An asylum seeker is destitute if they lack adequate accommodation or the means of obtaining it. The Asylum Support Regulations 2000 make clear that accommodation is not adequate if remaining in it exposes the individual to risk of domestic violence.
Arrangements are now in place to use the asylum support budget to close a gap which prevented asylum seekers and their dependants supported under section 95 of the 1999 Act from accessing a refuge. The policy is designed to ensure asylum seekers who are victims of domestic abuse receive the specialist support they need. This statutory guidance applies to asylum seekers who are entitled to asylum support, which will be provided whether in supported accommodation or a specialist refuge.
Those granted refugee status or humanitarian protection in the UK have access to support provisions in the same way as anyone else residing in the UK with recourse to public funds. Asylum seekers can remain supported by the Home Office while their claim is being processed and recognised refugees have the right to work, access to benefits and can apply for housing.
Local authorities may also provide basic safety net support, regardless of immigration status, if it is established that there is a genuine care need that does not arise solely from destitution, for example, where there are community care needs, migrants with serious health problems or family cases where the wellbeing of a child is in question. If a victim of domestic abuse has children, local authorities have a duty to provide financial support and/or accommodation under section 17 of the Children Act 1989 to safeguard the welfare of those in need, regardless of their immigration status or that of their parents.
No recourse to public funds (NRPF) - change of conditions

An application to lift the NRPF status is available for migrants on certain specified human rights routes to settlement, such as the five-year parent route or ten-year partner, parent, or private life route. An applicant who has encountered a change in their circumstances and due to this will be destitute or at imminent risk of destitution, has a child whose particular additional and essential needs will not be met without access to public funds, or is encountering exceptional financial circumstances, may qualify for their NRPF status to be lifted.
Fee Waivers

Fee waivers are available for certain specified human rights applications where a migrant is applying for the right to remain in the UK based on family or private life but
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

cannot afford the fee. These include applicants under the five-year parent route and the ten-year partner, parent, or private life route.

Alcohol and substance misuse
Despite limited evidence, some studies have found a significant relationship between alcohol and drug use and intimate partner violence.127 CSEW data for the year ending March 2018 found 16.6% of partner abuse victims highlighted that the offender was under the influence of alcohol, and 10.6% under the influence of drugs. Around one in five (21%) of victims said they did not know or did not want to answer whether the perpetrator was under the influence of alcohol.128 A 2022 Home Office report summarising 127 Domestic Homicide Reviews (DHRs) found that alcohol and drug use was noted as a perpetrator vulnerability in around a third of cases.129
Some victims may use alcohol and drugs as a coping mechanism in response to abuse. Alcohol can also be embedded in a relationship with perpetrators of domestic abuse with perpetrators using alcohol to control victims.130
Of the 120 support services that responded to Women’s Aid’s annual survey, 7% said supporting victims with multiple or complex needs was their most challenging issue faced between 2018 to 2019. Additionally, there were only three organisations (with 21 bed spaces) dedicated for women with substance use support needs or complex needs.131 Similarly, alcohol treatment services may not be sufficiently well- equipped to treat women who have experienced domestic abuse. A mapping exercise led by Against Violence and Abuse (AVA) found that women-only provisions of substance use services are available in less than half of local authorities in England and Wales.132 Furthermore, services typically address single issues, such as substance use or mental health which can see women being passed around services or unable to access holistic support. There can also be variations and gaps in service provision for certain groups.

Professionals should be aware that victims, with alcohol or drug dependencies, who have children may be wary of the involvement of children’s social care as they may be concerned that their children may be removed from their care. This may create a barrier to victims seeking or accepting help. ‘Chapter 6 – Agency Response to Domestic Abuse’ provides further information on the children’s social care response and emphasises the importance of professionals building trusting relationships with the

127 Costa, BM, et al. Longitudinal predictors of domestic violence perpetration and victimization: A systematic review. Aggression and Violent Behaviour: 2015; 24, 261-271; Schumacher JA, Feldbau-Kohn S, Smith Slep AM, Heyman RE. Risk factors for male-to- female partner physical abuse. Aggression and Violent Behaviour: 2001;6(2-3):281-352.
128 ONS. Partner abuse in detail – Appendix tables - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): Data year ending March 2018.
129 Home Office. Domestic Homicide Reviews: Key findings from analysis of domestic homicide reviews: 2022.
130 The draft statutory guidance gives examples of ways substance use can exist within an abuse relationship, stating that responding agencies should understand these issues p.28.
131 Women’s Aid. The Domestic Abuse Report 2020: The Annual Audit. Bristol: Women’s Aid: 2020.
132 Holly, J. (2017). Mapping the Maze: Services for women experiencing multiple disadvantage in England and Wales. London: Agenda & AVA.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

parent who is victim to domestic abuse to seek to overcome this fear and ensure the right support is offered for both adult and child victims. See also further resources for practitioners working with families affected by domestic abuse.
Professionals should also recognise the consequence that alcohol-related abuse may have on children. Parental alcohol and drug use were documented in 37% and 38% of cases where a child was seriously hurt or killed between 2011 and 2014, respectfully.133
The prevalence of alcohol-related domestic violence is five times higher among the most disadvantaged groups compared to the least disadvantaged.134 However, both alcohol and substance misuse and domestic abuse can be hidden and data may be impacted by differences in disclosure or detection within different socio-economic groups.
The co-occurrence of drug and alcohol use, homelessness, criminal justice system involvement and mental health will often mean that victims will face huge challenges when seeking support. It is paramount that statutory services take into consideration the multiple barriers, needs and potential for discrimination that can be faced by these groups, when planning and delivering services. See also the section ‘Impact on Victims’.

Mental health
Mental health problems are not a cause of domestic abuse; however, it can be a risk factor for perpetration and victimisation. Depression has been linked with perpetrating abuse135, and mental health issues can lead to an increased risk of being a victim of domestic abuse.136

Domestic abuse can have a long-lasting effect on victims. It can lead to the development of long-lasting mental health problems and eating disorders. The CSEW for year ending March 2018 found that just under half of partner abuse victims aged 16 to 59 (48.9%) reported mental or emotional problems and around a quarter (25.5%) had stopped trusting people and experienced difficulty in other relationships. Over a third (36%) received specialist mental health or psychiatric services as a result of their abuse.137



133 Department of Education. Pathways to harm, pathways to protection: a triennial analysis of serious case reviews 2011 to 2014: University of East Anglia and University of Warwick: 2016.
134 Institute of Alcohol Studies. Inequalities in victimisation: alcohol, violence, and anti-social behaviour: 2020.
135 See Guedes, A., Bott, S., Garcia-Moreno, C., Colombini, M., 2016. Bridging the gaps: a global review of intersections of violence against women and violence against children. Global Health Action, 9(1); Schumacher, J., Feldbau-Kohn, S., Smith Slep, A., Heyman, R., 2001. Risk factors for male-to-female partner physical abuse. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 6(2–3), pp. 281-352.
136 Bacchus, L., Ranganathan, M., Watts, C., Devries, K., 2018. Recent intimate partner violence against women and health: a systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. BMJ Open, 8(7), pp. 1-20.
137 ONS. 2018. Partner abuse in detail – Appendix tables - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk).
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Victims with mental health needs might not attend a service specialising in domestic abuse, so it is important for all mental health support services and providers to be aware of indicators of possible domestic abuse, to ask about the individual’s experiences in private discussion and to be appropriately trained to respond. Mental health services may need to tailor their support and work with other support services to provide this support. For further information, see the section on ‘Psychological’ impacts.

Socio-economic background
Individuals may be victims of domestic abuse regardless of their socio-economic position and background. However, socio-economic status has been identified as a risk factor for many types of crime and violence, including domestic abuse.138 See also the ‘Livelihood’ section in ‘Chapter 4 – Impact of Domestic Abuse’.
An evidence review suggests that there may be particular risks associated with having low income, economic strain and benefit receipt, for example, in exacerbating interpersonal dependency and/or compounding wider patterns of vulnerability relating to lack of employment or poor access to social support.139 Consideration should be given to these circumstances and its relation to any abusive behaviours present, and the specific needs of victims and potential barriers to accessing services.

As emphasised throughout this guidance, it is important to highlight that simply because an individual is exposed to any one of these factors, it does not necessarily mean they will experience or carry out domestic abuse.























138 Capaldi, D. Knoble, N. Shortt, J. Hyon, K., 2012. A systematic review of risk factors for intimate partner violence. Partner Abuse.
Volume 2, Issue 3, pp 231-280.
139 Fahmy, E, Williamson E, Pantazis, C. Evidence and policy review: Domestic violence and poverty: A research report for the Joseph Rowntree Foundation: University of Bristol: 2016.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Chapter 6 – Agency Response to Domestic Abuse




Identifying and responding
This chapter outlines the role of individual agencies in responding to domestic abuse. It often takes victims of domestic abuse a significant period of time to seek effective help from agencies.140 Further to this, victims of domestic abuse with protected characteristics (as defined by section 4 of the Equality Act 2010) may face additional barriers to accessing support.141 Children and young people may also face different or additional barriers to disclosing their abuse.142 See ‘Chapter 4 – Impact of Domestic Abuse’ and ‘Chapter 5 – Different experiences, needs and related considerations’.
Given that less than 1 in 5 victims report their abuse to the police143, many victims of domestic abuse do not come into contact with the criminal justice system. It is therefore important that a wide range of agencies and bodies are able to identify victims and know how to provide the right response. Early intervention by the voluntary sector and statutory agencies working together can help to protect adults and children from further harm, as well as preventing escalation and recurrence of abuse.

Public agencies should invest in awareness raising, specialist training and systems change within their services to ensure that victims receive effective and safe responses and that information about their services reach the range of different communities and protected groups in their areas.

Where a criminal offence is being investigated, victims of domestic abuse will be treated as victims of crime under the Victims’ Code in England and Wales. The Victims’ Code sets out the services, and the standard for these services, that must be provided

140 SafeLives. Getting it right first time: 2015.
141 See the Different experiences, needs and related considerations section for further information.
142 See the Impact on children section.
143 ONS. Partner abuse in detail – Appendix tables - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): Data year ending March 2018: Table 4.12.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

to victims of crime by relevant organisations. The rights extend to a parent or guardian of the victim if the victim is under 18 years of age, or a nominated family spokesperson if the victim has a mental impairment or has communication needs including where this has arisen as a result of the offence. Which rights apply is circumstance dependent (such as reporting to the police or identifying a suspect who is subsequently charged) however all victims are entitled ‘to be able to understand and to be understood’, ‘to be referred to services that support victims and have services and support tailored to their needs’ and ‘to make a complaint about their rights not being met’. Further information can be found in the Victims’ Code published by the Ministry of Justice. Government intends to place the key principles of the Victims’ Code into law in the Victims Bill.
Annex A presents a non-exhaustive list of agencies that victims of domestic abuse and their families may come into contact with. The information sections below are to assist those organisations exercising public protection duties and frontline professionals so they can identify all the victims of the abuse, including children and young people, and ensure that they receive support and protection tailored to their particular needs.

It is essential that agencies identify and respond to all forms of abuse and all victims. Given the complex nature of domestic abuse, a multi-agency response is critical to identifying victims and their families at an early stage and before abuse reaches a crisis point. This is in addition to understanding the necessary precautions and response for crisis and risk management including cohesive understandings of safeguarding needs by all relevant professionals. For details see ‘Chapter 7 – Multi- Agency Response to Domestic Abuse’.

Risk assessment
Professionals who are trained to do so can use tools such as the Domestic Abuse, Stalking and Harassment (DASH) risk assessment to help identify the level of risk an individual is facing and to tailor their support accordingly.144 The DASH risk tool is not a definitive assessment of risk but provides for the identification and assessment of risk based on structured professional judgment. Professionals using this, or other risk assessment tools, should be alert to the risk to children as well as adults. It is essential to identify changes, such as escalation in severity and/or frequency of abuse.

Risk assessments should holistically encompass specialist professional judgement, survivor perceptions of risk, along with additional indicators relevant to minority groups.145




144 Police forces are in the process of adopting the Domestic Abuse Risk Assessor (DARA).
145 For example, ROAR LGBT risk assessment tool; Stay Safe East Disabled victims risk assessment; and SafeLives Young People’s DASH risk checklist with guidance.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Responding to children and young people
In responding to cases of abuse involving those under 18, child safeguarding procedures should be followed as set out in the statutory guidance document, Working Together to Safeguard Children (2018). Children and young people can experience different forms of abuse, see ‘Chapter 2 – Understanding Domestic Abuse’. Professionals should be mindful that young people may be reluctant to discuss relationships or their concerns around abuse with adults. Additionally, young people may be particularly ill-equipped to deal with certain practical challenges, such as moving home to escape the abuse or managing their own finances.
Young people experiencing or perpetrating abuse in their own relationships need to be supported in a way that is tailored to their needs, although they may often have to rely on specialist services designed for adult victims146 that are not always appropriate. It is vital that young people who experience domestic abuse within their own relationships are referred through a multi-agency risk assessment.
Children and young people should be offered support based on their individual needs, with a range of interventions, so that each child is able to access the specialised help they require. This could include access to psychoeducational support, therapeutic services (for example, counselling) or specialist children’s victim support workers or an Independent Domestic Violence Adviser (IDVA) who is able to work with children and young people. A strengths-based approach to recovery, building on ‘the resilient blocks in the child’s life’, has been shown to be effective in interventions for children.147

Professionals should be equipped to identify and respond to children and young people experiencing domestic abuse, drawing on the range of support available, from early intervention to crisis stage. Best practice responses involve an integrated response which combines child safeguarding and high-risk domestic abuse expertise, particularly in relation to risk assessment and safety planning. Further details on responding to young people experiencing abuse can be found in the SafeLives Practice Briefing, Respect Guidance ‘Work with young people’s violence and abuse’ and Women’s Aid Good Practice Guidance for specialist services for children and young people.
Professionals should recognise the dynamics, impact, and risk when responding to cases of child-to-parent abuse. This may include, commissioning specialised local child-to-parent abuse services or embedding staff, within a multi-agency ‘front door’ referral system, who are trained to identify and respond appropriately to both the child and the parent victim. It is important that a young person using abusive behaviour against a parent or family member receives a safeguarding response, which should include referral to a Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub or local equivalent in the first

146 See Donovan, C., Magic, J., West, S. 2021. LGBT+ Domestic Abuse Service Provision Mapping Study. Galop, Domestic Abuse Commissioner, Durham University.
147 Holt, S. et al. 2008. ‘The impact of exposure to domestic abuse on children and young people; A review of the literature’. Child Abuse & Neglect 32:8.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

instance where a parent advocate may attend, followed by referral to Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conference if necessary, regardless of whether any police action is taken.
The Home Office intends to publish later this year updated guidance on child-to- parent abuse. This guidance will include the recommended responses by police, health professionals and social workers.

A trauma-informed response requires service providers to recognise the signs and impact of trauma and to view people’s difficulties through a ‘trauma lens’, recognise the increased likelihood of disengagement from standard services and the need for
trauma-specific services that take into account the need for relational trust and collaboration to be at the centre of intervention.148 Trauma-informed practice seeks to address the barriers that those affected by trauma can experience when accessing care and services and the role of such practice in early intervention and prevention can be crucial.

For information on working across agencies to respond to children experiencing domestic abuse see the section ‘Multi-agency working to safeguard children’.

Education
Education (including early years, childcare, schools and higher education) is not a reserved matter and is within the legislative competence of the Senedd, therefore information in this section only applies to England.
Early Years and Childcare

Early years providers can play a key role in preventing and detecting domestic abuse. Early years providers have a duty under section 40 of the Childcare Act 2006 to comply with the welfare requirements of the Early Years Foundation Stage (EYFS) statutory framework.
Early years providers must have regard to ‘Working Together to Safeguard Children’ which requires them to ensure that they are alert to any issues of concern in the child’s life and that they have, and implement, a policy and set of procedures to safeguard children. This must include an explanation of the action to be taken when there are safeguarding concerns about a child and in the event of an allegation being made against a member of staff. The policy must also cover the use of mobile phones and cameras in the setting, that staff complete safeguarding training that enables them to understand their safeguarding policy and procedures, have up-to-date knowledge of safeguarding issues, and recognise signs of potential abuse and neglect.
Early years providers must ensure that they have a practitioner who is designated to take lead responsibility for safeguarding children within each early years setting and

148 Taggart, D. Trauma Informed Care for Young People, Research in Practice: Darlington: 2018.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

who must liaise with local statutory children’s services as appropriate. This lead must also complete child protection training.
Schools and colleges

School and college staff are particularly important as they are in a unique position to identify concerns early, provide help for children and prevent concerns from escalating. School settings can also increase opportunities for sexual abuse and other harmful relationships and behaviours to develop between peers.149

Schools and colleges must have regard to Keeping Children Safe in Education (KCSIE) statutory guidance.150 This guidance provides that if a child has been harmed or is at risk of harm, a referral should be made to children’s social care immediately, and, if appropriate, to the police. The guidance includes an annex providing additional information for staff on specific types of harm and abuse, including identifying and responding to domestic abuse.
KCSIE is clear that schools and colleges should ensure that all staff receive regularly updated safeguarding training so they can take appropriate steps to identify, protect and support children. Training could include an exploration of domestic abuse, including the dynamics of inequality, power, and control, which underpin domestic abuse; the different forms domestic abuse may take and the impact of domestic abuse on children and young people. This could cover both domestic abuse within family settings as well as abuse perpetrated between children and young people either in their own intimate relationships or towards their family.
Every school and college should have a designated safeguarding lead who provides support to staff members to carry out their safeguarding duties and who will liaise closely with other services, such as children’s social care and the police. The lead should be a senior member of staff, full details of the role is set out in Keeping Children Safe in Education. When considering the needs of children affected by domestic abuse, schools and colleges may also want to consider their duties in regard to children with special educational needs, including those with behavioural problems, and refer to the SEND Code of Practice.
There is also guidance available on child-on-child sexual violence and sexual harassment in schools and colleges in England.

The organisation Operation Encompass has created an information sharing protocol between police forces and schools so that police can alert designated safeguarding leads of domestic abuse incidents involving a child. Police notify schools about all domestic abuse incidents before the start of the next school day so that appropriate

149 Brown, S., Redmond, T., Rees, D., Ford, S. & King, S. (2020). Truth Project Thematic Report: Child sexual abuse in the context of schools. London: Independent Inquiry into Child Sexual Abuse. [Online]. Available at: https://www.iicsa.org.uk/publications/research/csa-schools.
150 In Wales, guidance for local authorities and governing bodies on arrangements for safeguarding children is under Keeping Learners Safe.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

and trained school staff are made aware of incidents and can support the child accordingly when they come into school. Whereas children’s social services only intervene in the most serious cases, Operation Encompass enables every child to receive support, regardless of whether the incident has been recorded as a crime. It does not replace statutory safeguarding procedures. Where appropriate, the police and/or schools should make a referral to children’s social care if they are concerned about a child’s welfare. The Keeping Children Safe in Education statutory guidance makes it clear that where there are safeguarding concerns about a child or young person, the designated safeguarding lead and any deputies should liaise with the three safeguarding partners and work with other agencies, in line with ‘Working Together to Safeguard Children’.

More information on Operation Encompass is provided through the case study at Box 6.1. All police forces in England and Wales now use Operation Encompass and all schools are encouraged to sign up to the scheme.

Concerns about obtaining a school placement for their children may be a barrier to victims escaping domestic abuse mid-way through the school year and seeking refuge or safe accommodation, particularly if it means leaving the area or creating difficulty for children to continue to attend a faith school. However, parents can apply for a place for their child at any school at any time; and where there are places available, the child must be admitted. In 2020, the Department for Education consulted on a package of changes to the School Admissions Code to improve the in-year admissions process and to minimise gaps in children’s education. This included specific proposals to support the in-year admission of children of victims of domestic abuse. The new School Admissions Code containing these provisions came into force in September 2021. The changes introduced new categories of children who must be placed vialocal Fair Access Protocols (FAP) - the mechanism to ensure that unplaced and vulnerable children are allocated a school place as quickly as possible to now include “children living in refuge or other Relevant Accommodation” and children “subject to a Child in Need Plan or a Child Protection Plan” (or have had one within the last 12 months). All admission authorities are required to participate in their local FAP. This includes admitting children referred to their school via the FAP. Other changes were also made to improve the general operation of FAPs, including a requirement that children must be allocated a place within 20 school days of being referred to the FAP. Together, these changes will benefit all children who need to move schools in the middle of a school year, but will be particularly beneficial to the most vulnerable, including those who need to move schools as a consequence of domestic abuse.
Understanding healthy relationships is at the centre of a child’s compulsory Relationships, Sex and Health Education (RHSE) in school. The topic ‘Being Safe’ supports children to recognise and report feelings of being unsafe and covers the concepts of, and laws relating to, sexual consent, sexual exploitation, abuse, grooming, coercion, harassment, rape, domestic abuse, forced marriage, ‘honour’-based abuse and FGM, and how these can affect current and future relationships. Schools must
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

have regard to the RSHE statutory guidance, and where their practices depart from parts of the guidance which state that they should or should not do something, they will need to have good reason for doing so. Government is supporting teachers to deliver high quality, age-appropriate teaching on the subject and build an awareness of all forms of abuse through teacher training modules available on GOV.UK.
There is no right to withdraw from RSHE, in which the topic of Being Safe is taught, at primary or secondary school. The content of this subject is essential in supporting pupils’ wellbeing and attainment and helping young people to become successful and happy adults who make a meaningful contribution to society.
If a primary school chooses to teach sex education and a parent wishes to withdraw their child, the head teacher must comply with their wish. For pupils at secondary school the RSHE statutory guidance sets out that unless there are exceptional circumstances, the parents’ request to withdraw their child from sex education should be granted until three terms before the pupil turns 16. At that point, if the child wishes to take part in sex education lessons, the head teacher should ensure they receive it in one of those terms.
Box 6.1: Case Study – Operation Encompass

Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Higher education

Higher Education (HE) providers have clear responsibilities, including under the Equality Act 2010, and should have robust policies and procedures in place to comply with the law, and to investigate and swiftly address reports of violence.
The Government continues to work closely with Universities UK (UUK) on implementing its Changing the Culture framework, which seeks to tackle violence against women, harassment and hate crime. Underreporting of abuse and
domestic violence is common and it is important that providers break down barriers to reporting and that students feel safe and able to report incidents of all
abuse, harassment, and violence.

All HE providers should discharge their responsibilities fully and have robust policies and procedures in place to address harassment, making sure that HE is a genuinely fulfilling and welcoming experience for everyone. Government would expect providers to ensure that students continue to have access to support services, and complaints processes, to ensure they are able to report any issues. The HARM network (University of Lancaster) has developed and published its own policy guidance for UK Universities, encouraging universities to have in place specific policies and procedures to address domestic abuse to protect students and staff.
Any student who feels that their complaint has not been dealt with appropriately or satisfactorily can escalate their complaint to the Office of the Independent Adjudicator (OIA).

Social Care

Social care is not a reserved matter and is within the legislative competence of the Senedd, therefore information in this section only applies to England.

In Wales, statutory guidance for local authorities and social care professionals is provided under the Social Services and Well Being (Wales) Act 2014. This Act provides the legal framework for improving the wellbeing of people who need care and support, and carers who need support, and for transforming social services in Wales. Social Workers in Wales must meet the Social Care Wales professional standards and Code of Practice for Social Care Workers. Social Care Wales regulates and sets standards for social work education training in Wales.
Children’s Social Care

Domestic abuse is the most common risk factor identified by social workers in assessments and is a key driver of need for children’s social care.151 Children’s social

151 In the year ending 31 March 2021, domestic abuse (concerns about a parent) remained the most common factor identified at the end of assessment, recorded in 168,960 episodes of children in need (34% of all episodes where assessment factor information was recorded).. ONS. Characteristics of children in need: 2020 to 2021: Data year ending March 2021.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

workers are therefore an important partner both in the identification of domestic abuse and the service response – whether by engaging families to keep children safe from harm, supporting a safeguarding response to teenage victims or perpetrators of intimate partner abuse, finding the best possible care when children cannot live at home, or creating the conditions that enable children to thrive and achieve. Children’s social workers play a crucial role within the wider multi-agency response, alongside other safeguarding partners, statutory and non-statutory, such as the police, schools, and health, to help protect children.
All social workers must meet Social Work England’s (SWE) professional standards for registration (and initial training must prepare new social workers to meet these standards). Professional Standards Guidance that social workers must use social work theories, models, and research, alongside the evidence from assessments, in making their professional judgements. In responding to domestic abuse, this might include taking into account known risk factors associated with domestic abuse such as pregnancy,152 as well as co-occurrence with other factors, including adult mental ill- health and substance use.153 It is important that social workers continue to develop their knowledge and skills through continuing professional development; this should include an understanding of the different forms of domestic abuse. All social workers are required to undertake development and training and upload a record of this to maintain their registration with SWE. Training should be bespoke and specifically address experiences and needs of children and young people with diverse identities and backgrounds.
Once children and family social workers are qualified there are clear expectations in Post Qualifying Standards (PQS) under the Children and Social Work Act 2017. The ‘Post-Qualifying Standard: Knowledge and Skills Statement for Children and Family Practitioners’ sets out, for example, the expectation that child and family social workers have the knowledge and skills to identify the impact of domestic abuse and work with other professionals to ensure vulnerable adults are safeguarded and children are protected.
Given the insidious and often hidden nature of domestic abuse, it is critical that social workers employ professional curiosity to recognise patterns of behaviour over time. Social workers should understand the stigma and fear that victims may have when disclosing domestic abuse, including the fear by the non-abusive parent of the possibility of having their children removed, should they disclose abuse. They should also be alive to the ways in which perpetrators might seek to manipulate them or other professionals. This stigma may be compounded by intersecting factors which may create further barriers in disclosure. Social workers should have the ability to build empathic and trusting relationships to seek to overcome this, understanding the nuances of each situation and working with the victim’s wishes where possible.


152 Yakubovich, A, et al. Risk and protective factors for intimate partner violence against women: Systematic review and meta-analyses of prospective-longitudinal studies: American Public Health Association: 2018: 108(7).
153 Humphreys, C, Regan, L, River, D, & Thiara, RK. Domestic Violence and Substance Use: Tackling Complexity: The British Journal of Social Work: 2005: 35(8), 1303–1320.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

The statutory guidance ‘Working Together to Safeguard Children’ is clear that practitioners should always take a child-centred approach, keeping the child in focus when making decisions about their lives and working in partnership with them and their families. Practitioners should see and speak to children, listen to them, and take their views seriously, working with them and their families in deciding how to support their needs. Special provision should be put in place to support dialogue with children who have communication difficulties and/or language barriers.
Practitioners work most effectively when they are able to combine practical, theoretical, therapeutic and systemic knowledge. Within the statutory system, social workers must look to understand and consider the wishes of the child where possible.
Effective social work practice will build on an understanding that a full disclosure – from an adult or child victim – can take time and trust. Practitioners should not focus wholly on disclosure and recognise that its absence does not necessarily mean that abuse is not occurring. This includes understanding the different effects domestic abuse can have on children and how these effects present in their behaviour (set out in the ‘Impact on child victims’ section in ‘Chapter 4 – Impact of Domestic Abuse’).
Efforts should be made to provide support for children to maintain and sustain relationships with the non-abusive parent, and to direct the professional focus on working with the whole family, including any children living outside the home, to help them to be safe and recover. Social workers should view every family member as one part of a complex picture. Practitioners should seek to understand the parent-child relationships taking place, identifying the harmful impacts of the domestic abuse, and recognising the links between a perpetrator’s abuse and their parenting, holding them to account accordingly. However, careful consideration should be given to the safety of the victim and non-abusive parent, and it may not always be appropriate or safe for services to engage the perpetrator at the same time. Services should also ensure an appropriate balance of responsibility on protecting the child involved and should be clear that accountability for the harm caused lies with the perpetrator. It is important that there are multiple channels of engagement to challenge perpetrators to identify, understand and change behaviour. This should not sit solely within the criminal justice system.154
Social workers should also be aware of the ways in which perpetrators may attempt to use the relationship between the non-abusive parent and child as a tool of coercive control. They may also seek to manipulate the relationship between the child and the non-abusive parent.
If children and families are to receive help at the right time, practitioners who come into contact with them have a role to play in identifying concerns, sharing information and taking prompt action. Detail on multi-agency working to safeguard children is included in ‘Chapter 7 - Multi-Agency Response to Domestic Abuse’.

154 Department for Education. Children’s Social Care Innovation Programme, Whole Family Approaches to Tackling Domestic Abuse: 2017.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

The local authority and its social workers have specific roles and responsibilities to lead the statutory assessment of children in need and to lead child protection enquiries, including for children in families with no recourse to public funds.
Within one working day of a referral being received, a local authority social worker should acknowledge receipt to the referrer and make a decision about next steps and the type of response required. This will include determining whether:
the child requires immediate protection and urgent action is required;
the child is in need and should be accessed under section 17 of the Children Act 1989;
there is reasonable cause to suspect the child is suffering or likely to suffer significant harm, and whether enquiries should be made and the child assessed under section 47 of the Children Act 1989;
any services are required by the child and family and what type of services;
further specialist assessments are required to help the local authority to decide what further action to take;
to see the child as soon as possible, if the decision is taken that the referral requires further assessment.
Every assessment should draw relevant information gathered from the child and their family and for relevant practitioners including teachers, school staff, early years workers, health practitioners, the police, and adult social care.
The 2017 joint targeted area inspection (JTAI) on The multi-agency response to children living with domestic abuse-agency response to children living with domestic abuse, conducted by Ofsted, Care Quality Commission (CQC), Her Majesty’s Inspectorate Constabulary and Fire & Rescue Services (HMICFRS), and Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Probation (HMIP), advises on good practice in this area. The report highlights to the importance of striking a balance between responding to immediate individual crises, and developing long-term solutions for the family, including attending to the overall needs of children. Understanding the emotional and psychological impact of domestic abuse is extremely challenging, and social workers will draw on a wide range of skills in assessing and responding effectively.
The JTAI also highlighted the need to:
develop age-appropriate tools to understand the range of risks that children face;
adopt a systematic focus on the perpetrator’s behaviour rather than just focusing on the victim as the sole solution; and
help schools support victims and families, particularly given the protective role education can play when the impact of domestic abuse is fully understood and taken into account.
It is important for social workers to work in partnership with children, families and professionals, being both authoritative and empathic and recognising the shame, fear
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

and resistance that can surround domestic abuse. In doing so, they can draw on the key features of effective practice, including using a strengths-based and systemic approach, doing skilled direct work and reflective supervision and practice within their organisation, such as group case discussions.
Successful whole family approaches utilise multi-disciplinary teams that can tackle issues on multiple fronts and share responsibility and risk across professionals. It is vital that social workers work effectively across all safeguarding agencies, including health and police professionals, in response to domestic abuse, including joint visits and approaches where appropriate, and adopt a timely flow of information to ensure plans and interventions are aligned. This includes children’s and adults’ specialists and, where available, local specialist domestic abuse services should be involved. A focus on underlying issues including mental health and substance misuse is important in order to break cycles of disengagement and reoffending.
The co-location of specialists can help facilitate multi-disciplinary working particularly in places where families already know and feel comfortable. There should be data-sharing within, and between, teams, including qualitative recording of families’ experiences of working with professionals. Separate workers for victims and perpetrators and for adults and children, operating within the same team, can be crucial to building families’ trust and ensuring safety.155
Box 6.2: Case Study – Whole-system approach to safeguarding children




155 Department for Education. Children’s Social Care Innovation Programme: 2017.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Adult Social Care

Victims of domestic abuse may also have care and support needs and already have involvement with safeguarding agencies. Individuals, who have care and support needs, may be particularly vulnerable to domestic abuse from intimate partners or family members, who may use the fact that they have caring responsibilities as a cover for their abuse. See sections on ‘Controlling or coercive behaviour’ and ‘Economic abuse’ in ‘Chapter 3 – Recognising Domestic abuse’.
The Care Act 2014156 specifies that freedom from abuse and neglect is a key aspect of a person’s wellbeing – this includes domestic abuse. The adult safeguarding provisions in the Care Act 2014 apply to an adult who appears to have needs for care and support (whether or not the local authority is meeting those needs), is experiencing or is at risk of abuse or neglect, and, as a result of those care and support needs, is unable to protect themselves from the risk of, or the experience of, that abuse or neglect.157
Under the Care Act 2014, a local authority has duties to:
Make, or cause to be made, enquiries if it has reasonable cause to suspect that the adult is experiencing or is at risk of abuse or neglect;
Determine whether any action should be taken, if so by whom, and what that action should be. All local authorities have safeguarding adult procedures to support such enquiries and coordinate action with partner organisations;
Arrange for independent advocacy to be available to adults who have difficulty in taking part in the process, and where there is no other appropriate adult to assist;
Co-operate with other agencies;
Establish a Safeguarding Adults Board for its area to provide assurance that local safeguarding arrangements and partners are acting to help and protect adults that are at risk of abuse of neglect. Safeguarding Adult Boards also have

156 In Wales, refer to the Social Services and Well-being (Wales) Act 2014.
157 See paragraph 14.2 of the Care and Support Statutory Guidance.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

the authority to carry out Safeguarding Adult Reviews where an adult with care and support needs has suffered serious harm, neglect, or death; and
Establish and maintain a service for providing people in its area with information and advice, including on how to raise concerns about the safety or wellbeing of an adult who has needs for care and support.
As well as the specific statutory duties to safeguard adults with care and support needs, local authorities have a number of general duties under Part 1 of the Care Act 2014. These include a duty to promote individual wellbeing and prevent needs for care and support developing, by promoting individuals’ personal dignity; emotional, social and economic wellbeing; participation in society; and control over their day-to-day lives. In addition, there are specific duties to undertake a needs (and where applicable) carer’s needs assessment. Both local domestic abuse and safeguarding adults’ protocols will apply to situations where a person, who has care and support needs that prevent them from safeguarding themselves, is experiencing domestic abuse. Safeguarding work should ensure that the person experiencing abuse has support to access a choice of specialist domestic abuse services and that there is partnership working with health and social care providers, housing and criminal justice agencies, as well as specialist domestic abuse and advocacy services.
The Mental Capacity Act 2005 (‘the 2005 Act’) also offers protections against abuse, including domestic abuse, by creating the criminal offences of ill treatment and wilful neglect of a person who lacks capacity under section 44 of the 2005 Act. The offences may apply to anyone who has the care of the person, an attorney acting under a lasting power of attorney or an enduring power of attorney, and deputies appointed by the court. The offences carry a penalty of a fine, a maximum of five years imprisonment, or both. The 2005 Act also created the Office of the Public Guardian (OPG) which registers Lasting Powers of Attorney and supervises deputies appointed by the Court of Protection. If finance or health and welfare concerns are raised with the OPG about an attorney or deputy, it can investigate, working with other organisations (such as local authorities or the NHS, where appropriate).
Potential indicators which may indicate that closer review and possible investigation might be needed include a change in living conditions, inability to pay bills, unexplained shortage of money, the unexplained loss or misplacement of financial documents and sudden or unexpected changes in a will or other financial documents. See also the ‘Economic abuse’ section. The Care and support statutory guidance acts as key supporting guidance to the Care Act 2014, including setting out the role of the Principal Social Worker and local authorities, and covering adult safeguarding procedures. It is crucial that adult social workers receive regular, updated domestic abuse training.

Health
Health is not a reserved matter and it is within the legislative competence of the Senedd, therefore information in this section only applies to England. It is relevant to
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

health professionals in England whether working within NHS commissioned services or local authority commissioned health services such as 0 to 19 services, sexual health and drug and alcohol treatment services.
Role and structures

Health professionals not only interact with victims of abuse regularly, but they may also interact regularly with every member of the household including children. They are trusted professionals who can often have access to patients on their own during times of increased vulnerability, including during pregnancy for women. This access can result in high volumes of disclosures of abuse. As a result, health professionals are ideally placed to identify and respond to the needs of victims, perpetrators and children and must be supported appropriately to do so.
Domestic Homicide Reviews (DHRs) frequently cite health professionals as those with the best chance of taking action, and analysis of Domestic Homicide Reviews has shown the significant role that health professionals play. Some victims may be long- term patients which reinforces the importance of the relationship with health professionals.
The Health and Care Act 2022 builds upon the work of voluntary Integrated Care Systems, by establishing 42 Integrated Care Boards (ICBs), and requiring the creation of Integrated Care Partnerships (ICPs) in each system area across England. This will empower local health and care leaders to join up planning and provision of services, both within the NHS and with local authorities, and help deliver more person-centred and preventative care. The ICB will take on the commissioning functions of the CCG as well as some of NHS England’s commissioning functions. It will also be jointly accountable for NHS spend and performance within the system. This will put more power and autonomy in the hands of local systems, to plan and deliver seamless health and social care services. The ICP will be tasked with promoting partnership arrangements, and developing a plan to address the health, social care and public health needs of their population. The ICB and local authorities will have to have regard to that plan when making decisions. Responding to and preventing domestic abuse should be a strategic priority for both ICBs and ICPs and should be the responsibility of all healthcare professionals working within a system. An ICS is expected to have a joined up, collaborative response to domestic abuse across its geographical footprint.

In relation to roles and responsibilities:
ICB senior leadership – will have statutory safeguarding responsibilities and be subject to a statutory requirement to contribute to needs assessment for safe accommodation. The Health and Care Act 2022 amended the NHS Act 2006 to require ICBs and their partner NHS Trusts and Foundation Trusts to set out any steps they propose to take to address the particular needs of victims of abuse (including domestic abuse) when developing their 5-year Joint Forward Plans.
ICPs – will have a statutory responsibility to develop a strategy addressing how the health, public health, and social care needs, identified in Joint Strategic Needs Assessments will be met by commissioners. Health and Wellbeing
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Boards should ensure that the health and care needs of those impacted by domestic abuse, are reflected in their Joint Strategic Needs Assessments, so that these needs can be addressed in local and system-wide decision making.
Enquiries

There is a need for all frontline staff in public services to be trained to make enquiries into domestic abuse to ensure they are Making Every Contact Count.158 To provide the best support to victims of domestic abuse, it is essential that healthcare staff have the tools and confidence required to identify potential victims, sensitively, intervene at an early stage where possible, and refer on as appropriate. It is critical that all health professionals understand the need to enquire about domestic abuse, and how to do this safely, if they are concerned that a patient may be experiencing or perpetrating it.
All staff working in the NHS must undertake level 1 safeguarding training as a minimum, and this training includes domestic abuse as a module. Further training is required for different occupational groups (Levels 2-3) and specific roles (Levels 4-5). The intercollegiate documents for safeguarding children and adults provide clear frameworks to identify the role and competencies required for all healthcare staff. The frameworks also include specific detail for chief executives, chairs, board members (including executives non-executives and lay members). Each level will have an assigned minimum training requirement.
There is a range of guidance available and relevant to different healthcare settings aimed at helping staff make relevant and appropriate enquiries in a sensitive manner and at the right time. Department of Health and Social care (DHSC) provides online domestic abuse resource for health professionals, a Quality Standard for Domestic Abuse has been published by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) and the Institute of Health Professionals working in conjunction with the Royal Colleges of Nursing and General Practitioners have developed a series of e-learning and training modules. It is recommended that healthcare professionals follow the specific guidance required for their practice and at the requisite level.

NICE guidelines state that being trained to respond to disclosure (Level 1) and how to ask about domestic abuse (Level 2) is essential for safe enquiry about experiences of domestic abuse and a consistent and appropriate response. Staff should understand the epidemiology of domestic violence and abuse, how it affects people’s lives and their own role, and that of other professionals, in intervening safely. Staff should be adequately trained in recognising domestic abuse and how to respond in practice. They should also be updated on local policy, protocols for identifying and assessing risk, information sharing, and pathways to and from specialist domestic abuse services.



158 Agenda. Ask and Take Action: why public services must ask about domestic abuse: 2019.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Health and social care service managers and professionals should ensure trained staff in antenatal, postnatal, reproductive care, sexual health, alcohol or drug misuse, mental health, children's, and vulnerable adults' services ask service users whether they have experienced domestic abuse. This should be a routine part of good clinical practice, even where there are no indicators of such abuse.
Findings from the Pathfinder Project159 highlighted that health professionals feel better able to enquire about domestic abuse if their Integrated Care System and primary care networks supported the placement of Independent Domestic Violence Advisors (IDVAs) or other accredited domestic abuse peer advocacy programme. These specialised trauma-informed services might then be best placed to follow up with any disclosures of abuse; a greater understanding of local referral pathways; specialist recovery and peer advocacy services to which they can refer or signpost victims, survivors or perpetrators dependent upon their unique situation.
Healthcare professionals should seek to create opportunities to speak to patients without the presence of others to facilitate the opportunity for abuse to be disclosed. Appropriately qualified professional interpreters should be used where needed to mitigate the risk of reliance on those who may be attending with the victim. Health professionals should not be relying on family members or partners for interpretation services when enquiring about domestic abuse. There is a significant risk that people experiencing domestic abuse may be less likely to disclose abuse with someone they know in the room. It may increase the risk to the victim if they disclose abuse in front of the perpetrator or someone who could share that information with the perpetrator. Health professionals are often the only professionals with an optimal opportunity to speak privately and safely with victims of domestic abuse and therefore should ensure that where possible, only professional, and independent interpreters are used. Speaking with victims alone can be difficult. For example, speaking with women alone can be difficult within maternity services. Pregnant women may be accompanied by their partners, family members or friends in attending antenatal appointments or making ultrasound scan visits. Whilst this is challenging, considering domestic abuse can start or exacerbate during pregnancy seeking to create opportunities for private discussion can be crucial. See ‘Pregnancy’ section in ‘Chapter 5 – Different experiences, needs and related considerations’.
Recognising the increase in remote healthcare assessments, guidance has been developed on routine enquiry within ‘virtual’ health settings. This guidance sets out steps to help health professionals identify and respond to those who may be at risk, and it can be applied to many areas where routine enquiries occur, for example maternity services as well as general practice.
Integrated response

To ensure joint local Health and Wellbeing Strategies, and the commissioning of relevant health and public health services, meet the needs of the local population, local

159 See Pathfinder Tooklit. 2020.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

health and public health partners should work together. This can be achieved through the Health and Wellbeing Board, to produce a needs assessment and this should include consideration of domestic abuse victims. The CSEW for the year ending March 2018, found that 33% of victims experiencing partner abuse received medical attention as a result of physical injuries and other effects. Around one in five partner abuse victims reported telling healthcare professionals about this abuse.160 Therefore, it is vital health professionals are supported, via specialist training and partnership working, to respond effectively and ensure victims have an effective non-criminal justice-based support option available to them.
For different bodies with the Health and Care System, working together is crucial. Care in the health service can be fragmented and patients may not have continuity of care. In England, the Health and Care Act 2022 will increase integration between health and social care and embed more power and autonomy in the hands of local systems, to deliver seamless health and social care services.
Poor information recording and inadequate information sharing within the health service and between health and other organisations are recurring themes in multi- agency reviews of death and/or serious harm in domestic abuse cases.161 A multitude of factors hinder good recording and sharing - such as lack of training, lack of time, and concerns about perpetrators seeing the information. Health professionals should record and share information about suspected and actual abuse accurately to better support victims of domestic abuse. ICBs may seek to adopt and embed the good practice recommendations for recording and sharing information about domestic abuse in health services from the Pathfinder consortium commissioned report on recording and sharing information, where these are applicable.
Health services should be encouraged and supported to set up robust partnerships with local domestic abuse specialist services and build referral pathways that are clear and easily accessible, to ensure staff feel confident to respond to victims. The NHS has a key role in providing care and support to victims of domestic abuse, including children, and babies through a wide range of health care services, including services for physical and mental health. Staff working in the NHS can help to identify victims and potential victims and perpetrators of domestic abuse and provide, signpost or refer them to appropriate support, for example to local safeguarding arrangements, specialist domestic abuse services, and/or the local Sexual Assault and Abuse Services Pathway for cases where domestic abuse has included sexual violence.
In line with the NHS key principle that care should be based on clinical priority, health services should ensure that any and all victims of domestic abuse and their children are not unduly disadvantaged in accessing physical and mental health services when they are forced to move to new accommodation in a different area.



160 ONS. 2018. Partner abuse in detail – Appendix tables - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk).
161 Home Office. Domestic Homicide Reviews, Key findings from analysis of domestic homicide reviews: 2016.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Working together across agencies helps to provide support for victims. This may include attending local domestic abuse or violence against women and girls strategic group meetings, Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conferences (MARACs) and engaging with Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements (MAPPA). For more information on these see ‘Chapter 7 – Multi-Agency Response to Domestic Abuse’.
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) published its Quality Standard for Domestic Abuse in March 2016.162 This includes identifying and supporting people experiencing domestic abuse, as well as referring to specialist services for those perpetrating domestic abuse. It also covers children and young people (under 16) who are living with/experiencing domestic abuse.
Health professionals can refer to the Pathfinder toolkit as good practice, taking an integrated healthcare response to domestic abuse, and a systematic approach to transforming the health sector’s response to domestic abuse. The toolkit combines all elements of evidence-based good practice, this includes:
partnership working across health and specialist services;
specialist interventions such as the IRIS programme in general practices;
Domestic Abuse Coordinators and IDVAs in acute and mental health settings;
sustainable specialist training, policies and procedures; and
accurate data collection and information sharing.
The model works across acute, mental health and general practice settings, so that all victims have access to the support they need and further harm can be prevented. Early qualitative findings from the independent evaluation of Pathfinder163 underscored the value of the whole-health model in creating the opportunities and pathways needed so that victims could find safety.
A whole-health model response to domestic abuse goes beyond training and stand- alone interventions. It requires a change in the culture of health services and partnership working with specialist domestic abuse services. Key to implementing these changes is monitoring and accountability. A coordinated and systemic approach lies at the heart of this work and is critical in ensuring sustainability and a safer and more effective response to domestic abuse.
The Inter-Collegiate and Agency Domestic Violence Abuse (INCADVA) forum is a policy forum which brings together the expertise and knowledge of national health and social care bodies, medical royal colleges and the domestic abuse sector. INCADVA

162 NICE also covers Wales,however, in this context NICE is interacting with a devolved health service that is under differing legislative duties, and this needs to be considered by professionals.
163 Pathfinder was a 3-year fixed-term pilot project that brought together expertise and funding for specialist domestic abuse interventions to embed a ‘Whole Health’ approach to domestic abuse in 8 sites across England. The project ended in March 2020 and was led by Standing Together in partnership with four expert partners Against Violence and Abuse (AVA), Imkaan, IRISi and SafeLives.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

have recommended a list of actions to highlight the vital role of the healthcare system in responding to domestic abuse, including:
Implementing the IRIS164 (Identification and Referral to Improve Safety) Programme. IRIS is an evidence-based intervention to improve the general practice response to domestic abuse through training, support to practice teams and having a DA specialist embedded in practices. It is nationally recognised as best practice and has informed NICE guidance.
The co-location of specialist Health IDVAs (Independent Domestic Violence Advisors) within health settings. A SafeLives report A Cry for Health165 provides extensive evidence around the benefits of this intervention in acute hospitals and other studies find similar results when specialists are located in mental health settings.
The establishment of a Domestic Abuse Coordinator and the implementation of a Domestic Abuse Champions Network. These have been core elements of the good practice that has emerged as part of the Pathfinder project.
Ensuring that victims have priority and timely access to specialist mental health support services, which are adequately and consistently funded, and available across the country to all victims, regardless of their immigration status.166
Long-term public health messaging to challenge public attitudes to domestic abuse.
Representation from mental health services on advisory panels, in addition to the wider health service representation.
In December 2021, the Department of Health and Social Care published the Vision for the Women’s Health Strategy for England, to be followed with the publication of the strategy. The Vision set out the overarching ambition of improving the health and wellbeing of women and girls in England based on the life course approach. The Strategy will set out actions both on issues that only affect women and girls, and on issues that affect everyone but which have sex-based differences in prevalence, experience or outcomes. It will detail delivery plans against the themes (women’s voices, healthcare policies and services, information and education, health in the workplace, research evidence and data) and against specific health needs and conditions.
Pharmacies also play a role in providing community based support to victims of domestic abuse, for example, the Home Office funds the Ask for ANI ‘Action Needed

164 See About the IRIS programme - IRISi.
165 SafeLives, A cry for health: Why we must invest on domestic abuse services in hospitals. 2016.
166 Charges for people who are not ordinarily resident in the UK in respect of relevant NHS services in England is set out in the National Health Service (Charges to Overseas Visitors) Regulations. Treatment for physical or mental condition caused by domestic abuse is free of charge to everyone.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Immediately’ codeword scheme which allows victims of domestic abuse to ask for ‘ANI’ and access emergency support from the safety of their local pharmacy.

Housing

Housing is not a reserved matter and is within the legislative competence of the Senedd, therefore information in this section only applies to England.
Role and approach

Alternative housing options, whether refuges, social housing, or private accommodation167, are key to ensuring victims are able to escape domestic abuse, and factor strongly in a victim’s decision making about whether they stay or leave a perpetrator. As the majority of domestic abuse is perpetrated at home168, housing providers can play a unique role in supporting victims of abuse who are their tenants and reporting perpetrators where appropriate. Some local authorities offer sanctuary schemes and support for victims to stay in their own home where it is safe to do so. Housing services may consider re-housing the perpetrator in certain circumstances rather than the victim.
It is vital that housing providers are able to recognise and respond to the signs of domestic abuse. A report by SafeLives identified the risk of misdiagnosing the effects of domestic abuse as Anti-Social Behaviour (ASB).169 Housing providers should employ professional curiosity when faced with all cases, even if domestic abuse is not immediately suspected. Abuse may manifest as multiple moves in quick succession; a refusal to let housing officers into the property; neighbour complaints or damage to property. Housing officers should recognise the impact of wrongly criminalising victims in such instances and consider safety planning and specialist support for the victim if action is taken against the perpetrator.
The Domestic Abuse Housing Alliance (DAHA) is a partnership that has established the first domestic abuse accreditation for housing providers. It aims to improve the housing sector’s response to domestic abuse through the introduction and adoption of an established set of standards and an accreditation process. The DAHA has produced a toolkit which sets out the steps that housing providers should take to become accredited.
In addition, the DAHA has led the introduction of a Whole Housing Approach to domestic abuse in partnership with groups that include Surviving Economic Abuse and Safer London. The programme is being piloted in three local areas (London ‘three boroughs’, Cambridgeshire and Stockton). The programme aims to raise awareness of domestic abuse within all housing sectors and improve outcomes for victims so they

167 This is a non-exhaustive list, depending on an individual’s circumstances different options may be available.
168 HMICFRS. Increasingly everyone’s business: A progress report on the police response to domestic abuse: 2015.
169 SafeLives. Safe at Home: The case for a response to domestic abuse by housing providers: 2018.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

can achieve stable housing and live safely. It recognises the diversity in both the housing needs of victims and the approaches required across different tenures, including social and private renting, and privately owned, to identify how they can be part of an effective response.
Homelessness and domestic abuse victims’ priority need for accommodation

Many victims of domestic abuse must leave their homes and the area where they live to escape abuse.
Victims who are homeless as a result of domestic abuse have priority need for accommodation. This means local housing authorities have a duty to secure accommodation for victims of domestic abuse if they are homeless through no fault of their own and eligible for assistance. The accommodation provided must be suitable in relation to the applicant and to all members of their household who normally reside with them, or who might reasonably be expected to reside with them.
The Homelessness Code of Guidance for Local Authorities170 states that in formulating their homelessness strategies, housing authorities should consider the particular needs that victims of domestic abuse have for safe accommodation, this could include implementing a reciprocal agreement with other housing authorities and providers to facilitate out of area moves for victims of domestic abuse. There are a number of potential accommodation options for victims of domestic abuse, and housing authorities will need to consider which are most appropriate for each person on a case- by-case basis, taking into account their circumstances and needs.
Housing authorities should consider whether mixed sex accommodation is appropriate and seek to provide single sex accommodation where this is required. Some women may feel safer in single sex accommodation. The Equality Act 2010 allows for the provision of separate or single sex services in certain circumstances. Limiting a service on the basis of sex (and in certain circumstances gender reassignment) must be a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim. The Equality and Human Rights Commission acknowledges that a legitimate aim could be for reasons of privacy, decency, to ensure health and safety or to prevent trauma. An example of this could include imposing such limitations on access by males, or by a transgender person whether or not they have a Gender Recognition Certificate, to a domestic abuse refuge offering emergency accommodation to female victims. For full details see the guidance Separate and single-sex service providers: a guide on the Equality Act sex and gender reassignment provisions.

It is important that victims have spaces where they feel safe and can be provided with trauma-informed support. Safe accommodation settings such as domestic abuse




170 In Wales, refer to Part 2 of the Housing (Wales) Act 2014.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

refuges should be single sex171, secure and dedicated to supporting victims of domestic abuse. The approach to the services and support commissioned should consider the particular needs of all victims in the area and authorities must consider their Public Sector Equality Duty under the Equality Act 2010. All support within safe accommodation should be delivered by knowledgeable and/or experienced specialist providers, charities, and other voluntary organisations whose purpose is to provide support to victims of domestic abuse. This support should meet the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities (DLUHC) Quality Standards, Women’s Aid National Quality Standards, Imkaan Accredited Quality Standards, Male Domestic Abuse Network Service Standards or DAHA Accreditation Framework for Housing Providers.

Local authorities have a duty under Part 4 of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021 (‘the 2021 Act’) to provide safe accommodation. This duty requires that tier one authorities assess the need for accommodation-based support for victims of domestic abuse in their area and use the funding provided through Part 4 of the 2021 Act to supply this. Tier one and tier two local authorities need to work together to establish what support is needed at safe accommodation in the local authority area.
The duty under Part 4 of the 2021 Act is a strategic duty rather than a duty owed to individuals. Where an eligible applicant approaches their local authority as homeless as a result of being a victim of domestic abuse, the local authority has a duty to treat the household as priority need for homeless assistance, and provide suitable accommodation as set out under Part 7 of the Housing Act 1996 and in the Homelessness Code of Guidance, rather than a duty to secure safe accommodation that meets the Part 4 requirements. Housing authorities must consider all of a household’s circumstances and needs when determining the suitability of accommodation, including personal safety, and local authorities may review placements on request. The regulations and statutory guidance on relevant accommodation provides information for housing authorities securing suitable accommodation for victims who are homeless as a result of domestic abuse. There is further information on Part 4 of the 2021 Act below.
Housing authorities should also consider the needs of people who are rough sleeping or hidden homeless in formulating their approach to housing domestic abuse victims. Annual statutory homelessness statistics for 2020 to 2021 show that 31,180 households (12%) recorded ‘domestic abuse’ as their main reason for being homeless or threatened with homelessness.172 Where victims are rough sleeping, the risk of further abuse on the streets is significant.




171 It is permitted to provide single sex accommodation and services in safe accommodation. See the statutory guidance on https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/domestic-abuse-support-within-safe-accommodation/delivery-of-support-to-victims-of- domestic-abuse-in-domestic-abuse-safe-accommodation-services.
172 Ministry of Housing Communities and Local Government (now the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities). Statutory Homelessness Annual Report, 2020-21, England: 2020.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Housing response

Housing providers should have policies in place to identify and respond to domestic abuse. The White Paper on Social Housing sets out that the Regulator of Social Housing will make clear that landlords should have a policy setting out how they tackle issues surrounding domestic abuse, working with other agencies as appropriate.173
Victims can experience many incidents of abuse before calling the police or reporting it to another agency. Housing providers may be able to identify abuse at earlier stages and should consider how they can best provide support to their residents. By understanding the indicators of domestic abuse through training and professional development, housing officers can increase their confidence to speak to people experiencing abuse, risk assess and safety plan alongside them.
Housing providers should carefully consider the nature and effects of domestic abuse with regards to the needs of victims, including tactics used by a perpetrator which have financial and safety implications for victims. For example, research identified impacts related to the fact that where a victim and perpetrator have a joint tenancy or mortgage they will be jointly and severally responsible for any liabilities. This may result in victims being liable for arrears or repairs when the perpetrator refuses to pay – a form of economic abuse - or fearing for their safety if unable to change locks without prior agreement from a landlord, letting agent or mortgage provider.174 See section on ‘Economic abuse’ for more information.
Safety should be at the core of the housing response to domestic abuse. Housing authorities and housing providers should also be alert to the wider role they play in ensuring victim safety. Procedures should be in place to keep all information on victims safe and secure. In many cases, particularly where extended family members or multiple perpetrators may be involved, perpetrators go to great lengths to seek information on victims. The housing authority and providers should be alert to the possibility of employees being, or having links to, perpetrators. Housing authorities should not disclose information about an applicant to anybody outside the organisation without consent. Authorities should consider safety when sharing information and ensure information sharing is relevant, necessary and proportionate for the purpose for which it is being shared, and that the lawful basis for sharing information is clear. In some circumstances, it may be necessary to restrict access to cases where abuse is disclosed to only named members of staff.
Housing authorities should work co-operatively with other local authorities and commissioners to provide services to tackle domestic abuse. Local authorities should

173 The Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities will undertake a consultation on the impacts of joint tenancy law on domestic abuse victims. This is in recognition of the fact that the current rules on joint tenancies mean that periodic and social housing tenancies can be ended by either tenant, without the consent of the other. Victims who are in a periodic joint tenancy with a perpetrator can therefore be vulnerable to the threat of being made homeless by perpetrators. The consultation aims to consider ways to support victims and reduce the risk of homelessness.
174 Walker, SJ, Hester, M. Policy Evidence Summary 4: Justice, housing and domestic abuse, the experiences of homeowners and private renters. Domestic Abuse Housing Alliance: 2019.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

assess the accommodation-based support needs of all domestic abuse victims, including children as stated in section 57 of the 2021 Act. This includes ensuring there is support specifically for victims with unique and/or complex needs, such as mental health advice and support, drug and alcohol advice and support, as well as signposting accordingly. Local authorities should also ensure that the appropriate and adequate support within safe accommodation meets the needs of all victims including those with multiple and complex needs and whose support needs may not be able to be met within generic domestic abuse safe accommodation, such as victims with mental health and/or substance misuse needs. See ‘Chapter 5 – Different experiences, needs and related considerations’ for further information.
Housing officers and homelessness commissioners should be involved in multi- agency working, including by being part of local safeguarding arrangements such as Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hubs (MASH) or MARACs.
Safe Accommodation

Part 4 of the 2021 Act introduces a statutory duty on local authorities, placing clearer accountability on local areas to ensure the needs of victims within refuges and other forms of domestic abuse safe accommodation are met in a consistent way across England. Under these duties, tier one authorities (county councils, unitary councils outside London, and the Greater London Authority and the Council of the Isles of Scilly) in England are required to appoint a Domestic Abuse Local Partnership Board to support local needs assessments and local strategies.
Tier one authorities are required to effectively commission services based on a local strategy informed by a robust needs assessment, and report back annually to Government. The annual reporting requirement will help the Government and others to monitor how the new duties on local authorities are working, understand where there may be challenges and how the funding is being used, and help identify and disseminate good practice. The Part 4 duty also requires tier two authorities in two-tier areas (District Councils in areas with a County Council, and London Boroughs) to co- operate with the lead tier one authority.
Under the duties, local authorities should consider the specific accommodation- based support needs of all victims in its area, including those with particular protected characteristics, and/or multiple complex needs. Relevant safe accommodation includes refuge accommodation, specialist safe accommodation, dispersed accommodation, second stage accommodation or other accommodation designated by the local authority, registered social landlord or registered charity as domestic abuse emergency accommodation.
Under these duties, authorities cannot provide support in ‘bed and breakfast’ accommodation175 and support should not be provided in any shared, mixed sex

175 As defined in The Domestic Abuse Support (Relevant Accommodation) Regulations 2021.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

accommodation as this would not be in line with the descriptions of safe accommodation in the relevant regulations or guidance. Where a victim is in this type of accommodation and the authority identifies that they require support, the authority may deem it appropriate to work with the housing authority to ensure that support can be provided in the appropriate relevant safe accommodation. If a victim does not require support in safe accommodation, then local housing authorities will need to continue to comply with their duties under homelessness legislation in line with Chapter 21 of the Homelessness Code of Guidance.
Refuge services are a core component of the housing response to domestic abuse which provide a crucial form of provision for victims, including children, who are no longer safe at home. However, some victims may not want to take up this option and some can face challenges in accessing support. These may include victims experiencing homelessness and facing multiple disadvantages related to mental health, substance abuse and having a disability. In addition, those from minority communities can also face challenges. Commissioners and providers should take an approach that is mindful of different needs and experiences, how they may intersect as well as any additional barriers and layers of discrimination faced by these groups when planning and delivering services.
There is a need to ensure that all victims are able to access safe accommodation irrespective of where they originally reside. Many victims fleeing domestic abuse will travel across borders to seek help and move away from the perpetrator. Women’s Aid annual 2017 survey found that over two thirds of women in refuges were from a different local authority area.176 The DLUHC has published statutory guidance relating to Part 4 of the 2021 Act that makes clear that tier one local authorities must meet the support needs of all victims residing in relevant accommodation including those who originally present from outside of the locality. This guidance includes reference to the appropriate quality standards to adhere to.

DLUHC has also produced guidance on improving access to social housing for victims of domestic abuse who are in a refuge or other form of temporary accommodation. The guidance encourages housing authorities to use their existing powers to support victims to remain safely in their homes if they choose to do so. It makes clear that housing authorities are expected not to apply residency tests for victims who have fled to another district and sets out how they can ensure victims are given appropriate priority for social housing. In line with section 79 of the 2021 Act, the guidance requires local authorities and private registered providers of social housing to ensure that victims of domestic abuse who have a lifetime tenancy, or who have had a lifetime tenancy and have fled the social home to escape domestic abuse, retain their lifetime security of tenure if the landlord grants them a new tenancy for reasons connected with the abuse.


176 Women’s Aid. Survival and Beyond: The Domestic Abuse Report 2017: 2018.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Local Criminal Justice Boards

An effective response by the criminal justice system is crucial in supporting victims of domestic abuse and ensuring perpetrators are brought to justice. Local criminal justice boards (LCJBs) are responsible for joining up local criminal justice agencies to achieve common aims and objectives including reducing crime, bringing more offenders to justice, and increasing public confidence. This can include activity to drive forward the adoption of the Domestic Abuse Best Practice Framework. LCJBs could be used by senior officers to monitor criminal justice responses to domestic abuse within agencies that sit on the boards.

Policing

Domestic abuse related offences represent 18% of all offences recorded by the police.177 A review of domestic homicides and suspected victim suicides during the Covid-19 pandemic found that over half of suspects (58%) were previously known to the police as a suspect for any prior offending.178 This review adopted a wide definition of domestic abuse related deaths which included child deaths in a domestic setting, unexplained or suspicious deaths, and suspected suicides of individuals with a known history of domestic abuse victimisation.
Incidents of domestic abuse should not be seen in isolation; by its nature domestic abuse involves repeat victimisation. Officers should consider the history and any patterns of behaviour to understand any incident within its wider context. HM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire and Rescue Services (HMCIFRS) reports on the police response to domestic abuse have indicated that there are a number of reasons why domestic abuse cases may not result in prosecutions.179 A significant share of domestic abuse cases are withdrawn, with the victim not supporting police action. It is vital to work with victims in a trauma-informed way to support them through an investigation process and to prevent re-traumatisation. Victims may withdraw their support for prosecution if they experience a lack of communication, empathy and support. HMICFRS has noted a huge variation between forces in the proportion of cases discontinued on the grounds that “victim does not support police action”. This varied across forces from less than 10 to over 40 per 100 domestic abuse related offences in the year ending March 2020.180 The quality of the policing response plays a significant part in victim engagement in domestic abuse cases and can impact charge and conviction rates. The Government has committed to review the data in cases closed due to evidential difficulties or where the victim does not support police action.
The report found that delays in investigations, lack of contact and lengthy court processes more generally result in high levels of disengagement. Access to justice,

177 ONS. Domestic abuse prevalence and trends, England and Wales - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk): data year ending March 2021.
178 Bates, l., Hoeger, K, Stoneman M-J, Whitaker, A. Vulnerability Knowledge and Practice Programme (VKPP): Domestic Homicides and Suspected Victim Suicides During the Covid-19 Pandemic 2020-2021: Home Office, VKPP, NPCC, College of Policing: 2021.
179 HMICFRS reports, including update reports, on domestic abuse are published on the organisation’s website.
180 HMICFRS. Police response to violence against women and girls: Final inspection report: 2021.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

including long waiting times between a charge being made and a case being heard at court increase the risk of victims disengaging with the process.
The College of Policing has developed guidance – Authorised Professional Practice – which sets out principles and standards for officers in investigating domestic abuse. The guidance outlines the duty of officers to take positive action in all stages of the police response to domestic abuse to ensure that victims, including children are protected; criminal proceedings are pursued where appropriate; and that there is effective perpetrator management where criminal proceedings are not possible or suitable.181
Relevant CPS guidance on domestic abuse and associated offences is referenced in the ‘Crown Prosecution Service’ section where topics related to police investigation are covered and are therefore applicable to officers as well as other professionals working on domestic abuse within the criminal justice system.
Controlling or coercive behaviour in an intimate or familial relationship has been a criminal offence since 2015 by virtue of section 76 of the Serious Crime Act 2015 where the requirements of the offence are set out. Further information can be found in the statutory guidance issued to police and criminal justice agencies under section 77 of that Act about investigations of this offence. This guidance should be considered when investigating the offence. See also section on ‘Controlling or coercive behaviour’.
The police should adopt a trauma-informed and trauma-responsive approach182 and take into account the following when supporting victims of domestic abuse:
An awareness of protected characteristics (as set out in section 4 of the Equality Act 2010) and any vulnerabilities that may impact on the victim and how they seek support, avoiding making assumptions based on stereotypes;
Barriers that may exist for victims to disclose information or seek support183, for example: fear of the perpetrator; fear that they may not be believed; pressures from family or the community – in particular for those victims in rural or closed communities; negative past experiences with the police or services; a desire to make the relationship work; economic barriers; communication difficulties; not wanting to uproot the children or fear that the children will be taken into care; fear of repercussions related to insecure immigration status;
Building trust can help people to disclose;
An awareress that domestic abuse can involve the wider family particularly where there is ‘honour’-based abuse or wider caring responsibilities;



181 For more information also see the College of Policing and NPCC’s Policing Violence Against Women and Girls National framework for delivery: Year 1 and Outcomes and performance network.
182 See ‘Impact on Victims’ section in ‘Chapter 4 - Impact of Domestic Abuse’ for further information on a trauma-informed response.
183 These barriers can intersect with barriers resulting from a victim’s protected characteristic(s). See Chapter 5 ‘Different experiences, needs and related considerations’.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Carry out safe enquiry, follow risk identification, assessment and management procedures, including the need to refer to an IDVA or Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conference (MARAC),
Make referrals to local specialist support services as appropriate;
Follow local procedures for safeguarding adults and children, including multi- agency safeguarding arrangements set out by the chief officer of police as a statutory safeguarding partner;
Recognise the impact ‘first responders’ may have on children who see, hear or experience the abuse in a domestic abuse incident, ensuring premises are consistently checked for the presence of children (whether or not in the room during an incident) and children are actively listened to. Responders should also be trained to recognise vulnerability and signs of abuse during a call for service for domestic abuse. See the section on ‘Education’ for more information on Operation Encompass;
Act to safeguard children by making a referral to social services where there are concerns about a child’s welfare;
Consider whether the perpetrator also needs a response that offers the chance to change their behaviour and holds them to account if they continue with their abuse. The Respect Phoneline can offer advice and information to perpetrators, their family and friends and to professionals, and can signpost to local Respect accredited programmes;
Investigate the history of the relationship (as well as the perpetrator’s history with other victims) and recognise the dynamics including any power imbalance;
Where substance misuse has occurred, be alert to the more complex dynamics that might exist meaning the abuse is not necessarily ‘alcohol-related violence’ and that the violence may be symptomatic of domestic abuse;184
Record any crimes and any previous incidents and place a domestic abuse flag on them, following National Crime Recording Standards. Consider that behaviours such as harassment and stalking may from part of the abuse but be recorded as separate offences;
Consider whether an application under the ‘Right to Know’ route of the Domestic Violence Disclosure Scheme, also known as ‘Clare’s Law’, needs to be made;
Provide the victim with accessible information about the criminal justice process and their rights under the Victims’ Code;
Be aware that perpetrators may raise counter or cross-allegations when reported by victims of abuse, and care should be taken to assess evidence and correctly identify victims and perpetrators, which can include family members.185

184 See, for example, Ward, M, et al. Domestic Abuse and Change Resistant Drinkers: preventing and reducing the harm. Learning lessons from Domestic Homicide Reviews: Alcohol Concern, Against Violence & Abuse (AVA): 2016.
185 For further information, see for example Respect’s 2019 Toolkit for Work with Male Victims of Domestic Abuse.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

In the event that a victim of abuse is reported as being a perpetrator by the real perpetrator, it is important that the victim should still be given support as a victim.
Ensure victims of domestic abuse have an interpreter186 (including BSL for deaf victims) or other communication accessibility support where required;
Where appropriate, provide an intermediary (if the victim is particularly vulnerable)187 or allow someone to sit with the victim during police interviews. This could be a supportive friend or family member (who is not a potential witness); this person should not be the child of the victim or perpetrator or any individual or member of the community where there is risk that they may disclose information shared by the victim with the perpetrator; and
Consider and follow your force’s positive action policy.


Link between victimisation and offending

Police and other criminal justice agencies should recognise the part domestic abuse can play in offending behaviour; this link is highlighted in the Ministry of Justice’s Female Offender Strategy. The response from criminal justice agencies to those affected can be pivotal in identifying domestic abuse at the earliest opportunity, offering support, and helping to break the cycle of victimisation and offending.
A range of offences may result from a victim’s experience of abuse, including: handling stolen goods under threat of violence from a partner; possession of a controlled substance belonging to an abusive partner; use of force against an abusive partner or ex-partner; failure to ensure school attendance for fear of meeting an abusive partner or ex-partner.188 Agencies should always consider the possible context of domestic abuse in female offending and emphasise a gender and trauma-responsive approach for supporting women at risk of entering the criminal justice system. See also the section on ‘Offending’.
Victims with insecure immigration status

Perpetrators of domestic violence can use insecure immigration status as a way to inflict abuse on the victim, for example, by way of threatening to tell the police or Home Office. When dealing with victims with insecure immigration status, police should treat all individuals who report domestic abuse as victims first. See the ‘Immigration status and migrant victims’ section for guidance as to what support victims with insecure immigration status may be able to access.

186 The College of Policing Authorised Professional Practice on Domestic Abuse provides guidance on the use of, and selection of, interpreters at the scene and during interviews.
187 As outlined in the Code of Practice for Victims of Crime in England and Wales (‘the Victims Code’), November 2020: victim, or witness, might need the help of a Registered Intermediary because of their age, a learning disability, a mental disorder or a physical disability that affects their ability to communicate. They are often the difference between a witness being able to give evidence or not.
188 For further information on identifying perpetrators as victims see Respect Toolkit for work with Male Victims of Domestic Abuse: 2019 edition.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance


Domestic Violence Disclosure Scheme

The Domestic Violence Disclosure Scheme (‘DVDS’), also known as ‘Clare’s Law’, as it was introduced following the murder of Clare Wood, by her former partner in Greater Manchester in 2009, is a policy framework, which provides for procedures enabling disclosure of information relating to previous violent conduct. Disclosures under this scheme are made using the police’s common law powers to disclose information to prevent crime, here by disclosing to A, information relating to abusive, or violent, offending by A’s current, or former, intimate partner, B. In order to be lawful, any such disclosure of information about B must be necessary to prevent crime, in this case, harm to A. Any disclosure must be proportionate to that aim, and must be in accordance with relevant over-arching legislation, for example the Human Rights Act 1998, the Data Protection Act 2018 and the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act
1974. Police should consider the need to seek legal advice on the legality of using their common law disclosure powers in the context of the DVDS on a case-by-case basis.
The DVDS includes two routes for disclosing information:

“Right to Ask” is triggered by a member of the public (“A” or someone acting on behalf of “A”) applying to the police for a disclosure; and
“Right to Know” is triggered by the police making a proactive decision to disclose information to protect a potential victim (“A or someone acting on behalf of A”).
The DVDS was implemented across all police forces in England and Wales in March 2014. Once brought into force, section 77(1) of the 2021 Act will place a duty on the Secretary of State to issue guidance to chief officers of police about DVDS. Section 77(2) imposes a duty on chief officers of police to have regard to guidance issued under section 77(1). Placing a statutory duty on the police to have regard to the guidance, which means they must have a good, clear reason to depart from it, will help raise awareness of the scheme, increase the number of disclosures made to prevent harm and ensure that the scheme is used and applied consistently across all police forces. There is existing non-statutory guidance on the DVDS scheme, this guidance will be updated and re-issued as statutory guidance later in 2022.
Bail

Bail conditions are an important means of supporting the positive action of arrest. They offer protection for the alleged victim and witnesses while criminal offences are investigated or during criminal proceedings. If a suspect breaches bail conditions, they should be swiftly held to account. Bail can be applied for both pre-charge and post- charge:

Pre-charge bail: Perpetrators may be released from police custody and subject to pre-charge bail before being charged, if it is necessary and proportionate to do so. If it is not necessary and proportionate to release on bail and there are no grounds for
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

further detention of the suspect, the suspect must either be ‘Released Under Investigation’ or released with ‘No Further Action’ taken. If released on bail, appropriate bail conditions can be applied if it is necessary in the circumstances, for instance to protect the suspect interfering with witnesses.189

In domestic abuse cases, police should consider that a suspect Released Under Investigation will not be subject to any conditions. This can lead the alleged victim to feel unprotected, particularly if they live with the suspect and the suspect is able to return home. Such circumstances can increase the likelihood of victims fleeing their homes or withdrawing their support for investigations. These potential outcomes should be balanced against the impact of release on bail with conditions on the suspect.

A suspect who breaches pre-charge bail conditions can be arrested and released again on the same bail conditions. Protective Notices and Orders can also be used where not already in place, further detail is provided at Annex D, which summarises different protective orders that can be issued.190 The Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Bill will reform the law around pre-charge bail and includes provisions to better protect vulnerable victims and witnesses.

Post-charge bail: Appropriate bail conditions can be applied once a perpetrator is charged to protect victims, witnesses and the public. Post-charge bail can be used to protect victims and witnesses from the risk of danger, threats, pressure, or repeat offences.
Voluntary Attendance Interview

A Voluntary Attendance (VA) Interview can also be used for progressing investigations. It should be noted that no conditions can be placed on a perpetrator when they attend a voluntary interview. Interviews may hinder the effectiveness of investigations in providing suspects with prior notice and the opportunity to destroy evidence (for example on digital devices) or speak to witnesses in advance. As such, VA should only be used when appropriate as it may not afford enough protection for the victim in cases of domestic abuse. Read further information on Voluntary Attendance Interviews.

Protective Notices and Orders

Domestic Violence Protection Notices and Domestic Violence Protection Orders (DVPNs/DVPOs) (governed by sections. 24-33 of the Crime and Security Act 2010,

189 The Government undertook a consultation on reforming pre-charge bail in 2020. The Government consulted on several proposals to make sure we have a system that prioritises the safety of victims and witnesses and supports the effective management of investigations; and the timely progression of cases to courts. The Government responded to the consultation on 14 January 2021 and a copy of the pre-charge bail consultation response can be found on GOV.UK.
190 College of Policing. Post-arrest management of suspect and casefile: 2018. More information can also be found in the College of Policing guidance on Identification, assessment and management of serial or potentially dangerous domestic abuse and stalking perpetrators: Eight principles to assist forces (college.police.uk).
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

‘the 2010 Act’) can allow for protective measures to be put in place for a victim following a domestic incident of violence or the threat of violence involving a perpetrator aged 18 or over. These may be used, for example, where there is no substantive criminal offence to prosecute. Breach of a DVPO is not a criminal offence but enforcement action can be taken in a magistrates’ court as a contempt of court.
A DVPN issued by the police prohibits the perpetrator from molesting the victim, as a minimum, which could include prohibiting the perpetrator from contacting the victim by any means. A DVPN may also exclude the perpetrator from the premises if they live with the victim. It also protects the victim and prevents further abuse until the matter goes before a magistrate. The DVPN is followed up with an application for a DVPO in a magistrates’ court within 48 hours of service of the notice (not including Sundays, bank holidays, Christmas Day or Good Friday). The resulting DVPO, if granted, lasts for between 14 and 28 days.191
The 2021 Act introduces Domestic Abuse Protection Orders (“DAPOs”) and Domestic Abuse Protection Notices (“DAPNs”). Once brought fully into force, DAPOs will bring together the strongest elements of the existing protective order regime into a single, comprehensive order to provide flexible, longer-term protection to victims of domestic abuse. In addition to imposing negative prohibitions such as excluding a perpetrator from a specified area, the DAPO will be able to impose electronic monitoring requirements, and positive requirements such as attendance on perpetrator behaviour change programmes.
DAPNs and DAPOs will initially be piloted in selected areas across England and Wales for two years to test the effectiveness and impact of the new model ahead of expected national roll-out. Separate guidance for the police on DAPNs and DAPOs will be published ahead of the pilot. DVPNs/DVPOs will continue to apply in non-pilot areas until, as expected, DAPNs/DAPOs are rolled out fully on a national basis. At that point, the existing provisions in the 2010 Act relating to DVPN/DVPO will be repealed – DVPNs/DVPOs and the guidance which underpins them will become obsolete. The following paragraphs consider some of the other protective orders that can be issued, further orders may be available dependent on the circumstances.
Other protective notices and orders include:

Restraining Orders
Stalking Protection Orders
Forced Marriage Protection Orders
FGM Protection Orders
Non-molestation Orders and Occupation Orders
Sexual Risk Orders

191 For more information, read the guidance on Domestic Violence Protection Orders.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Sexual Harm Prevention Orders
Notification Orders
A table providing a summary of the orders is set out at Annex D and further details can be found in the respective College of Policing Authorised Professional Practice and CPS guidance.
Police and Crime Commissioners
Police and Crime Commissioners (PCCs)192 are responsible for issuing police and crime plans which set out their priorities for the police force area during their period of office. As part of the process of preparing the plan, PCCs arrange for the public and victims of crime to give their views before it is issued. In preparing plans, consideration should be given to those that may experience disparities in service outcomes or their experience of crime and policing. PCCs will need to ensure they comply with their responsibilities under the Equality Act 2010.
PCCs are responsible for holding their Chief Constables to account for the exercise of the Chief Constable’s functions and the functions of the persons under the Chief Constable’s direction and control. This may include setting clear expectations on responding adequately and effectively to victims of crimes including victims of domestic abuse related crimes incidents.
PCCs should consider how they work with other partners to provide an efficient and effective criminal justice system for their local areas including in relation to domestic abuse related crime and incidents to support prevention, early intervention and the provision of services. This may involve bringing partners together through convening and leading forums such as Local Criminal Justice Boards (LCJBs) and some areas will have other partnership boards working alongside or reporting into the LCJBs. For example, there are often boards, and other structures, with a particular focus on domestic abuse and sexual violence. PCCs will play a leading role in these, given their responsibilities in respect to victims of crime and commissioning local support services for victims.

Crown Prosecution Service

The Crown Prosecution Service (the ‘CPS’) prosecutes criminal cases that have been investigated by the police and other investigative organisations in England and Wales. The CPS is independent and makes its decisions independently of the police and Government. The CPS decides which cases should be prosecuted using the Full Code Test, determines the appropriate charges in more serious or complex cases and advises the police during the early stages of investigations, prepares cases, and presents them at court. The CPS prosecutes criminal cases in England and Wales on

192 Including directly elected mayors with Police and Crime Commissioner (PCC) powers, however the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 indicates some of the differences between the governance models in particular in relation to the Mayor’s Office for Policing and Crime
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

behalf of the state against a defendant. The CPS works with partners to inform, support, and serve victims and witnesses to help secure and deliver justice. The Attorney General superintends the CPS, but the CPS is operationally independent. The relationship between the police and CPS in relation to prosecution decisions is set out in the Director’s Guidance on Charging.
The CPS does not decide whether a person is guilty of a criminal offence – that is for the jury, judge, or magistrate - but it must make the key decision of whether a case should be put before a court. Every charging decision is based on the same two-stage test outlined in the Code for Crown Prosecutors:
Does the evidence provide a realistic prospect of conviction? That means, having heard the evidence, is a court more likely than not to find the defendant guilty?
Is it in the public interest to prosecute? That means asking questions including how serious the offence is, the impact on communities and whether prosecution is a proportionate response.
Cases involving domestic abuse are regarded as particularly serious by the CPS given the abuse of trust involved. The CPS recognises the importance of understanding the barriers that victims may face in reporting and accessing justice. The CPS recognises the difficult decision victims may have to take before they report abuse and the vulnerable position many face. There may be an ongoing threat to the safety of victims as their life maybe closely intertwined with that of the perpetrator, for example, they may have dependents and they may live, or have lived, together.
CPS legal guidance and training to prosecutors on handling cases of domestic abuse applies to all victims, and sets out handling on all aspects of offending related to domestic abuse including recognising the lasting trauma that victims and their extended families may face and reminding prosecutors that abuse can comprise controlling or coercive behaviour and can be psychological, physical, sexual, economic and emotional. Wider CPS guidance on offences including controlling or coercive behaviour; stalking and harassment; cybercrime; and ‘honour’-based abuse and forced marriage can also be relevant to domestic abuse cases.
The CPS works closely with the police to build the strongest possible case in order to bring offenders to justice and is committed to taking all practicable steps to help victims through the often difficult experience of becoming involved in the criminal justice system. Working with the police, the CPS has developed a proactive prosecution approach, which requires prosecutors to assess as soon as possible whether there is sufficient other evidence to bring a prosecution without the need for the victim to attend court. This other evidence could include police body worn video footage and 999 recordings where appropriate.
Victim’s Right to Review scheme
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Both the police and CPS operate a Victims Right of Review (VRR) making it easier for people to seek a review of a decision not to bring charges or to terminate proceedings in eligible cases. The right to review police decisions is an entitlement under the Victim’s Code and the police should make victims aware of this right when providing an explanation for a police decision not to charge.
For both VRR schemes, there is a three-month time limit to make a request. Reviews will be considered by a person independent of the original investigation and decision. The police VRR involves one review stage, conducted by an officer at least one rank higher than the original decision maker. The CPS VRR can include two stages comprising a local resolution stage and, if necessary, review by the national Appeals and Review Unit.
The national guidance on the police VRR is being refreshed and an updated copy will be published later this year. Details can also be found on individual force websites. Further guidance on the CPS VRR is available in the Victims Right to Review scheme and the Victims’ Right to Review Policy and Guidance 2020. In addition, CPS, alongside other organisations, have obligations under the Victims’ Code.

Domestic Abuse Best Practice Framework for Courts

The CPS, together with the police and Her Majesty’s Courts and Tribunals Service (HMCTS) are leading efforts to implement a best practice framework for use across all magistrates’ courts. The framework has been developed by identifying common components from high performing courts and aims to improve the capacity and capability of the criminal justice system to respond effectively to reports of domestic abuse offending. The framework also serves to provide a level of service to victims, which increases their safety and satisfaction in the criminal justice system.
The framework has identified common components including:
A clear multi-agency/community approach which addresses risk management and safeguarding procedures. Multi-agency fora enable participating agencies to discuss the handling of domestic abuse cases ensuring all information is provided in a timely, safe and efficient manner and the correct support is put in place for the victim. Agencies should scrutinise their local data and put in place mitigating actions to address any emerging issues;
Independent Domestic Violence Advisor (IDVA) support ensures victims are informed at each stage of the prosecution process, working with prosecutors to support the victim;
Trained, consistently deployed staff across all agencies (including judges); and
In court services - proactive witness services/pre-trial familiarisation visits/appropriate use of special measures. As part of this, in some areas, they have considered fast tracking or expedited trial systems.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Following the testing of the Domestic Abuse Best Practice Framework (DA BPF) in three test sites, all sites improved their performance in respect of managing domestic abuse cases, moving from being low performing areas to being in line with or above national average domestic abuse performance. The framework was rolled out in the magistrates’ courts in January 2019.
Regions all have strategic and operational groups, including Local Criminal Justice Boards, which should drive forward adoption of the DA BPF in each local area. They are being supported by a national implementation group – membership of which includes representatives from HMCTS, Police, CPS, Victim Support, and specialist domestic abuse support services.

Prison and Probation

The role of Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service (HMPPS) is to supervise sentences given by the Courts either in custody or in the community, supporting people to complete them successfully or taking enforcement action where they are not complying. This includes tackling domestic abuse as part of HMPPS’ wider role of protecting the public and reducing reoffending. HMPPS works closely with a variety of other agencies, to manage the risks perpetrators pose and to ensure that risk management plans address the safety and wellbeing of victims, including children.

The HMPPS Domestic Abuse Policy Framework sets out the organisation’s commitment to reducing domestic abuse related reoffending, the risk of serious harm associated with it and to provide interventions to support rehabilitation. It ensures that staff at all levels understand what is expected of them and take action to safeguard adults and children at risk. It encourages staff to approach the issue with professional curiosity in every case and sets out the principles of good practice in relation to working with domestic abuse.
The Policy Framework outlines the arrangements for working with people whose behaviours include domestic abuse, as well as those with convictions. The identification of domestic abuse is not a one-off activity that occurs only at the point of a court report or at the start of the sentence. Throughout the sentence, all staff need to use an investigative approach, being vigilant and inquisitive in seeking out information from a wide range of sources to inform an ongoing assessment of whether domestic abuse features in current or previous relationships. Risk assessment requires an analysis of all available sources of information and takes into account prior known incidents of domestic abuse (e.g. police call-out information) as well as convictions. Risk Management Plans must address all the identified risk factors and set out actions to safeguard identified individuals assessed to be at risk of serious harm.

HMPPS provides advice to courts to support safe sentencing and work closely with a variety of other agencies to manage the risks posed by those under their supervision. Sharing information in relation to risk is already an expected element of all staff’s
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

practice. The Policy Framework details the expectations of multi-agency working in the context of domestic abuse, highlighting the range of arrangements under which multi- agency working is governed and individual cases discussed. Staff will need to be familiar with local arrangements for Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements (MAPPA), Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conferences (MARAC), child safeguarding case conferences, Integrated Offender Management (IOM) as well as familiarising themselves with specialist voluntary sector domestic abuse agencies. Probation practitioners and their managers should expect to work with a variety of other agencies, to manage the risks perpetrators pose and to ensure the safety and wellbeing of victims, including children. The involvement of other agencies and the need to share information should form part of a Risk Management Plan and staff will need to consider which multi-agency arrangements are likely to be the most effective mechanism for each plan.
Where appropriate, perpetrators should be offered the opportunity to engage with an offending behaviour programme and those who are eligible for HMPPS accredited programmes should be referred. Those who are not suitable for an accredited programme will be able to access alternative rehabilitative activities designed to reduce reoffending. Interventions and accredited offending behaviour programmes need to be carefully considered for those with a history of abuse, including whether mixed sex groups are appropriate.
Abuse can continue from within prison through phone calls, letters, face to face meetings, or through family members. Prison Offender Managers should assess whether a prisoner presents a continuing risk while in custody and prepare plans to manage and address the risks identified. A perpetrator’s release from prison can also be a risky period for victims and Prison Offender Managers and probation practitioners should ensure that issues arising in custody are fed into release planning. Ensuring that all necessary information has been obtained to inform and assess the suitability of the address and adequate accommodation planning is also key to ensure perpetrators do not immediately return to victims, including children or other vulnerable adults.

HMPPS operates a Unwanted Prisoner Contact Service193 that is available for victims or third-party agencies acting on behalf of a victim and with their consent, to stop unwanted contact from a prisoner including to stop domestic abuse perpetrators contacting victims from inside prison, even where the prisoner is serving a sentence for an unrelated offence. Contact with the service is made by telephone or email directly by the concerned individual or third-party agency. The service can also provide victims with approximate release dates and any concerns about release will normally result in a report being sent to the holding establishment.
Victim safety in the context of domestic abuse covers both past victims and identified adults or children at risk of becoming victims in the future. Given the prevalence of domestic abuse, HMPPS recognises that some of the people they

193 Get support as a victim of crime – GOV.UK.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

supervise will themselves be victims of domestic abuse. As part of sentence planning and risk management, staff will work together with local agencies, domestic abuse services and specialist services to ensure the most effective way of achieving the safety of those affected by domestic abuse.
Victims of perpetrators who have been convicted of a specified sexual or violent offence and sentenced to 12 months or more in custody have a statutory right to participate in the HMPPS Victim Contact Scheme. If victims have opted into the Victim Contact Scheme, the expectations of the Victim Liaison Officer and case managers are set out in the Policy Framework; the role of the Victim Liaison Officer includes informing the victim about key developments in the perpetrator’s sentence such as if they are due to be released from prison or, for indeterminate prisoners, updates on Parole Board hearings. The probation practitioner should include the arrangements for informing the victim of a prisoner’s release from custody as part of the victim safety element of their risk management plan including in circumstances where the person poses a high risk of harm to a victim who does not fall into the scheme. Further information is provided in the Policy Framework.

Youth Offending Teams

Youth Offending Teams play a significant role in assessing and identifying both victims and perpetrators of domestic abuse. The teams are often one of the key referrers into children’s social care and play an instrumental role in delivering offence- focused work around domestic abuse and providing learning on healthy relationships. The general services they provide include:
running local crime prevention programmes;
helping young people at the police station if they are arrested;
helping young people and their families at court;
supervising young people serving a community sentence; and
staying in touch with a young person if they are sentenced to custody.
Whilst the police are usually the first people to contact the youth offending team, any agency can make contact and family members and friends can also contact them if they are worried about a young person’s behaviour.

Criminal and Civil Justice System – Criminal, Civil, and Family Courts

Criminal courts and special measures in the criminal courts

Domestic abuse is dealt with under both the criminal and civil law. The two systems are separate and are largely administered by separate courts. Criminal courts primarily deal with offenders who have committed a criminal offence, from common assault to
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

more serious crimes such as murder. The criminal courts will take necessary steps to ensure that victims and witnesses are able to give their best evidence in such proceedings.
The Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999 (‘the 1999 Act’) introduced a range of measures that can be used to facilitate the gathering and giving of evidence by vulnerable and intimidated witnesses. These measures are known collectively as ‘special measures’ and include the following:

Screens to shield the witness from the defendant
Evidence given by witnesses through live link
Evidence given in private
Removal of wigs and gowns by judges and barristers
Visual recorded interview
Pre-trial visual recorded cross -examination or re-examination
Examination of witness through an intermediary
Aids to communication

The CPS provides further guidance on special measures. The 2021 Act provides for automatic eligibility for complainants of offences relating to domestic abuse to be considered for special measures in criminal proceedings. Once fully in force, section 62 of the 2021 Act, will directly amend the relevant provisions in the 1999 Act. This change will provide complainants with automatic eligibility for special measures as intimidated witnesses (under section 17(4) of the 1999 Act). This will mean that they will not have to demonstrate fear or distress to be eligible for special measures. Special measures apply to prosecution and defence witnesses, but not to the defendant and must be made through an application to the court. Witnesses will be automatically considered as intimidated witnesses under the 1999 Act and can choose what special measure(s) they would like the application to be made to the court for, however, granting special measure applications is always a judicial decision.
Civil courts and special measures in the civil courts
The civil courts resolve disputes mainly between individuals or organisations. They do not have a separate category of offence for domestic abuse, however, cases before these courts involve a wide-ranging category from debt to those involving housing rights, compensation, and contractual disputes. As in the other court jurisdictions, there is recognition that perpetrators sometimes use the courts to continue their abuse, often bringing victims back to court repeatedly, which can in itself be a traumatising process.
Section 64 of the 2021 Act, which was commenced on 14 June 2022, requires Rules of Court to include provision enabling a court to make a special measures direction to provide for victims or alleged victims of specified offences to be eligible for special measures (for example, to enable them to give evidence via a video link or behind a screen). It also requires the Rules of Court to provide for those who are victims of domestic abuse or who are ‘at risk’ of being a victim to avail of special measures in the civil courts. The purpose of the provision is to ensure that rules are
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

made setting out when and how special measures directions should be made in such cases. Regulations194 have been made specifying which offences are relevant for the purposes of these rules. Whether any special measures are ultimately provided in a particular civil case will depend on whether the court considers they would likely improve the quality of the witness’s evidence, or a party’s participation in the proceedings. Special measures might only be appropriate in certain civil cases and not others, but the new rules require the court to consider whether a special measure direction should be made.
Once brought into force, section 66 of the 2021 Act will also prohibit perpetrators from cross-examining their victims in person and vice versa in specified circumstances in civil proceedings in England and Wales. Such cross-examination in person can serve to re-traumatise victims and prevent them giving their best evidence in court. This will apply for example, where a party or witness is a victim of a specified offence or there is a relevant injunction in place. The 2021 Act will also allow domestic abuse victims to introduce evidence (for example a letter from a doctor or employer) of domestic abuse perpetrated by a party to the proceedings towards a witness (or vice versa) in order to qualify for this ban. Regulations195 have been made specifying the types of specified offence, protective injunctions and evidence that are relevant for the purpose of prohibiting cross-examination in civil proceedings.

Family courts and special measures in the family courts

Family proceedings in England and Wales are dealt with in the family court or in the Family Division of the High Court. The administration of these courts in England and Wales is a reserved matter and is therefore the responsibility of the UK Government. However, in England, the Children and Family Court Advisory Service (Cafcass) provide expert advice and recommendations to the court on the interests of the child in both public law cases as well as in private law cases where there are safeguarding risks, including those related to domestic abuse.196 In Wales, Cafcass Cymru is the key agency tasked with looking after the interests of children. Cafcass Cymru is devolved and part of the Welsh Government.197
The family courts routinely hear cases involving alleged or admitted domestic abuse in both public law proceedings – usually disputes between parents and the state (such as care proceedings), and private law proceedings – typically disputes between family members over child arrangements. A literature review conducted on private law children cases draws attention to estimates that allegations or findings of domestic abuse are present in between 49% and 62% of child arrangement cases.198


194 The Special Measures in Civil Proceedings (Specified Offences) Regulations 2022 (legislation.gov.uk).
195 The Prohibition of Cross-Examination in Person (Civil and Family Proceedings) Regulations 2022 (legislation.gov.uk).
196 Cafcass provide resources for assessing domestic abuse targeted at Family Court Advisers.
197 Further information on Cafcass Cymru is available at: Cafcass Cymru | GOV.WALES.
198 Ministry of Justice. Domestic Abuse and Private Law Children Cases, a literature review Table 4.1: Brunel University London: 2020.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

The Family Procedure Rules 2010 set out the practice and procedure to be followed in family proceedings. Practice Direction 12J, which supplements those rules, sets out what the court is required to do in child arrangements cases where domestic abuse is alleged or admitted, or there is other reason to believe that the child or a party is at risk of domestic abuse. The welfare of the child must be the court’s paramount consideration when making any child arrangements order.199 The court must be satisfied that any contact ordered with a parent who has perpetuated domestic abuse does not expose either the child or the parent with whom the child is living to risk of further harm.
The 2020 Ministry of Justice report Assessing Risk of Harm to Children and Parents in Private Law Children Cases raised concerns about the experience of domestic abuse victims, including children in the family proceedings. The expert panel (the ‘Harm Panel’) considered over 1,200 submissions from individuals and organisations across England and Wales, together with roundtables and focus groups held with professionals, parents and children with experience of the family courts. Key themes of the report include:
The pro-contact culture - respondents felt that courts placed undue priority on ensuring contact with the non-resident parent, which resulted in systemic minimisation of allegations of domestic abuse.
Working in silos – submissions highlighted differences in approaches and culture between criminal justice, child protection (public law) and private law children proceedings, and lack of communication and coordination between family courts and other courts and agencies working with families, which led to contradictory decisions and confusion.
An adversarial system – with parents placed in opposition on what is often not a level playing field in cases involving domestic abuse, child sexual abuse and self-representation, with little or no involvement of the child.
In response, the Government published an Implementation Plan setting out commitments to improve the experience of domestic abuse victims, including children in private law proceedings.
This plan included a commitment to address the Harm Panel’s conclusion that perpetrators sometimes use the family court as a way to continue their abuse, often bringing victims back repeatedly, which can itself be a traumatising process. An order under section 91(14) of the Children Act 1989 (‘the 1989 Act’) (also known as a barring order) can be made by the court to require individuals to seek permission before they can apply again for particular orders. The Harm Panel concluded in its report that this power has not been used sufficiently. The Government has therefore introduced section 91A to the 1989 Act, inserted by section 67 of the 2021 Act. Section 67 makes clear that section 91 (14) orders can be made by the court when it is satisfied that the making of a further application for an order under that Act, would put the child

199 Section 1(1) of the Children Act 1989.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

concerned, or another individual, at risk of harm. Risk of harm includes risk of harm from domestic abuse, including seeing or hearing it.
Once brought into force, section 65 of the 2021 Act will prevent perpetrators from cross-examining their victims in person and vice versa in specified circumstances in family proceedings in England and Wales. Such cross-examination in person can serve to re-traumatise victims and prevent them giving their best evidence in court. This will apply for example, where a party or witness is a victim of a specified offence or there is a relevant injunction in place. The 2021 Act will also allow domestic abuse victims in family proceedings to introduce evidence (for example, a letter from a doctor or an employer) of domestic abuse perpetrated by a party to the proceedings towards a witness (or vice versa) in order to qualify for this ban. Regulations200 have been made specifying the types of specified offence, protective injunctions and evidence that are relevant for the purpose of prohibiting cross-examination in family proceedings.
Section 63 of the 2021 Act provides for special measures in family proceedings. It mandates an amendment to the existing Family Procedure Rules at Part 3A, to automatically deem as “vulnerable” victims of domestic abuse for the purposes of determining whether a participation direction should be ordered. Specifically, it requires that rules of court must provide that where a party or witness in family proceedings is, or is at risk of being, a victim of domestic abuse carried out by a party, a relative of a party, or a witness, it is to be assumed that the quality of their evidence, and their participation in the proceedings are likely to be diminished by reason of vulnerability. An exception may be included in rules to cover instances where a person does not wish to be deemed eligible for a special measures’ direction.

Protective Orders

Victims or other professional agencies, depending on the nature of the abuse, can apply for a protective measure to protect a victim or a person who may become a victim of abuse. Applications for injunctions – either non-molestation or occupation orders - can be made to the family court and emergency injunctions can be ordered at the judge’s discretion, without the perpetrator’s knowledge.
Courts can make protective orders of their own volition, to protect a victim or person at risk, where statute provides for this.
A summary table of protective orders for victims of domestic abuse is at Annex D.

Jobcentre Plus

Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) employees are highly likely to come into contact with victims of domestic abuse and staff undertake learning to be able to

200 The Prohibition of Cross-Examination in Person (Civil and Family Proceedings) Regulations 2022 (legislation.gov.uk).
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

support customers. Each jobcentre has assigned domestic abuse points of contact who have undergone training to identify and support the needs of anyone experiencing domestic abuse and will work closely with local services to share knowledge and signpost victims to additional, external support. Furthermore, the Tackling Domestic Abuse Plan commits to piloting the Ask for ANI ‘Action Needed Immediately’ codeword scheme in jobcentres (currently operating only in pharmacies), so that individuals can make disclosures safely and access emergency support.
There are a range of measures that may help victims of domestic abuse, including:

Victims of domestic abuse can be exempt from work-related requirements for up to 26 weeks;
The Destitute Domestic Violence Concession (DDVC) (see the 'Immigration status and migrant victims' section);
Advance payments;
An exception to the policy of supporting a maximum of two children. The exception applies to those third and subsequent children likely to have been born as a result of non-consensual conception (which, for this purpose, includes rape or where the claimant was in a controlling or coercive relationship with the child’s other biological parent at the time of conception);
Housing Benefit paid to a Universal Credit claimant (for domestic abuse victims living in a refuge) is excluded from the benefit cap;
Waiver of the Child Maintenance Scheme application fee;
Dual housing support - if victims have to temporarily stay in alternative accommodation but intend to return to their former home, they may be able to receive the housing element of Universal Credit for both their usual permanent home and the temporary alternative accommodation;
Removal of the spare-room subsidy not applying to victims staying in exempt accommodation;
Discretionary Housing Payments (DHP) - The DHP Guidance Manual highlights individuals or families fleeing domestic abuse are as a priority group for DHPs;
Alternative payment arrangements, including split payments (no information about why the split payment request has been granted is given to the perpetrator);

	A change to the claimant messaging within the Universal Credit service to encourage claimants who have joint claims where there are children in the household to nominate the bank account of the main carer to receive the Universal Credit payment; and
Support to make a new claim for Universal Credit if there is not one in place, or to split an existing joint claim if the survivor has left the perpetrator.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Jobcentre Plus staff should be aware that perpetrators may make vexatious allegations of benefit fraud in an attempt to control and abuse partners or former partners.

Employers

Employers have an important role to play in helping victims of domestic abuse to remain in work, in the workplace itself, and to help victims access the support they need through signposting to specialist services and raising awareness about domestic abuse. All employers need to consider what action they can take in relation to this role and their responsibilities. Employers continue to have a pivotal role as new ways of working in response to the Covid-19 pandemic, including home working and hybrid working, are established. For those experiencing abuse, the workplace can often offer a safe space and a respite away from the perpetrator. Colleagues and managers can often be the only people outside the home that victims talk to each day and are therefore uniquely placed to help spot signs of abuse.
Many employers are likely to encounter employees affected by domestic abuse, either as victims, carers, witnesses to abuse, or as perpetrators. These individuals may be found in any position within an organisation.
Domestic abuse can impact on victims’ ability to access work and their career prospects. Examples of how perpetrators may prevent victims from working include through threats, causing physical injuries or restraining them. Perpetrators may also try to harass victims whilst at work, abuse or threaten their colleagues or employer, or control their income. Victims may be forced to stop working when they flee from perpetrators due to having to move area or go into a refuge.201
Domestic abuse has considerable costs for the economy, with an estimated £14 billion arising from lost output due to time off work and reduced productivity from domestic abuse victims in the year to March 2017.202
Employers have a duty of care to their employees. Legally, this means that they need to abide by relevant health and safety and employment law, as well as the common law duty of care. Employers must ensure, as far as reasonably practicable, the health, safety and welfare at work of their employees. Employers should consider the impact of domestic abuse on their employees as part of their duty of care.

As best practice, employers should develop policies to set out their approach to domestic abuse within their workforce including, for example, signposting to specialist organisations, roles and responsibilities within the organisation, any education and training available, the practical support they can offer to victims in their workforce and their approach to perpetrators in the workplace. This support offer may include access

201 TUC. Domestic violence and the workplace: A TUC Survey Report: 2014.
202 Home Office. The economic and social costs of domestic abuse: Research Report 107: 2019.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

to paid leave or flexible working arrangements which can be helpful to victims in certain situations, for example, managing appointments related to domestic abuse or finding safe accommodation. Employers should consult with staff, trade unions, employee representatives or domestic abuse charities to develop, implement and maintain a domestic abuse policy taking into account the law, guidance and identified good practice.
In 2020, the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy undertook a review to examine how victims of domestic abuse can be supported in the workplace and how to give employers the confidence and knowledge to support victims better. The report sets out the need to tackle domestic abuse as a workplace issue and the positive role that employers can play in supporting victims. The report on workplace support for victims of domestic abuse includes best practice case studies and prompts to help those experiencing domestic abuse.
There is a range of up-to-date practical guidance which employers can access. Employers should note the Employers’ Initiative for Domestic Abuse (EIDA), a business network which empowers employers to take action against domestic abuse, for their staff, and their sectors. The EIDA bring together the experience, expertise and best practice of their members and partners to tackle abuse and raise awareness. Membership is free to any employer wanting to act. The network provides practical guidance, up to date tools and materials, as well as signposting to support services. For example, their handbook is a single reference guide, with a raft of practical steps for employers to take to establish and maintain a domestic abuse policy and support employees who make a disclosure. The guidance has been assembled with the help of EIDA’s partners, founders, and Beacon members and is available to download for members of the network. They also have a free to download employer toolkit which has been updated to reflect post-Covid-19 pandemic working.
Employers should also note the Employers Domestic Abuse Covenant (EDAC), a commitment by businesses to support those affected by abuse to enter or re-enter the workplace. Employers are invited to sign the Covenant and identify workplace skills and opportunities for victims seeking sustainable employment opportunities. The initiative aims to harness real and meaningful social change, create inclusive and positive opportunities, develop long term, sustainable solutions for victims of abuse to build their confidence, resilience, skills, and access to the workplace. The EDAC has been rolled out across England from June 2021 and is a collaboration between the Sharan Project and the Department for Work and Pensions, with support from the Home Office and the Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy.

Employers should also refer to the PHE BITC Domestic Abuse Employer Toolkit. This toolkit helps employers of all sizes and sectors make a commitment to respond to the risk of domestic abuse and build an approach that ensures all employees feel supported and empowered by their workplace to deal with domestic abuse. The Equality and Human Rights Commission and the Chartered Institute for Personnel Development have also published a guide for employers on managing and supporting
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

employees experiencing domestic abuse, which outlines what a framework of support may look like. UNISON has also produced a model workplace agreement on domestic violence and abuse.
Employers may access Hestia’s Respond to Abuse Employer’s Advice Line and digital tool, which is available to any business or organisation in the United Kingdom who would like free guidance and information regarding how to support employees enduring domestic abuse in the workplace. See Annex A for a list of support available for victims.

Financial services

Control – through restriction, exploitation or sabotage – of finances is a significant part of economic abuse. The VAWG National Statement of Expectations recommends that local commissioners explore what local financial institutions are doing to identify and support victims of coercive control, including whether they can provide a safe disclosure point for a victim. See section on ‘Economic abuse’ for further information.
In 2015, the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), which regulates the financial services industry in the UK and helps protect consumers, published research203 to challenge firms to better support vulnerable customers. The FCA has worked with stakeholders to ensure that vulnerable consumers are consistently treated fairly across financial services sectors. Following a consultation process, the FCA finalised guidance for firms on the fair treatment of vulnerable customers. This guidance identifies that alongside other characteristics certain life events, including relationship breakdown and domestic abuse, can increase the risk of consumers becoming vulnerable to different types of harm or disadvantage. It highlights actions firms should take to understand the needs of consumers in these circumstances to make sure they are treated fairly.
In recognising the role that financial services play in responding to domestic abuse UK Finance and the Building Societies Association have established a Financial Abuse Code. The voluntary Code sets out how participating banks and building societies should support customers who are victims of domestic and financial or economic abuse. It is also designed to extend to other forms of abuse – i.e. abuse by people that are not connected as defined by the 2021 Act – for example elder abuse by carers who are not “personally connected” to the victim. The Code aims to bring increased awareness and better understanding of what financial abuse looks like for firms, colleagues (e.g. customer facing staff), and those impacted by financial abuse.
A growing number of financial institutions and associated brands, representing a large proportion of current accounts, have signed up to the Code since its launch. They are implementing the principles set out in the Code, improving how they support



203 FCA. Occasional Paper No. 8: Consumer Vulnerability: 2015.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

customers to understand and regain control of their finances, which is often an important first step in regaining their independence.

Links with the voluntary sector

The voluntary sector plays a key role in providing specialist support for victims, their families and perpetrators. Many areas have voluntary support services, including specialist and ‘by and for’ services, providing support in the community and beyond, such as:
national and local helplines;
refuge services;
advocacy (including Independent Domestic Violence Advocates and Domestic Abuse Prevention Advocates);
outreach and floating support;
support for children and young people;
drop-in services;
counselling and therapeutic services;
group work and peer support;
recovery programmes for victims, including children;
research and evidence building;
development of policy and service standards; and
behaviour change programmes for perpetrators.
The Government funds the Freephone National Domestic Abuse Helpline for England (0808 2000 247) run by Refuge. The Helpline offers confidential, non- judgmental information and expert support to keep victims safe and provide them with information in order to make informed choices. The Government also funds the only specialist LGBT domestic abuse helpline, run by Galop, an LGBT anti-violence charity and a specific Men’s Advice helpline run by Respect (0808 801 0327). Southall Black Sisters operates a specialist advice helpline for ethnic minority and migrant women with no recourse to public funds (020 8571 9595). There is also helpline support for perpetrators through the Respect Phoneline (0808 8024 040). The Live Fear Free helpline is the national Violence against Women, Domestic Abuse and Sexual Violence helpline in Wales (0808 80 10 800) and is funded by the Welsh Government. These helplines and a non-exhaustive list of other specialist domestic abuse support can be found at Annex A.
As specialist trained practitioners, Independent Domestic Violence Advisors (IDVAs) act as a victims’ point of contact, supporting those who are at high risk of harm from perpetrators. IDVAs work with their clients from a point of crisis to assess risk
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

levels, discuss options and create safety plans. This includes actions from Multi- Agency Risk Assessment Conferences (MARACs) as well as sanctions and remedies available through the criminal and civil courts, housing options and services available through other organisations.204 IDVAs may work closely with Independent Sexual Violence Advisors (ISVAs) in cases involving sexual assault or rape and the Children and Young People IDVA role provides specialist support in cases involving children and young people at high risk.
For multi-agency working to be effective it is vital that the state works closely with the voluntary sector to ensure full and proper combination of expertise to provide holistic support. For instance, specialist domestic abuse support workers are highly trained to support families affected by domestic abuse and contribute valuably to discussions and risk assessments involved in Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hubs (MASHs) or Child in Need and Child Protection plans, including attendance at Initial Child Protection Conferences. Further details about multi-agency working are provided in ‘Chapter 7 – Multi-Agency Response to Domestic Abuse’.






































204 SafeLives. National Definition for IDVA work: 2014.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Chapter 7 – Multi-Agency Response to Domestic Abuse




Multi-agency working

The response to domestic abuse is a complex one that spans several statutory and non-statutory agencies, including but not limited to, local authorities, community-based agencies, children’s services, schools, housing, health (including mental health), drug and alcohol services, specialist domestic abuse agencies, the police and the criminal justice system. Wider organisations, such as employers and financial services institutions also have a role to play. Agencies have a responsibility to work together effectively to provide support and protection to victims of domestic abuse. This can be through strategic planning, co-commissioning and creating joined-up services. Working together is essential to help with identifying domestic abuse at an early stage and with responding to domestic abuse in a manner that can reduce the risk of escalation. It is vital to appropriately safeguard victims, including children, regardless of the level of risk.
An effective multi-agency response means that all frontline agencies consider domestic abuse and are trained to understand both the complex dynamics and the signs of domestic abuse. Specialist domestic abuse organisations offer a range of training for professionals working in multi-agency safeguarding contexts. This training should take into account a victim’s protected characteristics, individual circumstances and recognise that intersecting forms of abuse may be at play. These factors can prevent victims from accessing support and services and highlight the need for specialist 'by and for' services to form part of all multi-agency working practices. In Wales, there is a statutory duty placed on Relevant Authorities to train their staff to appropriate levels in line with the National Training Framework on violence against women, domestic abuse and sexual violence statutory guidance issued under section 15 of the Violence against Women, Domestic Abuse and Sexual Violence (Wales) Act 2015 and section 60 of the Government of Wales Act 2006.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Agencies must work together and share information to ensure they are able to draw on all the available information held within each agency to build a full picture of the victims, including children, and perpetrators. This includes looking holistically at an individual’s case and circumstances to identify appropriate multi-agency support.
All agencies have a duty to assess whether a safeguarding response is required before referring an incident to a multi-agency partnership. Co-locating specialist domestic abuse services or providers can be an effective way of multi-agency working. For example, some local areas have Independent Domestic Violence Advisors (IDVAs) based in police stations and hospitals.205 Co-location can be particularly effective in supporting those who have experienced domestic abuse, where there may be a stigma around accessing services.
Standing Together have produced In Search of Excellence, a guide for facilitating Coordinated Community Response (CCR) partnerships that reiterates the importance of coordination work amongst frontline provision.206

The Domestic Abuse Act 2021 (‘the 2021 Act’) established in law the office of the Domestic Abuse Commissioner (DAC), to provide public leadership on domestic abuse issues, play a key role in overseeing and monitoring the provision of domestic abuse services in England and Wales and promote best practice, including in multi-agency working.207
Multi-agency working should be embedded into approaches to responding to domestic abuse and should offer a range of interventions and support, from early intervention to support for high-risk cases through formalised safeguarding arrangements. These responses can include but are not limited to:

Advice and guidance;
Advocacy;
Onward referrals or signposting to other agencies or services;
Housing support;
Financial advice and assistance;
One-to-One or group counselling;
Respite care;
Child protection plans;

205 The Pathfinder Toolkit includes a section on the co-location of health based IDVAs.
206 Standing Together also provide a CCR Network hub for sharing best practice including information on professional training.
207 The Home Office, in consultation with the Domestic Abuse Commissioner, developed a framework document within which the Commissioner will operate. The Welsh Ministers have also been consulted as required under section 11(7) of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021. The purpose of the document, which is issued under section 11 of the Act, is to set out how the Home Secretary and the Domestic Abuse Commissioner will work together.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Safety and support plans;
Support through a criminal justice process, or civil court case;
Drug and alcohol support; and
Perpetrator behaviour change programmes.

A Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub (MASH) is one way of coordinating activity around safeguarding referrals, assessments and joined-up responses. Other local areas may call multi-agency safeguarding structures something different. These bring together expert professionals from a range of services that have contact with children, young people, adults and families, making the best possible use of their combined knowledge and information to safeguard children who are at risk of harm or neglect. Many local areas have a MASH or other fora, with the aim of providing a ‘one front door’ model, where professionals gather information and make decisions about which pathways to follow for different contacts and referrals. This may lead to an assessment by children’s social care, early help or a response from universal services. Where local areas do not have MASH arrangements in place, alternative multi-agency safeguarding arrangements should be in place which deliver the broad principles set out below. SafeLives have published Seeing the Whole Picture: an Evaluation of SafeLives’ One Front Door which sets out what an effective model should look like.

Local organisations and agencies should have in place effective ways to identify emerging problems and potential unmet needs of individual children and families. Local authorities should work with organisations and agencies to develop joined-up early help services based on a clear understanding of local needs. This requires all practitioners, including those in universal services and those providing services to adults with children, to understand their role in identifying emerging problems and to share information with other practitioners to support early identification and assessment.
Effective multi-agency working (for example, a MASH):
Needs to see and respond to the whole picture;

Should embed the needs, safety, and wishes of victims;

Should have a clear strategic focus;

Requires active partners participating in meaningful joint working;

Needs specialist skills;

Requires safe and effective information sharing;

Values and employs staff with the right values; and

Addresses the behaviour of the perpetrator.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

See the ‘Principles for multi-agency working’ section.

The Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts (PCSC) Act 2022 (‘the PCSC Act 2022’) introduced a Serious Violence Duty to ensure specified authorities across England and Wales, being police, fire and rescue services, health, local authorities, youth offending teams and probation services to work collaborative, share data and information in order to put in place a strategy to prevent and reduce serious violence. Section 13 of the PCSC Act 2022 explicitly includes domestic abuse and sexual offences within the definition of “violence” for the purpose of the Serious Violence Duty.208

Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conferences
A Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conference (MARAC) is a non-statutory process that brings together statutory and voluntary agencies to jointly support adult and child victims of domestic abuse who are at a high risk of serious harm or homicide, and to disrupt and divert the behaviour of the perpetrator(s). The MARAC’s working assumption is that no single agency or individual can see the complete picture of the life of a victim, but all may have insights that are crucial to their safety. The core MARAC agencies are: police, IDVA services, housing, children’s services, the Probation Service, primary health, mental health, substance misuse service and adult social care.
At the beginning of the MARAC process, local agencies will refer victims to the local MARAC. Before the meeting, all participating agencies will gather relevant, proportionate, and necessary information regarding the victims, including children, and the perpetrator(s). The local agency representatives will attend the MARAC meeting, (usually taking place monthly or fortnightly) to discuss the shared information and expertise and suggest actions. Agencies should ensure that they are regularly communicating with each other between MARAC meetings – this is a crucial part of the MARAC process and ensures there is a coordinated response to domestic abuse. Communication around cases should not wait for MARAC meetings to take place.
The IDVA is a specialist practitioner who works in partnership with other agencies to implement the action plan, mobilising resources on behalf of the victims, including children to increase their safety. They crucially represent the victim at the MARAC, making sure their voice is heard.
The victims, including children, and perpetrator(s) do not attend the meeting. The victim is informed that the case is being taken through the MARAC process, unless it is deemed unsafe to do so. If the victim objects to the disclosure of personal information, this should be considered in proportion to the risks present. If it is believed that withholding information puts a child at risk of significant harm, or another adult at risk of serious harm, then disclosure may be justified in the public interest and/or in order to

208 At the time of writing, draft statutory guidance on the Serious Violence Duty, which will be issued by the Secretary of State under section 19 of the PCSC Act 2022, is published for public consultation.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

protect the vital interests of the third party. If the victim is at significant risk of harm, then this would be in the public interest. The process must be compliant with the UK GDPR and Data Protection Act 2018 and the common law duty of confidence. The Information Sharing Protocol and Caldicott Principles must be adhered to and the decision to share must be recorded as being both proportional and relevant in relation to the risks. You can read the Practical Guidance on the application of the Caldicott Guardian Principles to Domestic Violence and MARACs. Dependent on which regime the processing falls within, you will need to ensure that the appropriate conditions for processing (including for sensitive processing) are satisfied. Advice on data sharing is available for practitioners providing safeguarding services to children, young people, parents and carers.

Multi-agency working to safeguard children

Agencies should recognise the impact of domestic abuse has on children and support them accordingly. Those responding to children experiencing domestic abuse should follow existing safeguarding, risk assessment and referrals processes and procedures.

Multi-agency working to safeguard children is underpinned by the system of multi- agency safeguarding arrangements, provided for by the Children Act 2004, as amended by the Children and Social Work Act 2017. These arrangements place a statutory duty on police, health, and local authority leaders to work together on local safeguarding arrangements. They are jointly responsible for coordinating safeguarding services to keep children safe and are accountable for how well local agencies work together to protect children from abuse and neglect. The three safeguarding partners (the local authority, health and police) should agree on ways to coordinate their safeguarding services; act as a strategic leadership group in supporting and engaging others; and implement local and national learning including from serious child safeguarding incidents.

The statutory guidance document, Working Together to Safeguard Children (2018), sets out what professionals and organisations need to do, individually and in partnership with other agencies, to safeguard and promote the welfare of children and young people. This remains core guidance on supporting children who are victims of domestic abuse. Working Together also highlights that everyone who works with children has a responsibility for keeping them safe and that multi-agency working and information sharing is essential to ensure that children and families receive the right help at the right time. The importance of early help in promoting the welfare of children is emphasised. The Social Services and Well-being (Wales) Act 2014 applies in Wales as well as the accompanying Working Together to Safeguard People guidance and the Wales Safeguarding Procedures for children and adults at risk of abuse and neglect.
The Working Together to Safeguard Children guidance also sets out key roles for individual organisations and agencies to deliver effective arrangements for
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

safeguarding and places an equal and shared duty on the three safeguarding partners (the local authority, health and police) to make arrangements to work together to safeguard and promote the welfare of all children in a local area. In relation to children in need (section 17 of the Children Act 1989) and child protection enquiries (section 47 of the 1989 Act), the guidance sets out the specific roles and responsibilities of the local authority and its social workers in leading statutory assessments. Working Together makes clear that in all welfare and safeguarding enquiries, a child-centred approach should be adopted by practitioners to ensure that the best interests of the child are considered at all times. See the section on ‘Impact of Domestic Abuse on Children’ and ‘Responding to children and young people’ for further information.

Principles for multi-agency working

Seeing and responding to the whole picture

It is essential that services work together to identify and respond coherently and take into account the whole picture of a domestic abuse context. This principle should frame the multi-agency response to victims, including children. Agencies should:
Develop a collaborative approach built around coordinating the skills, experience and perspectives of people from each agency. Any assessment process should recognise and allow for fluctuations in the victim’s needs and safety and should be informed by the assessment provided by the specialist domestic abuse service.
Be aware of the potential for domestic abuse to intersect with other harms, taking into account other safeguarding functions when considering the needs of victims, alongside pathways for intervention for perpetrators. Many harms and adverse experiences intersect with one another to either drive abusive behaviour, or to exacerbate vulnerabilities in those who have experienced abuse - for example, where there is a suspected risk of serious violence, modern slavery or child sexual exploitation.
Use an evidence-based assessment process to ensure there is a shared understanding of the risk and a shared plan to address risk. The assessment should involve identifying the risk to/from each family member and the needs of each family member. The primary goal of this assessment should be the increased safety and wellbeing of all non-abusive family members, with the response tailored to their particular situation and the views they have expressed. This assessment process should be well-evidenced, tested with service users, and be the subject of regular, high quality training on how it should (and should not) be used. It should have reference to existing assessment methods such as the Domestic Abuse, Stalking, Harassment and ‘Honour’-Based Violence (DASH) risk assessment and Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) work. Risk is fluid and must be re-assessed regularly and the process should facilitate that.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Develop processes and pathways that ensure that once needs and risks are identified, family members get the most appropriate support as soon as possible.
Box 7.1: Case Study – Support for victims of domestic abuse

Case Study

Hounslow Domestic and Sexual Violence Outreach Service is a violence against women and girls (VAWG) service for all victims of gender-based violence. Victims living in the London Borough of Hounslow can access the service themselves or partner agencies can refer. Examples of the way in which Hounslow provides support to victims of domestic abuse include:
Adult Social Care IDVA – supports vulnerable adults, including those with disabilities, the elderly and those with complex needs.
Health IDVA – co-located with the Clinical Commissioning Group and supports victims identified and referred by GPs, Maternity, and the local hospital. The referral pathway is via the NHS System 1 ensuring speedy referrals from busy medical staff.
Metropolitan Police – The IDVA is co-located with the Safeguarding Unit to respond quickly to reports of high-risk domestic abuse incidences thereby providing earlier intervention and safety plans.
Freedom Programme – a 12-week programme designed to empower female victims of domestic abuse.
Hounslow One Stop Shop – A designated venue offering a free weekly drop-in providing information and advice from a variety of partners to victims of VAWG. Partnerships with housing services, welfare benefits advisers, family law solicitors, immigration solicitors, children’s support workers, ethnic minority support workers and IDVAs working together to support families in Hounslow.
Children affected by domestic abuse project – provides a coordinated early help response delivering improved outcomes for children and families affected by domestic abuse. The project supports Operation Encompass which notifies schools within 24 hours after police have responded to an incident where a pupil is residing at the address. Specialist Parent and Child Domestic Abuse Workers (PCDAWs), co-located in schools, receive all notifications and work with the schools to provide holistic therapeutic support to children and non-abusive parents. They also work with non- abusive parents empowering them to make informed choices and supporting them to help address their child’s needs. The PCDAWs liaise regularly with the Designated Safeguarding Leads within the schools, enhancing the support that schools can offer children affected by domestic abuse.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Designing interventions and responses around the needs of victims

The voice and needs of victims, including children, needs to be embedded in a multi-agency response. Services designed around the needs of victims, and grounded in victim experience, means victims are more likely to stay engaged in the process.209 Agencies should:
Consider the needs of all local communities using local demographic data to understand the make-up of the area and make appropriate provision, including in rural communities and for those who face additional barriers to seeking and engaging with the support available, such as language, mobility, physical disability, learning difficulties or social attitudes. This could include, for example, building sustainable and trusting relationships across faith and cultural allies in the community to ensure the needs of victims are represented – see The Safety Across Faith and Ethnic (SAFE) Communities project from domestic abuse charity Standing Together as an example of good practice in this area. An equality impact assessment should be developed and reviewed regularly, including to evaluate the effectiveness of approaches against intended aims, with input from service users and specialists to identify barriers and provide responses experienced by some groups. Religious, community or cultural institutions should always prioritise the welfare of victims.
Listen to the views and experiences of victims and their family members. This process should be embedded in the multi-agency response and should consider how best to reach all victims, including children and young people who may face additional barriers accessing services or making their voice heard. Their views should be used to assess the risk that the perpetrator(s) of the abuse pose(s) to other family members and the impact this has on their needs, such as safety, health, housing, and wellbeing. The safety and support for the victim should be central to any approach or engagement with other family members.
Be trained to identify and understand the different typologies of abuse and perpetrators, the prevalence of different types of abuse in the local area, and

209 Standing Together. In Search of Excellence: A refreshed guide to effective domestic abuse partnership work – The Coordinated Community Response (CCR): 2020.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

the appropriate strategies to reduce abusive behaviour recognising that different groups of professionals need different levels of training and awareness based on their level of contact with children and families.
Have embedded, or have readily available, input from specialist agencies and 'by and for' services that have a proven track record of supporting victims of domestic abuse and who are aware and experienced in working with male and female victims with protected characteristics, including being from an ethnic minority, being disabled, LGBT or from a particular religion or faith.
Fully inform victims about the purpose and aims of the multi-agency safeguarding team where such a team is in place. The team needs to be aware that victims may perceive the involvement of statutory agencies in their situation in a negative way. They may fear that they will not be believed, that they will be blamed for the abuse and that they may lose their children. Agencies should be trained to understand the different forms of abuse including coercive, controlling and violent behaviour and the impact it has on male and female victims, and this should inform professional practice.
Develop processes to ensure that individuals do not have to repeat their story to several professionals in different agencies. The team should consider a single point of contact approach with the person acting as a lead seeking consent to share information with relevant partners in all situations where it is possible and legally required.
Develop processes that ensure that the safety, needs and wishes of all non-abusive family members are sought at the earliest opportunity and that plans are developed which are responsive to the views they have given.
Embed reflective practice throughout the service centred on feedback from victims (both adults and children). Consult them regularly and use this to reassess situations where necessary, considering new information, informing continuous development and improvement of the collaborative work of the agencies.
Consider the role of victims throughout the process from service development to commissioning, delivery and evaluation. There should be an ongoing process of victim engagement throughout the lifecycle of any multi- agency arrangement.
Consider the burden on the victim throughout the process, while it is sometimes appropriate for actions to be focused on the victim or non-abusive parent, this can also place additional burdens on the victim when the person responsible for the situation is the perpetrator.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

A clear strategic focus

For multi-agency working to be effective, all agencies must work with a clear and common focus. For this to be achieved partnerships should:
Have an integrated governance and operational structure, so that agencies are regularly meeting at strategic, operational, and decision-making level. Accountability and leadership are clear and effective and are appropriately linked to local bodies such as the Community Safety Partnership, Safeguarding Partners and Safeguarding Adult Boards.
Agree a statement of common purpose which sets out a shared vision and ambition and a high-level operating manual and protocols for the multi-agency safeguarding team.
Agree a common outcomes framework, which will focus on four key measures: effective informed support provided to victims and family members, which increases their level of safety and wellbeing at the earliest opportunity; increasing victim trust and confidence in safeguarding; perpetrator behaviour addressed at the earliest opportunity by agencies; family needs considered holistically by agencies, not in isolation from each other.
Take ownership of the need to understand local referral pathways and available provision, identifying any gaps in provision and considering within strategic governance how these gaps can be addressed.
Together, regularly analyse performance and outcome measurement data, undertake deep dive case audits to check for missed opportunities and consider the feedback received from service users and specialist organisations. A key element of the monitoring process should involve scrutiny around whether the data collected reflect any disproportionality in terms of decisions or practice for particular groups, e.g. ethnic minorities, LGBT, disabled victims, or victims belonging to a particular faith. Personal data relating to any of these groups is considered ‘special category’ data and is highlighted in Article 9 of the UK GDPR. The processing (including sharing) of any ‘special category’ personal data must meet further conditions set out in this Article. Further guidance on special category data is provided by the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO). The data collected could be used to improve ongoing practice. This process might be facilitated by a critical friend – a peer multi-agency team or independent local or national organisation.
Identify a dedicated multi-agency team coordinator or manager with specific responsibility for team building, developing a common culture of meaningful partnership through the creation of operating manuals, joint protocols, agreed assessment procedures, joint induction and training programmes and common monitoring and evaluation processes. All multi-agency partners are clear about the role, responsibility, authority, and accountability of the multi-agency
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

safeguarding team coordinator/manager; there is a clear, multi-agency safeguarding escalation process for any concerns.
Share information in a way that is timely, proportionate, legal, and safe. A protocol will be in place between agencies to govern this information sharing process and be the subject of annual review. All IT and use of that IT will be compliant with data protection legislation. The multi-agency safeguarding team will have developed and published a data protection impact assessment (DPIA). A DPIA must be in place where a proposed data share is high risk or concerns sensitive data. Further Guidance can be found here; ICO Data protection impact assessments.
Provide accurate data including designing out duplication of cases where feasible and understanding the service pathway being undertaken by victims of domestic abuse.
Participation as active and joined-up partners

In addition to having a common strategic focus, multi-agency partnerships should also ensure the right people and organisations are at meetings and that a whole family approach is taken to ensure meaningful work is achieved. Agencies should:
Engage the core agencies whose collaborative working will be needed to improve outcomes for victims, including children. This is likely to include the police, probation, children’s services, health (physical and mental), housing, specialist domestic abuse services, education, adult safeguarding services, drugs, and alcohol support and Cafcass (Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service). This could also involve undergoing training in other safeguarding procedures to maintain a full understanding of how different harms and vulnerabilities intersect with one another.
Seek to undergo training in other safeguarding procedures to maintain a full understanding of how different harms and vulnerabilities intersect with one another. Good practice might consist of teams undertaking training in one another’s safeguarding procedures, to improve the response and support given to victims.
Demonstrate both in policy and practice that agencies consider the safeguarding need of all family members, i.e. that those agencies primarily charged with child safeguarding are considering the safety and wellbeing of the non-abusive parent and other family members, and the agencies primarily charged with safeguarding adults will also consider the support needs of the child(ren).
Specialist skills

Invite a specialist domestic abuse service to be embedded within the team.
The specialist should have skills and experience in identifying the individual
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

circumstances of risk and need someone might be facing. This should include professional expertise on supporting children experiencing or perpetrating domestic abuse, including in a family setting or in their own intimate relationships.
Professionals from that service should be treated as having parity of status with statutory bodies in the multi-agency safeguarding team (they should, for example, be included in all relevant meetings, be part of information sharing agreements, have good access around the building, expect that their skills, knowledge and experience will be drawn on for key decisions and the outcome of decisions shared with them).
Set an expectation that the service invited to join the multi-agency safeguarding team is able to evidence that it meets the shared sector standards agreed between Imkaan, Respect, SafeLives and Women’s Aid published in 2016.
Safe and effective information sharing

Effective and meaningful multi-agency work relies heavily on timely and appropriate, while lawful, information sharing, ensuring all agencies have the necessary information to participate materially in meetings and make informed decisions. Agencies should:
Make mandatory, appropriate information sharing training available to the multi-agency safeguarding team so that they are professionally competent and confident about when and how to share (or not share) information, in line with the multi-agency safeguarding team protocol (see above), data protection legislation (UK General Data Protection Regulation and Data Protection Act 2018, ‘the 2018 Act’) and the ICO Data Sharing Code of Practice. When sharing personal data, consideration must be given to whether it is lawful, personal data can only be shared if there is a lawful basis for doing so. Training should be informed by service user feedback and learning from local Child Safeguarding Practice Reviews, national reviews published by the Child Safeguarding Practice Review Panel and Domestic Homicide Reviews.
Develop links and information sharing protocols that place the safety of the victims, including children, at the centre with multi-agency safeguarding structures including MAPPA (Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements), MARAC (Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conference), Operation Encompass, CSE (child sexual exploitation) operational groups, Prevent, the Community Safety Partnership and Supporting Families.
Decision-making about what to share, and when, should be governed by a clear, collective understanding about the risks to safety for an individual and family, and how those risks and the other needs within that family can be addressed. Information sharing should happen with the express intent of reducing risk to one or more family members. There must be a lawful basis to
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

process (including sharing) any personal data. What lawful basis is appropriate will depend on the specific purpose for the processing. The six different lawful bases are set out in Article 6 of the UK GDPR, one of which must be met before personal data can be processed or shared. If using consent as the lawful basis this must be a freely given, specific, informed and unambiguous indication, and an individual should be able to withdraw consent at any time. Consent may not be the most appropriate lawful basis and consideration should be given to each situation; for example processing personal data to comply with a statutory obligation such as a court directive, in this case the lawful basis would be compliance with a legal obligation. If there is a genuine change in circumstances that requires the lawful basis to be amended, this should be documented and the individual informed; for example if consent was used as the original lawful basis, but an unanticipated risk to an individual has become apparent, then the lawful basis can justifiably be changed to vital interest. Further details on lawful basis is provided online by the Information Commissioner’s Office. Where necessary agencies should redact information or consider splitting meetings where it is thought that doing so could reduce the risk to the victims, including children. In relation to law enforcement processing by competent authorities under Part 3 of the 2018 Act, such as police forces, different rules under that Part of the 2018 Act will apply.
Document these decisions to demonstrate data protection compliance.
Record all relevant data, information sharing is only as good as the quality of the information being shared, and the level of detail can be crucial to accurate risk assessment. For example, simply recording “there is a history of domestic abuse” does not give other professionals the level of detail needed to be able to risk assess. When sharing personal data, consideration must be given to whether it is lawful, personal data can only be shared if there is a lawful basis for doing so.
Valuing and employing staff with the right values

The work performed by agencies is heavily reliant on the ability of staff to carry out the work, and agencies should ensure that staff are adequately supported. This can be done by:
Demonstrating in both policy and practice that they take the duty of care to their staff seriously. This should involve a focus on reflective practice, joint training programmes which bring different organisations’ staff together, clinical supervision and employee assistance programmes;
Demonstrating professional curiosity when engaging service users. Often, victims will make contact with a range of services before disclosing their abuse. These contacts represent opportunities for early intervention, so it is crucial that all staff are trained to recognise domestic abuse and ask the right questions;
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Creating opportunities for staff to have sight of any positive outcomes, such as case studies or local stories, and being able to link back to families that they had initial contact with, to understand the impact of their work;
Recognising the specialised nature of the work, choosing staff who hold specialist qualifications, training, accreditation, or other recognised professional standard which gives parity of status with agency colleagues; and
Having a domestic abuse policy in place, complementing the policies held by each individual agency, which addresses the potential for staff to themselves be victims, or perpetrators, or experiencing vicarious trauma, which they action and own.
There are a number of different existing initiatives and processes beyond MASHs (or equivalent) that agencies should be feeding into. Some of these initiatives and processes will be more or less appropriate depending on the level of risk and the stage at which agencies are intervening, e.g. early intervention or a well-established case. These include but are not limited to Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conferences, Multi- Agency Public Protection Arrangements, Perpetrator Panels and Perpetrator Programmes (see also the section ‘Addressing the behaviour of the perpetrator’).
Address the behaviour of the perpetrator

Addressing perpetrator behaviour is as important as safeguarding and supporting victims. Often, the courses of action considered are those aimed at the victims and non-abusive parents, placing additional burdens on them. Tackling perpetrator behaviour and placing the onus on them should be a key consideration for partnership work.
Agencies should take the earliest opportunity available to consider how the behaviour of the perpetrator can be disrupted or constrained, putting the emphasis for change on that individual. The response to the perpetrator must be appropriate for the unique context and needs of the victim. For instance, victims subject to ‘honour’-based abuse may be experiencing a spectrum of behaviours from multiple perpetrators.
Where Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service (HMPPS) statutory interventions are not available, agencies should consider creative options to address the behaviour of the perpetrator, including recourse to Youth Offending Teams, Integrated Offender Management (IOM), Multi-Agency Targeting And Co-ordinating (MATAC), Domestic Abuse Perpetrator Programmes, safeguarding, housing, Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) and the full range of quality assured perpetrator programmes. Any approaches adopted should work closely with existing arrangements, including MARAC to ensure perpetrator management teams have key information from victim-focused panels.
Young people perpetrating abuse in their relationships must be supported in an appropriate way that places emphasis on tackling the drivers of their behaviour. Court and responding agencies must consider youth justice guidelines when responding to
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

cases of teenage relationship abuse, avoid unnecessarily criminalising young people, and identify appropriate interventions to address behaviours that might constitute or lead to abuse. Relevant youth justice guidelines include:
Case management guidance for Youth Offending Teams

Standards for children in the Youth Justice System

Crown Prosecution Service guidance on youth offenders

Sentencing Council guidelines on sentencing children and young people

Agencies should also ensure multi-agency safeguarding teams receive mandatory training on:
the full range of behaviours that can be abusive, coercive or controlling;
recognising the key risk and vulnerability factors and power relationships;
understanding the dynamics of domestic abuse and the basic typologies of different perpetrators, including dynamics of denial and minimisation and how to appropriately weigh up the credibility of different versions of events. Staff should know that key perpetrator tactics often involve trying to manipulate frontline services making those professionals more likely to identify and be confident to competently address coercive, controlling, and manipulative behaviours;
recognising the impact of domestic abuse on children and young people, including the impact of being exposed to domestic abuse, and being used by the perpetrator to inflict abuse on the target victim; and
skills to form alliances with victims and early engagement with perpetrators aimed at behaviour change.
This will make those professionals more likely to identify and be confident to competently address coercive, controlling, and manipulative behaviours. Staff need to be aware of the complexity of different forms of perpetration which may not neatly fit into the binary of ‘victim’ or ‘perpetrator.’ For example, a young person may be perpetrating domestic abuse but may be a victim of child sexual exploitation themselves or a woman may be perpetrating abuse within a forced marriage context but may also be experiencing domestic abuse herself.

Addressing the behaviour of the perpetrator
Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements

Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements (MAPPA) are a set of statutory arrangements to assess and manage the risk posed by certain sexual, violent and terrorist offenders. They are established by virtue of sections 325 to 327 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 and apply to all police force areas in England and Wales. MAPPA
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

requires local criminal justice agencies and other bodies to work together in partnership in order to deal with sexual, violent, terrorist or other dangerous offenders in order to protect the public from serious harm. MAPPA brings together the Police, Probation and Prison Services into what is known as the MAPPA ‘Responsible Authority’ for each MAPPA Area (coterminous with police force areas). A number of other agencies are under a statutory duty to co-operate with the Responsible Authority (e.g. Children’s Services, Adult Social Services, Health Trusts and Authorities, Youth Offending Teams, Home Office Immigration Enforcement). Local Strategic Management Boards are responsible for overseeing the arrangements of their respective police force areas.

MAPPA is for convicted offenders, the conviction does not have to be for a violent or sexual offence but the circumstances surrounding it need to be indicative that there is a risk of harm. Anyone can refer a convicted individual into MAPPA. It is particularly suitable in domestic abuse cases when dealing with serial perpetrators or other offenders who pose a high risk of serious harm where there is need for a formal multi- agency plan to be kept under review. IDVAS and other victim representatives should be included within MAPPA partnerships. See the MAPPA Guidance for more information Domestic Abuse and Stalking - Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements - MAPPA .

Perpetrator Panels

All local areas should have a forum for discussion that is focused on the perpetrator; this may be as part of a focused discussion at a MARAC or elsewhere. Many local areas are introducing multi-agency perpetrator panels, such as the Multi- Agency Tasking and Coordination meeting (MATAC), which has been piloted in Northumbria and rolled out across six other police forces in the North East and Yorkshire. The Drive programme210 has also successfully used perpetrator panels in other forces in England and Wales. Such panels bring together local agencies to identify strategies for responding to the most harmful domestic abuse perpetrators. Interventions identified through MATAC or Drive can include education, prevention, diversion, disruption, and enforcement.
The following principles will help agencies deliver effective multi-agency perpetrator forums:
Identification – Panel agencies have the tools to recognise and assess the level of risk and harm posed by perpetrators of domestic abuse, including serial offenders. Individuals convicted of an offence under schedule 15 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003, who are subject to Notification requirements under the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (commonly known as the Sex Offender Register) or are sentenced to more than 12 months' imprisonment are automatically eligible for MAPPA management. For other convicted perpetrators who pose a high risk of


210 The Drive partnership works with high-risk perpetrators to prevent their behaviour and protect victims.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

harm, consideration should always be given to referring into MAPPA on a discretionary basis.
Multi-Agency Engagement – Agencies involved in offender management, safeguarding, disruption and behaviour change attend the Panel and are involved in governance as appropriate.
Information Sharing – Agencies share relevant and proportionate information, in line with the protocol and UK GDPR.
Disruption – The Panel develops a multi-agency coordinated action plan to disrupt abuse and reduce reoffending, using the full range of tools and actions available.
Holding Cases – The Panel provides oversight and ensures that actions are completed and followed up, that cases are held by the appropriate agency (avoiding duplication with other agencies and multi-agency initiatives such as MAPPA, IOM and MARAC) and are reheard when required.
Safeguarding and Victim Voice – The Panel recognises victim and survivor voices, considers the impact of planned actions on risk to victims, including children and works with the relevant agencies to safeguard.
Case Volumes – The Panel will have clear local criteria which ensures the appropriate volume of cases is heard.
Equality – The Panel recognises the needs of both victims and perpetrators with protected characteristics.
Operational Support – The Panel will have enough support and resources to ensure its effective functioning.
Governance – There is a clear and accountable governance structure and strategic leadership from the relevant agencies. There should be links with the MAPPA Strategic Management Board.

Perpetrator Programmes

It is important that local areas commission safe, effective perpetrator programmes which take into account the needs in their areas and are accompanied by support for any associated victims. These should be ‘as well as’ support for victims, not ‘instead of’. There are several different accreditation schemes and standards operating in perpetrator work.
The Government has committed to develop a set of overarching national standards and principles for domestic abuse perpetrator interventions. These will provide a framework for commissioners to help determine the quality of perpetrator interventions, particularly on safeguarding and victim and survivor safety.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

The third sector expert organisation Respect has developed quality standards and an accreditation process for services working with perpetrators. The Respect Standard211 is nationally recognised and sets out an evidence-based, safety-focused framework which identifies good practice and offers guidance for organisations to ensure that they are meeting the needs of service users safely and effectively, with the safety of victims, including children at its heart.
These programmes should also be accessible therefore relevant needs assessments may be required to allow for identification and appropriate response.
Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service (HMPPS) has their own accredited programmes for those convicted and sentenced by the courts. The Correctional Services Advice and Accreditation Panel (CSAAP), an independent committee of international experts, helps HMPPS to accredit programmes by reviewing programme design, quality assurance procedures and findings, and programme evaluations. They make recommendations about whether to accredit programmes based on set criteria and ensure that programmes:
are based on the latest international evidence and thinking around what works to reduce reoffending;
address factors relevant to reoffending and desistance;
are targeted at appropriate users;
develop new skills (as opposed to only awareness raising);
motivate, engage and retain participants;
are delivered as intended; and
are subject to monitoring, evaluation and review.

Behaviour Change Interventions

Programmes such as that ran by Ahisma and ‘Talk, Listen, Change’ aim to challenge and support perpetrators of abuse to make long term changes to their violent and abusive behaviour. Behaviour change interventions also consider additional needs such as alcohol and substance misuse and mental health difficulties.
The Multi-Agency Tasking and Coordination (MATAC) model is part of the Whole System Approach to Domestic Abuse piloted in the North East and Yorkshire. The model involves data analysis to identify high harm perpetrators who are then referred into a multi-agency panel to coordinate action including education, diversion, disruption, and enforcement to prevent abuse and reduce reoffending. Findings from



211 In Wales, refer also to the VAWDASV Perpetrator Service Standards.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

one force’s two-year evaluation indicate reductions in reoffending across different types of domestic abuse.212
Box 7.2: Case Study – Multi-agency working

Coordinated Community Response Case Study

A Coordinated Community Response (CCR) offers a comprehensive, inclusive and holistic approach to address domestic abuse and violence against women and girls, by bringing statutory, voluntary and community agencies and organisations alongside specialist 'by and for' services to prevent, identify and respond to the multiple and intersecting needs of victims and children who are subject to this oppression, while holding perpetrators to account.
How partnership working can operate in practice:
K described experiencing emotional abuse from her ex-partner throughout their three-year relationship and states that towards the end of the relationship there was a constant threat of physical violence and K felt that it was only a matter of time before he hit her. During the relationship, the perpetrator was very controlling and jealous. He would sometimes turn up unexpectedly when K was out with friends and always demanded to know what she was wearing, where she was going and who she was with. K described the perpetrator as sexually violent. He was very rough during sex. She did not consent to this and sometimes would cry afterwards – he did not care. The perpetrator had access to weapons and had experience in cyber security, so K was concerned that he may be tracking her or have access to her phone. K was very afraid of her ex-partner.
After they separated, K’s ex-partner repeatedly contacted and harassed K and her friends and family. Initially, he contacted her every three to four days by phone. He also sent K unwanted messages and gifts on special occasions, despite K stating that she wished to have no further contact.
As a result of the abuse, K was diagnosed as having post-traumatic stress disorder. She had been accessing private counselling but could not afford to keep doing this.
K was referred to the Angelou Partnership’s lead, Advance213, who offered K support from an IDVA. The IDVA began supporting K and helped her create a safety plan. The plan included a referral to Rape Crisis and the Angelou Partnership’s Independent Sexual Violence Advisor (ISVA) service, provided by Solace Women’s Aid, to support K with her experience of sexual violence and abuse. The IDVA also referred K to a Woman’s Trust, for specialist domestic abuse counselling that was free for K to access.





212 Davies, P, Biddle, P. Domestic Abuse Serial Perpetrator Interventions. Multi Agency Tasking and Co-ordination (MATAC): Tackling perpetrators of domestic abuse. Evaluation – Final Report: 2017 Northumbria University.
213 Information on Advance and its role within the Angelou Partnership is provided on the partnership’s website.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance


Domestic Homicide Reviews

A Domestic Homicide Review (a ‘DHR’) under section 9(1) of the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004 (‘the 2004 Act’) is a review of the circumstances in which the death of a person aged 16 or over has, or appears to have, resulted from violence, abuse or neglect by a person to whom they were related or with whom they were in an intimate personal relationship, or by a member of the same household. Where a victim took their own life (suicide) and the circumstances give rise to concern, such as it emerging that there was coercive controlling behaviour in the relationship, a DHR should also be carried out. Such reviews are carried out in local areas by Community Safety Partnerships (CSP), made up of one or more of the bodies and persons bodies listed in section 9(4) of the 2004 Act. The reviews are undertaken with a view to identifying the lessons to be learnt from the death, particularly regarding the way in which professionals and organisations work together to safeguard victims.
When a domestic homicide occurs, the relevant police force should inform the relevant CSP in writing of the incident. Overall responsibility for establishing a review rests with the local CSP as they are ideally placed to initiate a DHR and review panel due to their multi-agency design and locations across England and Wales. CSPs are made up of representatives from some, but not all, of the ‘responsible authorities’ listed in section 5 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (‘the 1998 Act’), which have the functions set out in section 6 of the 1998 Act in relation to a local government area who work together to protect their local communities from crime. See further guidance on conducting DHRs. It is the duty of any person or organisation listed within subsection
(4) of the 2004 Act to have regard to the DHR statutory guidance.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Annex A – Support Available for Victims

24-hour National Domestic Abuse Helpline (England) – run by Refuge, freephone: 0808 2000 247. British Sign Language access from 10am - 6pm on weekdays. The website offers a live chat service between 3pm - 10pm on weekdays.

Advocacy After Fatal Domestic Abuse – an organisation that supports those who have lost a family member (or friend) through fatal domestic abuse.

Age UK – an organisation that supports older people and victims of elder abuse.

Ask for ANI – a codeword scheme for victims to access support from the safety of their local pharmacy.

Broken Rites – a group offering mutual support and information to separated and divorced spouses and partners of clergy, ministers, and Church Army Officers.

Childline – a free 24-hour service providing support for anyone under 19 in the UK. 0800 1111.

Clinks – an organisation that supports the voluntary sector working with people in the criminal justice system and their families. Clinks have a directory of services, although it is not exhaustive, and are experienced in supporting women who have suffered domestic abuse.

Dogs Trust Freedom Project – a specialist dog fostering service for victims fleeing domestic abuse.

Galop – a specialist organisation and LGBT anti-violence charity offering support to LGBT victims.

Hestia Respond to Abuse Advice Line – a specialist advice line supporting employers to help staff experiencing domestic abuse on 0203 879 3695 or via email Adviceline.EB@hestia.org. 9am - 5pm Monday to Friday.

HM Prison and Probation Service Unwated Prisoner Contact Service – a service for victims to contact HMPPS to report unwanted letters, phone calls, texts or messages from a prisoner or to proactively seek to stop contact. You may access the service by completing the form on Gov.uk using the link gov.uk/stop-prisoner-contact (24 hr access) or call 03000606699 or via email unwantedprisonercontact@justice.gov.uk Monday to Friday 9am – 4pm. The Unwanted
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Prisoner Contact service also offers victims the opportunity to contact HMPPS to raise concerns about a prisoner being released.

Hourglass – a specialist organisation aiming to end the harm, abuse and exploitation of older people in the UK. Their helpline can be accessed by phone on 0808 808 8141, text on 07860 052906 or email helpline@wearehourglass.org.
Jewish Women’s Aid – a specialist organisation supporting Jewish women and children affected by domestic abuse. Their helpline is 0808 801 0500 and is open Mondays to Thursdays from 9.30 am - 9.30 pm (excluding Jewish holidays and bank holidays).
Karma Nirvana ‘Honour’-Based Abuse helpline – a specialist organisation supporting victims of ’honour’-based abuse and forced marriage. Their helpline is 0800 599 9247 and is open 9am - 5pm, Monday to Friday.
Loving Me – a specialist organisation providing one-to-one online support and advocacy for high risk Transgender, Gender Queer and Non-Binary victims of domestic abuse.
ManKind Initiative – a specialist organisation supporting male victims of domestic abuse and their children.
Men’s Advice Line – run by Respect. 0808 801 0327 open Monday to Friday 9am - 8pm or email info@mensadviceline.org.uk
Muslim Women’s Network – a specialist organisation supporting Muslim women and girls.
National LGBT+ Domestic Abuse helpline – 0800 999 5428 Monday to Friday 10am
- 5pm.

National Stalking helpline – run by Suzy Lamplugh Trust. 0808 802 0300 9.30am - 4pm Monday to Friday.
NSPCC – The UK’s leading children’s charity working to prevent abuse, rebuild children’s lives and support families.
NSPCC FGM helpline – 0800 028 3550.

Operation Encompass Teachers’ National Helpline – 0204 513 9990 open 8am - 1pm Monday to Friday. The helpline is for school staff to seek guidance and discuss queries they may have following an Operation Encompass notification and in preparation for supporting a child experiencing domestic abuse.
Paladin – an organisation that provides support for victims of stalking.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

Parental Education Growth Support (PEGS) – an organisation that supports victims of child to parent abuse.
Rail to Refuge – a scheme providing free rail travel to refuge accommodation for women, men and children fleeing domestic abuse through a member organisation of Women’s Aid, Welsh Women’s Aid, Imkaan or Respect (which runs the Men’s Advice Line).
Rape Crisis England and Wales – an organisation representing rape crisis centres across England and Wales which provide support for women and girls of all ages who have experienced any form of sexual violence. Their telephone number is 0808 802 9999. Their website also offers a Live Chat service.
Refuge – an organisation operated by an all female staff that provides support for all victims of domestic abuse and violence against women and girls.
Respect – an organisation that works with male victims of domestic abuse and domestic abuse perpetrators. Respects operates the Men’s Advice line, a confidential helping for male victims of domestic abuse and the Respect Phoneline for domestic abuse perpetrators and those supporting them.
Restored – a specialist organisation working to tackle domestic abuse by partnering with churches and Christian organisations.
Revenge Porn helpline – open between 10am and 4pm, Monday to Friday. 0345 600 0459 or help@revengepornhelpline.org.uk.
Sexual Assault Referral Centres (SARCs) – centres providing medical, practical and emotional support to all victims of sexual assault.
Sign Health Domestic Abuse Service – a specialist domestic abuse service to support the health and wellbeing of deaf people.
Sikh Women’s Aid – an organisation providing support for Sikh women and girls.

Southall Black Sisters – an organisation providing support for ethnic minority victims and migrant women. Their helpline is 020 8571 9595 and is open between 9am and 5pm Monday to Friday.
Stay Safe East  – a specialist organisation providing support for deaf and disabled victims of domestic abuse across London. Referrals should be made to enquiries@staysafe-east.org.uk.
Surviving Economic Abuse – a specialist organisation dedicated to supporting victims of economic abuse, working in partnership with Money Advice Plus to provide money and debt advice to victims experiencing financial difficulties.
Domestic Abuse Act 2021 Statutory Guidance

UK Forced Marriage Unit (FMU)  – a Government policy unit leading on forced marriage policy, outreach and casework. FMU operates a public helpline to provide advice and support to victims and potential victims of forced marriage. 020 7008 0151.
Victim Support – a specialist service helping anyone affected by any types of crime, not only those who experience it directly, but also their friends, family and any other people involved.
Women’s Aid Federation England (WAFE) – an organisation supporting women affected by domestic abuse. Their website offers a Live Chat service available Monday to Friday 10am to 6pm and Saturday and Sunday 10am to 6pm. Women’s Aid also provide a directory, listing local support services across the UK, although it is not exhaustive it is updated regularly.
Wales specific organisations:
24-hour National Helpline (Wales) ‘Live Fear Free’ – 0808 801 0800 open 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
Live Fear Free helpline is a free service for all victims of domestic abuse and sexual violence and those close to them, including family, friends, colleagues and other concerned parties.

Live Fear Free can also be contacted in the following ways; Text: 0786 007 7333
Email: info@livefearfreehelpline.wales Live chat: gov.wales/livefearfree
BAWSO – a specialist organisation dedicated to supporting ethnic minority communities.
Dyn Wales helpline – an organisation supporting male victims of domestic abuse. 0808 801 0321 or email support@dynwales.org (support for male victims)
Meic – a free, confidential, anonymous, and bilingual helpline service for children and young people up to the age of 25 in Wales providing information, useful advice and support. Meic are open 8am - midnight, 7 days a week, by telephone, SMS text and instant messaging.
Telephone: 0808 80 23456
Text: 54001
Live chat: www.meiccymru.org

Mid, West, East and South Wales the main sexual violence support service provider is New Pathways and can be contacted on 01685 379 310
or enquiries@newpathways.org.uk.
North Wales (Anglesey, Conwy, Gwynedd, Flintshire, Denbighshire and Wrexham), there are two main sexual violence support services:

Rape and Sexual Abuse Support Centre (RASASC) provides information, specialist support and therapy to anyone who has experienced any kind of sexual abuse and violence; they can be contacted on 01248 670 628
or info@rasacymru.org.uk.
Stepping Stones provides therapeutic services to adults who have been sexually abused as children; they can be contacted on 01978 352 717
or info@steppingstonesnorthwales.co.uk.

Welsh Women’s Aid – an organisation supporting Welsh women affected by domestic abuse.
Annex B – Glossary of Acronyms



ACE – Adverse Childhood Experience
APVA – Adolescent to Parent Violence and Abuse
CAPVA – Child and Adolescent to Parent Violence and Abuse
CCR – Coordinated Community Response
CJS – Criminal Justice System

CPS – Crown Prosecution Service

CQC – Care Quality Commission

CSE – Child Sexual Exploitation

CSEW – Crime Survey for England and Wales
CSP – Community Safety Partnership
DA BPF – Domestic Abuse Best Practice Framework
DAEHL – Domestic Abuse Early Help Lead
DAHA – Domestic Abuse Housing Alliance
DAPNs – Domestic Abuse Protection Notices
DAPOs – Domestic Abuse Protection Orders
DAPPs – Domestic Abuse Perpetrator Programmes
DASH – Domestic Abuse, Stalking, Harassment and ‘Honour’-Based Violence
DDVC – Destitute Domestic Violence Concession
DHR – Domestic Homicide Review

DHSC – Department of Health and Social Care
DLUHC – Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities
DVDS – Domestic Violence Disclosure Scheme, also known as “Clare’s Law”
DVILR – Domestic Violence Indefinite Leave to Remain
DVPNs – Domestic Violence Protection Notices
DVPOs – Domestic Violence Protection Orders
DWP – Department for Work and Pensions
FCA – Financial Conduct Authority

FGM – Female Genital Mutilation

FGMPO- Female Genital Mutilation Protection orders
FOUR – Fixated, Obsessive, Unwanted and/or Repeated
HMCTS – Her Majesty’s Courts and Tribunals Service
HMICFRS – Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire and Rescue Services
HMIP – Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Probation
HMPPS – Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service
ICB – Integrated Care Board

ICP – Integrated Care Partnership

ICS – Integrated Care System

IDVA – Independent Domestic Violence Advisor
INCADVA - Inter-Collegiate and Agency Domestic Violence Abuse
IOM – Integrated Offender Management
ISVA – Independent Sexual Violence Advisor
JTAI – Joint Targeted Area Inspection
KSS – Knowledge and Skills Statements
LCJBs – Local Criminal Justice Boards
LGBT – Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Trans
MAPPA – Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements
MARAC – Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conference
MASH – Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub
MATAC – Multi-Agency tasking and coordination meeting
NICE – National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
NRM – National Referral Mechanism
NRPF – No Recourse to Public Funds
NSE – National Statement of Expectations
ONS – Office for National Statistics

PCC – Police and Crime Commissioner
PCDAW – Parent and Child Domestic Abuse Worker
RSHE – Relationships, Sex and Health Education
VAWDASV – Violence Against Women, Domestic Abuse and Sexual Violence
VAWG – Violence Against Women and Girls
Annex C – Guidance Documents

All resources listed here and within the guidance may be subject to changes and updates. Where impending updates are known at the time of writing indication of this is given.
Authorised Professional Practice on Domestic Abuse214
https://www.app.college.police.uk/domestic-abuse-index/
Child to Parent Abuse Guidance215
https://safelives.org.uk/sites/default/files/resources/HO%20Information%20APVA.pdf

Code of Practice for Victims of Crime https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ data/file/476900/code-of-practice-for-victims-of-crime.PDF
Controlling or Coercive Behaviour Statutory Guidance216 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ data/file/482528/Controlling_or_coercive_behaviour_-_statutory_guidance.pdf
Crown Prosecution Service Guidance on Domestic Abuse217
https://www.cps.gov.uk/legal-guidance/domestic-abuse

DAHA (Domestic Abuse Housing Alliance) toolkit
http://accreditation.dahalliance.org.uk/

Domestic Abuse, Stalking, Harassment and ‘honour’ Based Violence (DASH) risk checklist
https://www.dashriskchecklist.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/DASH-2009.pdf

Domestic Abuse Toolkit for Employers
https://www.bitc.org.uk/toolkit/domestic-abuse-toolkit/

Domestic Homicide Review (DHR) Guidance218 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ data/file/575273/DHR-Statutory-Guidance-161206.pdf






214 At the time of writing, it is known that this publication is planned for update.
215 Ibid.
216 Ibid.
217 Ibid.
218 Ibid.
Domestic Violence Disclosure Scheme (DVDS) Guidance219 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ data/file/575361/DVDS_guidance_FINAL_v3.pdf
Domestic Violence Protection Notice (DVPN) and Domestic Violence Protection Order (DVPO) Guidance https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ data/file/575363/DVPO_guidance_FINAL_3.pdf
Female Genital Mutilation Statutory Guidance https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/multi-agency-statutory-guidance-on-female- genital-mutilation
Forced Marriage Statutory Guidance and Multi-Agency Practice Guidelines https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-right-to-choose-government-guidance-on- forced-marriage/multi-agency-statutory-guidance-for-dealing-with-forced-marriage-and- multi-agency-practice-guidelines-handling-cases-of-forced-marriage-accessible
Guidance for Local Strategies (Wales)
https://gov.wales/sites/default/files/publications/2019-06/guidance-for-local-strategies.pdf

Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service (HMPPS) Domestic Abuse Policy Framework
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/domestic-abuse-policy-framework

Homelessness Code of Guidance https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5a969da940f0b67aa5087b93/Homelessnes s_code_of_guidance.pdf
Information Sharing: Advice for Practitioners Providing Safeguarding Services to Children, Young People, Parents and Carers220 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ data/file/721581/Information_sharing_advice_practitioners_safeguarding_services.pdf
Keeping Children Safe in Education Statutory Guidance221
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/keeping-children-safe-in-education--2

Male Victims Statement (Crown Prosecution Service) https://www.cps.gov.uk/publication/cps-public-statement-male-victims-crimes-covered-cps- vawg-strategy
Supporting Male Victims Document (Home Office)
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-male-victims


219 At the time of writing, it is known that this publication is planned for update.
220 Ibid.
221 Ibid.
Modern Slavery: Statutory Guidance for England and Wales (under s49 of the Modern Slavery Act 2015) and Non-Statutory Guidance for Scotland and Northern Ireland https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ data/file/1059234/Modern_Slavery_Statutory_Guidance	EW	Non- Statutory_Guidance	SNI	v2.8.pdf
Multi-Agency Working and Information Sharing Project https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ data/file/338875/MASH.pdf
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) Quality Standard
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/qs116

National Statement of Expectations https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ data/file/1064571/National_Statement_of_Expectations_2022_Final.pdf
Pathfinder Toolkit
https://www.standingtogether.org.uk/blog-3/pathfinder-toolkit

Perpetrator Service Standards (Wales)
https://gov.wales/sites/default/files/publications/2019-06/perpetrator-service-standards.pdf

Pre-Charged Bail and Released Under Investigation Guidance222
https://cdn.prgloo.com/media/832fb4a76353450ab555b7db1c93ed48.pdf

Priorities for Domestic Abuse Services https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ data/file/721495/Fund_for_domestic_abuse_services_2018-20_prospectus.pdf
Respect Standard Accreditation Guidance
https://www.respect.uk.net/pages/64-respect-standard

Safeguarding Children, Young People and Adults at Risk in the NHS: Safeguarding Accountability and Assurance Framework
https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/safeguarding-children-young- people-adults-at-risk-saaf.pdf
SafeLives Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conference (MARAC) guidance
https://safelives.org.uk/practice-support/resources-marac-meetings

Sanctuary Schemes for Households at Risk of Domestic Violence: A Guide for Agencies
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/sanctuary-schemes-for-households-at-risk-of- domestic-violence-guide-for-agencies
Sentencing Children and Young People Sentencing Council Guidelines https://www.sentencingcouncil.org.uk/overarching-guides/magistrates- court/item/sentencing-children-and-young-people/

Sexual Violence and Harassment Between Children in Schools and Colleges https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/sexual-violence-and-sexual-harassment- between-children-in-schools-and-colleges

Special Educational Needs and Disability Code of Practice: 0 to 25 years Statutory guidance for organisations which work with and support children and young people who have special educational needs or disabilities (England) https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/send-code-of-practice-0-to-25
Stalking Protection Act: Statutory Guidance for the Police https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/stalking-protection-act-statutory-guidance-for- the-police
Standards for Children in the Youth Justice System 2019 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ data/file/780504/Standards_for_children_in_youth_justice_services_2019.doc.pdf
Statutory Guidance for the Commissioning of Violence Against Women, Domestic Abuse and Sexual Violence (VAWDASV) Services in Wales https://gov.wales/sites/default/files/publications/2019-05/statutory-guidance-for-the- commissioning-of-vawdasv-services-in-wales.pdf
Statutory Guidance Framework: Controlling or Coercive Behaviour in an Intimate or Family Relationship223
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/statutory-guidance-framework-controlling-or- coercive-behaviour-in-an-intimate-or-family-relationship
Strengthening Families and Protecting Children Programme
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/strengthening-families-protecting-children-sfpc-programme

Tackling Violence Against Women, Domestic Abuse and Sexual Violence: A Collaborative Commissioning Toolkit for Service in Wales https://www.lloydsbankfoundation.org.uk/media/jmun2m2n/vawdasv-toolkit_wales_web.pdf
The Multi-Agency Response to Children Living with Domestic Abuse The multi- agency response to children living with domestic abuse (publishing.service.gov.uk)
Violence Against Women and Girls Commissioning Toolkit https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/violence-against-women-and-girls-national- statement-of-expectations-and-commissioning-toolkit
Violence Against Women and Girls: Sector Shared Core Standards https://1q7dqy2unor827bqjls0c4rn-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp- content/uploads/2016/11/Shared-Standards-Whole-Document-Final-30.11.2016.pdf
Working Together to Safeguard Children Statutory Guidance224
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/working-together-to-safeguard-children--2

Working Together to Safeguard People: Handling Individual Cases to Protect Children at Risk
https://gov.wales/safeguarding-children-risk-abuse-or-neglect

Youth Offenders CPS Legal Guidance
https://www.cps.gov.uk/legal-guidance/youth-offenders

Youth Offending Team and Managers Case Management Guidance
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/case-management-guidance







































224 At the time of writing, it is known that this publication is planned for update.
Annex D – Table of Protective Orders




















Written by College of Policing


 DISASTER VICTIM IDENTIFICATION 16 mins read








Recovering and identifying the deceased and human remains

Inquests and inquiries

National and international arrangements

Additional arrangements for contaminated fatalities

Humanitarian aspects in emergency management

Social needs and media considerations

Civil emergencies reference material

Senior identification manager
DVI managers and personnel should have completed the College of Policing approved DVI courses relevant to their role.

The senior identification manager (SIM) is a senior police investigator and leader responsible for managing all aspects of the identification process.

The strategic commander appoints the SIM where there are fatalities or there is an expectation of fatalities.

See SIM initial actions

Responsibilities
SIM responsibilities include:

consulting with the senior investigating oﬃcer (SIO)

assume overall responsibility for the management of the DVI process
liaising with HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal
setting a casualty bureau (CB) and major incident public portal (  MIPP) strategy and ap p ointing a trained and
competent CB manager

setting a communications strategy in consultation with the strategic commander, tactical commander and SIO
setting involvement gradings, including SIM questions
setting a missing persons cancellation policy
briefing and debriefing
quality assuring protocols, procedures and functionality during the identification process
appointing experienced family liaison coordinators (FLCs)
establishing a family liaison strategy and risk assessment for obtaining Ante Mortem data.
ensuring that the next of kin are kept informed throughout the investigation and identification process
submitting Ante Mortem and Post Mortem data to the identification commission in respect of fatalities
establishing eﬀective protocols for information sharing in line with gold strategy
establishing a policy book or file for recording all policy decisions
liaising with the Welfare Tactical Commander with regard to managing and assessing risk, health, welfare and wellbeing issues
consider appointing trained DVI manager such as scene evidence recovery manager (SERM), police mortuary operations coordinator (PMOC), Ante Mortem coordinator (AMC) and reconciliation coordinator. These key managers will provide support to strategies for identification of the deceased including recovery from the scene and mortuary operations. Careful consideration must be given to strategies involving engagement with families for reconciliation and repatriation of human remains and involve consultation with HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal, SIO, FLC and Lead Pathologist
Senior investigating officer
An emergency or major incident will require a criminal investigation. The senior investigating officer (SIO) will assume responsibility for all aspects of that investigation, including liaison with other authorised investigative bodies. The gold commander should consider early appointment of an SIO.

A police SIO is required to:

perform the role of oﬃcer in charge of an investigation, as described in the Code of Practice under Part II of the Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 , and be accountable to chief oﬃcers for conducting the investigation
develop and implement the investigative strategy
develop the information management and decision-making systems for the investigation
manager the investigations' health, safety, welfare and wellbeing issues, as well as allocated resources (people, finance an equipment)

The relationship between the SIO and the SIM is crucial for effectively managing any DVI or mass fatality incident. They should agree terms of reference soon after their appointments and should determine the actual relationship and reporting structure, taking into account the incident’s relevant circumstances. The designated strategic commander can ratify the SIO and SIM’s relationship, agreeing the command structure, and present these to the strategic coordination group (SCG). This enables all strategic and tactical commanders in the police service and partner agencies to understand where responsibilities lie.

Once agreed, the strategic commander, SIO and SIM should sign the terms of reference . The SIO and SIM must record any changes to the terms of reference in a policy log entry.
HM coroner or procurator fiscal
HM coroner or procurator fiscal in Scotland are responsible for chairing the identification commission, where the identity of the deceased is confirmed.

HM coroner or procurator fiscal conduct an inquest into the death of a person in their area, where they have reasonable cause to suspect that the deceased has died:

a violent or unnatural death
a sudden death of which the cause is unknown
in prison, police custody or other state detention

It is HM coroner or procurator fiscal's responsibility to establish the deceased’s identity, as well as how, when and where the death occurred. They have the power to:

take lawful possession, control and care of the deceased person or human remains from when the death is reported until all enquiries are complete. HM coroner or procurator fiscal are required to release the body as soon as reasonably practical
authorise removing the deceased from their place of death to a mortuary for a full post-mortem examination
Procurator fiscal
In Scotland, the Lord Advocate is the Head of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. They are the public official responsible for prosecuting crime. They are also responsible for investigating all sudden, suspicious and unexplained deaths.

Supported by procurators fiscal, in circumstances where a death is sudden, suspicious or unexplained, the Lord Advocate will investigate the death and seek to establish the cause of death and the circumstances of the death. If necessary, this may involve instructing that a post-mortem examination is carried out.

Death investigations may lead to a fatal accident inquiry (FAI), which is a form of judicial inquiry governed by the Inquiries into Fatal Accidents and Sudden Deaths etc. (Scotland) Act 2016 (IFA(SD)A 2016).

The procurator fiscal carries out an investigation to determine whether there are circumstances that suggest the death may have been caused as a result of a criminal act or omission. If so, criminal proceedings may be taken. If not, the investigation may discover that the death has occurred in circumstances where an FAI is appropriate.

An FAI is essentially a fact-finding exercise carried out in the public interest. Its purpose is not to apportion blame for the death, but to determine:

where and when the death took place
the cause of the death
reasonable precautions whereby the death might have been avoided
the defects, if any, in any system of working that contributed to the death or any accident resulting in the death
other facts relevant to the circumstances of the death

There are two types of fatal accident inquiry.

Mandatory

In terms of Section 2 of the IFA(SD)A 2016, a mandatory FAI is conducted where the death occurred in Scotland and where the death occurred:

as the result of an accident when the deceased was acting in the course of their employment or occupation, or
when the deceased was in legal custody or was a child detained in secure accommodation at the time of the death

Discretionary

In terms of Section 4 of the IFA(SD)A 2016, a discretionary FAI is conducted on the authority of the Lord Advocate, where the death occurred in Scotland and the Lord Advocate considers that the death was sudden, suspicious or unexplained. Or it occurred in circumstances that give rise to serious public concern and it is decided that it is in the public interest for an inquiry to be held into the circumstances of the death.

The FAI takes place in front of a sheriff (judge) and will lead to the sheriff issuing a determination. The purpose of an FAI is to identify any systemic defects in ways of working that led to the death. This is so that the sheriff can make recommendations as to how deaths can be prevented from occurring in similar circumstances in the future.
Casualty Bureau
The Casualty Bureau (CB) is the central point where all information related to an incident is received, collated and assessed. This includes information about people believed to be involved in the incident.

The CB provides resources and a process to manage high-volume data, to identify key or critical information at the earliest opportunity. The CB also provides a phone line for the public to report people involved in an incident, as well as an online reporting facility, the Major Incident Public Portal (MIPP).

The MIPP has two tiles for a CB activation. First there is a police and partner agency tile, which is active 24/7. It allows any police force in the country to collate the details of people involved at survivor reception centres or hospitals and includes an investigative triage form (ITF), which is password protected. The other tile can be activated for the public to directly report missing persons and other information.

A CB is likely to be activated when there is a significant demand from the public for information that exceeds normal force call-handling capabilities. It may also be activated by the SIM to receive a significant volume of information from the public (using the ITF) at Survivor Reception Centres and Hospitals.

It is important to note that the CB information contact centre can only receive details. It cannot be used to provide details to the public about the incident.

All police regions are required to have a CB capability. All police forces can provide additional CB call-handling resources to support any other CB following a mutual aid request.

When the CB is activated for a mass fatality incident, it manages all information in relation to the recovery, reconciliation, identification and repatriation of victims, as well as criminal investigation.

Casualty Bureau manager
The CB manager reports directly to their SIM. Their delegated responsibilities are to lead and manage the CB, which is made up of three separate units:

incident contact centre
input unit
message assessment unit

The CB manager has a number of responsibilities and tasks, as set out in CBSAP 2024 .Their main responsibility is the efficient setting up, execution and closure of the CB.
Family liaison
Note: This section should be read and implemented in conjunction with SIM responsibilities.

Major/mass fatality incidents are very emotional for families and will clearly be distressing. They can also be a lengthy and frustrating process at times. One of the most important considerations is the relationship between bereaved families and the police. It is therefore essential that family liaison officers (FLOs) are deployed to families. FLOs are the primary point of contact for the family and this will be their sole and dedicated role following the incident.

The role of family liaison in a mass fatality event is different to that in a murder investigation or road traffic collision. The FLO helps the SIM and SIO achieve their identification and investigation strategies. This is different to a crisis support worker, who provides emotional and practical support to family or friends. Ante-mortem trained FLOs should be used when available, as they have additional expertise in ante-mortem collection in a major/mass fatality incident.

There may be times throughout the investigation when the SIM or SIO request a meeting with the families or vice versa. In the event of a major or mass fatality incident, the SIO or SIM may be unable to see families individually. It may, therefore, be advantageous for the families to be brought together for periodic briefings. These can be arranged by FLOs to meet the needs of all parties. However, it is important to consider families who are unable to attend or do not wish to attend and ensure they receive the same information.

Any requests to share information about bereaved families should be discussed with the families themselves and consent obtained prior to sharing. Families often request details of other families involved in the investigation as well as requests from media outlets and other organisations. These requests can cause an enormous amount of stress for the families.

To some extent, the police may be able to resolve this with other agencies. The police can, however, minimise the duplication of requests from other agencies to families by channelling them through the FLO.

Family liaison coordinator
The SIM should consider appointing a family liaison coordinator (FLC) if the scale and the nature of the incident requires the deployment of multiple family liaison advisors (FLAs) and FLOs. In a major incident or mass fatality, the deployment of an experienced FLC should be considered. They can support the SIM and lead on family liaison deployment. The lead FLC should establish how many FLAs and FLOs need to be deployed to the incident.

See family liaison coordinator suggested initial actions .

Family liaison adviser
Depending on the nature of the incident, it may be necessary to deploy FLAs to support the FLC. The scale and nature of the incident will dictate the amount and locations of FLAs. FLAs will be responsible for deploying and tasking FLOs and will report to a SIM, SIO, FLC or lead FLA.

Family liaison officer
The FLO helps the SIM and SIO achieve the identification and investigation strategies. This is different to a crisis support worker, who provides emotional and practical support to the family or friends. Ante-mortem trained FLOs should be used when available, as they have additional expertise in ante-mortem collection in a major/mass fatality incident.

Responsibilities
The FLO is responsible for:

obtaining ante-mortem material as applicable
working with the family to comply with their right to receive all relevant information connected to the enquiry
explaining DVI procedures to the family
obtaining ante-mortem evidence as per the FLO strategy (including fingerprints, medical and dental consent, and photographs of the missing person)
completing the ante-mortem form as a matter of urgency
completing a victimology statement
completing a death notification to HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal and any identification statement taken
providing the family with the Explaining Disaster Victim Identification in Major Incidents document
informing families of the INTERPOL website 
if the incident is declared a criminal investigation, discussing with family/friends referral to the Victim Support Homicide Service and/or direct eyewitnesses referral
if relevant, informing the family about the National Emergencies Trust
establishing that referrals are made to support services
returning personal property of the deceased in accordance with the wishes of the bereaved and SIM
supporting the family in their contact with the media
facilitating family visits to the scene or family viewing area as appropriate (when safe to do so)
acting as the initial link between the family and the SIM
maintaining a written log of all contact with the families and their representatives
facilitating contact with other statutory and voluntary agencies

Scene evidence recovery manager
DVI managers and personnel should have completed the College of Policing approved DVI courses relevant to their role.

The scene evidence recovery manager (SERM) is a police manager who is responsible for the retrieval of deceased persons, human remains, evidence and property from within the inner cordon. They work on behalf of HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal and the SIM.

On appointment, the SERM discusses the DVI strategy, policy and process with the SIM. They should attend the scene to liaise with the incident commanders. The SERM ensures that appropriate controls are in place at the scene to restrict access to authorised persons. They are responsible for collating and documenting evidence. The SERM ensures that due respect is paid to the deceased lying within the scene, taking account of circumstances at that time.

The uninjured are evacuated from the scene and emergency triage provided to the injured. Following this, the rescue phase can be declared over.
The response phase moves into retrieval and investigation . The SERM assumes responsibility for the area contained within the inner cordon from the fire and rescue scene commander. The SERM assesses personnel, equipment and specialist assistance required for site clearance and the timescales involved using established JESIP principles to recover the deceased.

For further information see Scene Evidence Recovery Manager Suggested Initial Actions. 

Responsibilities
On appointment, the SERM is responsible for:

overall scene management and coordination
ensuring scene preservation and security
appointing, tasking and coordinating specialists at the scene
implementing predetermined strategies for identification and investigation
obtaining evidence, including seizing and retaining personal property for identification and/or criminal investigation at the scene(s)
completing all appropriate documentation
chairing the scene evidence recovery group and ensuring that eﬀective briefings are conducted between multiple agencies using the JESIP Principles.
fully documenting all decisions and rationale in a decision log
liaising with other stakeholders, including initial responders and category 1 and 2 responders, in compliance with obligations set out in the Civil Contingencies Act 2004 managing the health, safety, welfare and wellbeing of all personnel at the scene
identifying the importance of risk assessments, as well as health, safety, welfare and wellbeing strategies of themselves and their colleagues at all phases of DVI operations
identifying and coordinating specialist logistical support provided by external contractors
managing family/VIP attendance at the scene

Police mortuary operations coordinator
DVI managers and personnel should have completed the College of Policing approved DVI courses relevant to their role.

A police mortuary operations coordinator (PMOC) should be appointed in any mortuary, whether based in existing mortuary facilities or an emergency mortuary. The PMOC is responsible for ensuring compliance with all
police DVI procedures at the mortuary for identifying the deceased and investigating the incident. The PMOC will be a suitably trained and qualified police officer or member of police staff.

The PMOC manages the police mortuary teams and liaises between the mortuary documentation officer and the supervising or lead pathologist, while ensuring that the agreed mortuary procedure is implemented.

See Police Mortuary Operations Coordinator Suggested Initial Actions .

Responsibilities
The police mortuary operations coordinator (PMOC) is responsible for:

obtaining, seizing and retaining evidence and personal property at the mortuary in line with strategies set by the senior investigating oﬃcer (SIO) and senior identification manager (SIM)
liaising with the designated individual to ensure the provisions of the Human Tissue Act 2004 are adhered to within the mortuary
ensuring continuity and security of evidence
ensuring that all relevant Post Mortem documentation is completed
liaising with the emergency mortuary coordinator
coordinating the activities of specialists in the mortuary
liaising with funeral directors
liaising with the tactical health, safety, wellbeing and welfare lead to manage the health, safety, wellbeing and welfare of all personnel in the mortuary and ensuring that the appropriate risk assessments including all personal protective equipment (PPE) and respiratory protective equipment (RPE) are documented
coordinating family attendance for viewing purposes
mortuary security
documenting all personal decisions and the rationale for them
assisting the mortuary facilities manager with decommissioning an emergency mortuary
ensuring all personal or sensitive information is handled correctly
ensuring no photographs are taken in the mortuary unless authorised

Pathologist
A pathologist examines deceased persons or human remains and ensures that relevant data is recorded on the pink post-mortem form.

The pathologist’s main objectives are to:

ascertain cause of death
gather evidence for criminal investigation
contribute towards gathering identification evidence

The pathologist may take samples for histology and DNA analysis and undertake an autopsy when authorised to do so by HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal. Careful consideration should be given to obtaining this information by non-invasive examination, such as CT scanning.

It is important that those involved in the care of the deceased recognise the emotional impact that taking histology samples may have on the victims’ families, especially when taking samples from children. This should only be carried out following careful consideration.
Pathologist responsibilities
It is the pathologist’s responsibility to ensure recording of:

external injuries and the position of injuries and/or burns
a description and arrangement of traumas, fractures, internal bleeding and any upper respiratory issues
old surgical procedures and internal implants, for example pacemakers
any anatomical particularities

The SIM or SIO will liaise with HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal around the level of pathology required. HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal will be responsible for appointing a lead forensic pathologist. Additional pathologists may be appointed to support the investigation and identification process.

Anatomical pathology technologist
The anatomical pathology technologist (APT) has an important role in the mass fatality incident. They should be familiar with the mortuary environment, as well as the procedures and risks there.

The APT assists pathologists at the post-mortem examination and assists police during the DVI process. They are experienced in handling bodies and removing clothing and other items during strip and search. APTs are also skilled in reconciling body parts and reconstructing the deceased. They prepare the deceased for viewing and release the bodies at the end of
the DVI process.

Local authorities
Local authorities may have agreements with private sector organisations to support the response to a mass fatality incident. Any such arrangements should be incorporated into local or regional mass fatality plans.

Local authorities are responsible for providing:

an executive oﬃcer to attend the SCG
a suitably desingated oﬃcer to support the MFCG
immediate shelter and welfare support for survivors at a survivor reception centre
emergency mortuary capability if existing mortuary provision is exceeded
inspection of dangerous structures to ensure they are safe for emergency personnel to enter
support for traﬃc management
emergency transport facilities for evacuees, survivors and casualties
medium-to-long-term welfare of survivors and the bereaved (for example, setting up survivor reception centres, evacuation and humanitarian assistance centres, and social care support)
specialist environmental and public health advice
coordination of activities of involved voluntary sector agencies and spontaneous volunteers
facilities for waste disposal and facilitation of remediation and reoccupation of aﬀected sites or areas
assistance in organising plant, demolition and site clearance facilities and emergency accommodation and care for the displaced or homeless
Multi-agency partners
Various agencies and organisations (private and voluntary) may be involved in the response to a mass fatality incident. Each agency’s level of involvement is determined by the incident’s scale and nature. Each  local resilience forum  (LRF) has plans and arrangements in place for dealing with mass fatality incidents.

The multi-agency response will follow the Joint Emergency Services Interoperability Principles (JESIP).

Co-location
Communication
Coordination
Joint understanding of risk
Shared situational awareness

Further information can be found at JESIP .

Agencies that may be involved in the response to a mass fatality incident in the UK and abroad include the following.

Home Oﬃce and  Cabinet Oﬃce

LRFs

Local authorities
Fire and rescue services
Department of Health and Social Care and the NHS

Ministry of Defence

Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Oﬃce (FCDO)
UK National Disaster Victim Identification Unit (UK DVI)
National Police Coordination Centre (NPoCC)
Health and Safety Executive (HSE)
Air Accidents Investigation Branch (AAIB)
Rail Accident Investigation Branch (RAIB)
Marine Accident Investigation Branch (MAIB)
Maritime and Coastguard Agency

INTERPOL

Private sector organisations
Voluntary sectors

Fire and rescue services
The role of fire and rescue services in an emergency or major incident is to rescue those trapped by fire, wreckage or debris. They may also support recovering deceased persons and human remains.

Fire and rescue services have an urban search and rescue (USAR) capability. They can assist in recovering deceased and human remains from constricted sites, collapsed buildings or from the wreckage or transport incidents.

USAR is a functional support sector for fire and rescue services. USAR respond to incidents involving unstable and collapsed structures resulting from deliberate or accidental causes. They search, detect, locate and rescue trapped casualties and support the recovery of the deceased. This includes working in environments that are difficult to access such as underground, in restricted spaces or at heights. They also respond to serious transportation incidents involving trains, trams and aircraft.

In these challenging environments, USAR teams have various specialised methods and an array of equipment allowing them to conduct:

technical searches
breaking and breaching
lifting and moving
propping and shoring to stabilise structures and prevent further collapse

The National Fire Chiefs Council and the National Police Chiefs’ Council have a memorandum of understanding to support policing in mass fatality incidents.

See: Joint Working Principles for Urban Search and Rescue Support to Police in Disaster Victim Identification (NFCC, NPCC and College of Policing, 2017)

Ambulance Hazardous Area Response Team (HART)
Hazardous area response teams are specifically recruited and trained personnel, equipped to provide the ambulance response to high-risk environments and complex emergency situations.

HARTs are based in each NHS Trust in England and Wales, providing cover across the whole of each country. In some cases, they may work together on specific, large scale or high-profile incidents, either accidental or deliberately caused.

HARTs work alongside the police and fire and rescue services within the inner cordon (or ‘hot zone’) of a major incident. The job of the HART is to triage and treat casualties and to help save lives in very difficult circumstances.

They are also there to look after other emergency personnel who may become injured while attending these difficult and challenging incidents.

The primary areas of ambulance service responsibility at a major incident are to:

save life together with the other emergency services
provide treatment, stabilisation and care of casualties at the scene
provide appropriate transport, medical staﬀ, equipment and resources
establish an eﬀective triage sieve and sort system, prioritising the needs and evacuation requirements of the injured and establish a safe location for casualty clearing
provide a focal point at the incident for all National Health Service (NHS) and other medical resources
nominate and alert receiving hospitals for the injured and inform other agencies
arrange the most appropriate means of transporting the injured to hospitals
conduct the termination of death and verification of death

National interagency liaison officers (NILOs)
National interagency liaison officers (NILOs) are security vetted, trained and identifiable emergency responders from the fire and rescue service, ambulance service, HM Coastguard, military and police.

They may operate in either a command, tactical advisor or service specific role. They can support pre-planned or spontaneous operations at strategic, tactical and operational levels, including facilitating interoperable working with partner agencies.
Command and control
Operational structure
The SERM will assume control within the inner cordon from the fire and rescue scene commander. In addition to liaising with the tactical health, safety, wellbeing and welfare lead, a specialist health and safety adviser should be consulted regarding scene safety, as appropriate to the type and scale of incident.

The SERM will establish a:

scene access control point

scene evidence recovery group
joint health and safety cell

The SERM is responsible for:

ensuring that the inner cordon is clearly delineated and secure
agreeing access and documentation for the inner cordon
deploying specialist personnel, to work in confined spaces or work safely at height, and equipment

The diagram below demonstrates the type of command structure that the SERM will operate under.



































Operational plan
The SERM develops an operational plan for recovering the deceased, human remains, property and evidence. The senior identification manager (SIM) and senior investigating officer (SIO) should approve the plan.

It contains:

a risk assessment of the scene
health and safety procedures to be adopted (including personal protective equipment)
details for establishing a victim holding audit area (VHAA) for the deceased persons and human remains
a property and evidence audit area

Scene evidence recovery group
The SERM will manage all actions undertaken during the retrieval and investigation stage of the operation at the scene until the scene is officially handed over to the local authority, normally at the recovery phase.
The SERM will develop and implement a coordinated plan to retrieve deceased persons, human remains, property and evidence from the scene. These exhibits will then be examined by appropriate investigating agencies. To achieve these outcomes, the SERM will form and chair a scene evidence recovery group consisting of people with a role to play in recovering the deceased, human remains, property and evidence from the scene (see diagram of a scene evidence recovery group).
Scene evidence recovery group members
This group may include:

scene evidence recovery manager (SERM)
victim recovery team leader
property recovery team leader
operational scene commander
police search adviser
police forensic adviser or crime scene manager
health and safety coordinator
Health and Safety Executive (HSE) adviser
fire and rescue service scene commander
a representative of other statutory investigative agencies, for example, the air accident investigation branch (AAIB), marine accident investigation branch (MAIB) and rail accident investigation branch (RAIB)
Logistics coordinator
Environment Agency representative
local authority representative, for example an emergency planning oﬃcer, building control inspector or environmental health oﬃcer
specialist contractors, landowner(s) or property owner(s) or their representative

Below is an example of a command structure for the retrieval and investigation phase.



























The scene evidence recovery manager (SERM) will manage all actions undertaken during the retrieval and investigation stage of the operation at the scene on behalf of the SIM and SIO. Initially, the SERM will establish a scene evidence recovery group. This group will be responsible for delivering the outcomes required to clear the site of the incident in line with strategies set in relation to the investigation and identification process.
Strategic coordination group
The SCG has overall responsibility for the multi-agency management of the emergency. For further information, see civil contingencies APP .

Tactical coordination group
The tactical commanders of all responding agencies should come together to form a tactical coordination group (TCG). The TCG should meet at an appropriate mutually agreed location as soon as practicable. For further information, see civil contingencies APP .
Mass fatality coordination group
The mass fatality coordination group (MFCG) coordinates the DVI process on behalf of the gold commander and HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal It allows sensitive matters regarding the deceased to be discussed outside the SCG.

Normally the MFCG will be chaired by HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal or the SIM.

Normally the MFCG will be chaired by HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal or the SIM. 

For further information see MFCG aide memoire.

Mass fatalities coordination group members
Members of the MFCG can include:

HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal
senior identification manager (SIM)
senior investigating oﬃcer (SIO)
scene evidence recovery manager (SERM)
supervising or lead pathologist
police mortuary operations coordinator (PMOC)
family liaison coordinator (FLC)
a local authority representative with delegated powers around finance
a legal team representative
a representative of the Human Tissue Authority (HTA)
any other designated individual in relation to the HTA licence
key staﬀ from planning, resourcing and logistics teams

Please note this list is not exhaustive and the MFCG group members will be dependent upon the incident and changing circumstances.

See here for example aide memoire.

Casualty bureau incident room
The Casualty Bureau (CB) Incident Room is the central point where all information related to an incident is received, collated and assessed. This includes information about people believed to be involved in the incident.

The CB Incident Room provides resources and a process to manage high- volume data, to identify key or critical information at the earliest opportunity. The CB Incident Room also provides a telephone line for the public to report people involved in an incident, as well as an online reporting facility, Major Incident Public Portal (MIPP).

This website can be used by the public to directly report information. It can also be used by police and other partner agencies to report people involved using the Investigative Triage Form (ITF), which is password-protected and predefined by the CB Manager.

A CB Incident Room is likely to be activated when there is a significant demand from the public for information that exceeds normal force call- handling capabilities. It may also be activated by the SIM to receive a significant volume of information from the public (using the ITF).

All police regions are required to have a CB Incident Room capability. All police forces can provide additional CB call-handling resources to support any other CB Incident Room upon a mutual aid request. All information received via the CB Incident Room telephone numbers and online via MIPP is recorded into a secure incident cloud-based account. This ensures that all information is collated in the same place.

When the CB Incident Room is activated for a mass fatality incident, it manages all information in relation to the recovery, reconciliation, identification and repatriation of victims, as well as criminal investigation.

For further information see Casualty Bureau Manager Suggested Initial Actions.

For more information see the command, control and coordination section
of the APP.
24/03/2025  DVI roles and responsibilities
https://www.college.police.uk/app/civil-emergencies/disaster-victim-identification/dvi-roles-and- responsibilities


Page

DVI roles and responsibilities


This page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published
23 October 2013 Updated
11 February 2025
Written by College of Policing Disaster victim identification 16 mins read

Senior identification manager
DVI managers and personnel should have completed the College of Policing approved DVI courses relevant to their role.
The senior identification manager (SIM) is a senior police investigator and leader responsible for managing all aspects of the identification process.
The strategic commander appoints the SIM where there are fatalities or there is an expectation of fatalities.
 See SIM initial actions

Responsibilities
SIM responsibilities include:
 consulting with the senior investigating officer (SIO)
 assume overall responsibility for the management of the DVI process  liaising with HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal
 setting a casualty bureau (CB) and major incident public portal (MIPP) strategy and appointing a trained and competent CB manager
 setting a communications strategy in consultation with the strategic commander, tactical commander and SIO
 setting involvement gradings, including SIM questions  setting a missing persons cancellation policy
 briefing and debriefing
 quality assuring protocols, procedures and functionality during the identification process  appointing experienced family liaison coordinators (FLCs)
 establishing a family liaison strategy and risk assessment for obtaining Ante Mortem data.
 ensuring that the next of kin are kept informed throughout the investigation and identification process  submitting Ante Mortem and Post Mortem data to the identification commission in respect of fatalities  establishing effective protocols for information sharing in line with gold strategy
 establishing a policy book or file for recording all policy decisions
 liaising with the Welfare Tactical Commander with regard to managing and assessing risk, health, welfare and wellbeing issues
 consider appointing trained DVI manager such as scene evidence recovery manager (SERM), police mortuary operations coordinator (PMOC), Ante Mortem coordinator (AMC) and reconciliation coordinator. These key managers will provide support to strategies for identification of the deceased including recovery from the scene and mortuary operations. Careful consideration must be given to strategies involving engagement with families for reconciliation and repatriation of human remains and involve consultation with HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal, SIO, FLC and Lead Pathologist

Senior investigating officer
An emergency or major incident will require a criminal investigation. The senior investigating officer (SIO) will assume responsibility for all aspects of that investigation, including liaison with other authorised investigative bodies. The gold commander should consider early appointment of an SIO.
A police SIO is required to:
 perform the role of officer in charge of an investigation, as described in the Code of Practice under Part II of the Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996, and be accountable to chief officers for conducting the investigation
 develop and implement the investigative strategy
 develop the information management and decision-making systems for the investigation
 manager the investigations' health, safety, welfare and wellbeing issues, as well as allocated resources (people, finance an equipment)
The relationship between the SIO and the SIM is crucial for effectively managing any DVI or mass fatality incident. They should agree terms of reference soon after their appointments and should determine the actual relationship and reporting structure, taking into account the incident’s relevant circumstances. The designated strategic commander can ratify the SIO and SIM’s relationship, agreeing the command structure, and present these to the strategic coordination group (SCG). This enables all strategic and tactical commanders in the police service and partner agencies to understand where responsibilities lie.
Once agreed, the strategic commander, SIO and SIM should sign the terms of reference. The SIO and SIM must record any changes to the terms of reference in a policy log entry.

HM coroner or procurator fiscal
HM coroner or procurator fiscal in Scotland are responsible for chairing the identification commission, where the identity of the deceased is confirmed.
HM coroner or procurator fiscal conduct an inquest into the death of a person in their area, where they have reasonable cause to suspect that the deceased has died:
 a violent or unnatural death
 a sudden death of which the cause is unknown
 in prison, police custody or other state detention
It is HM coroner or procurator fiscal's responsibility to establish the deceased’s identity, as well as how, when and where the death occurred. They have the power to:
 take lawful possession, control and care of the deceased person or human remains from when the death is reported until all enquiries are complete. HM coroner or procurator fiscal are required to release the body as soon as reasonably practical
 authorise removing the deceased from their place of death to a mortuary for a full post-mortem examination

Procurator fiscal
In Scotland, the Lord Advocate is the Head of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. They are the public official responsible for prosecuting crime. They are also responsible for investigating all sudden, suspicious and unexplained deaths.
Supported by procurators fiscal, in circumstances where a death is sudden, suspicious or unexplained, the Lord Advocate will investigate the death and seek to establish the cause of death and the circumstances of the death. If necessary, this may involve instructing that a post-mortem examination is carried out.
Death investigations may lead to a fatal accident inquiry (FAI), which is a form of judicial inquiry governed by the Inquiries into Fatal Accidents and Sudden Deaths etc. (Scotland) Act 2016 (IFA(SD)A 2016).
The procurator fiscal carries out an investigation to determine whether there are circumstances that suggest the death may have been caused as a result of a criminal act or omission. If so, criminal proceedings may be taken. If not, the investigation may discover that the death has occurred in circumstances where an FAI is appropriate.
An FAI is essentially a fact-finding exercise carried out in the public interest. Its purpose is not to apportion blame for the death, but to determine:
 where and when the death took place  the cause of the death
 reasonable precautions whereby the death might have been avoided
 the defects, if any, in any system of working that contributed to the death or any accident resulting in the death
 other facts relevant to the circumstances of the death There are two types of fatal accident inquiry.
Mandatory
In terms of Section 2 of the IFA(SD)A 2016, a mandatory FAI is conducted where the death occurred in Scotland and where the death occurred:
as the result of an accident when the deceased was acting in the course of their employment or occupation, or
when the deceased was in legal custody or was a child detained in secure accommodation at the time of the death
Discretionary
In terms of Section 4 of the IFA(SD)A 2016, a discretionary FAI is conducted on the authority of the Lord Advocate, where the death occurred in Scotland and the Lord Advocate considers that the death was sudden, suspicious or unexplained. Or it occurred in circumstances that give rise to serious public concern and it is decided that it is in the public interest for an inquiry to be held into the circumstances of the death.
The FAI takes place in front of a sheriff (judge) and will lead to the sheriff issuing a determination. The purpose of an FAI is to identify any systemic defects in ways of working that led to the death. This is so that the sheriff can make recommendations as to how deaths can be prevented from occurring in similar circumstances in the future.

Casualty Bureau
The Casualty Bureau (CB) is the central point where all information related to an incident is received, collated and assessed. This includes information about people believed to be involved in the incident.
The CB provides resources and a process to manage high-volume data, to identify key or critical information at the earliest opportunity. The CB also provides a phone line for the public to report people involved in an incident, as well as an online reporting facility, the Major Incident Public Portal (MIPP).
The MIPP has two tiles for a CB activation. First there is a police and partner agency tile, which is active 24/7. It allows any police force in the country to collate the details of people involved at survivor reception centres or hospitals and includes an investigative triage form (ITF), which is password protected. The other tile can be activated for the public to directly report missing persons and other information.
A CB is likely to be activated when there is a significant demand from the public for information that exceeds normal force call-handling capabilities. It may also be activated by the SIM to receive a significant volume of information from the public (using the ITF) at Survivor Reception Centres and Hospitals.
It is important to note that the CB information contact centre can only receive details. It cannot be used to provide details to the public about the incident.
All police regions are required to have a CB capability. All police forces can provide additional CB call-handling resources to support any other CB following a mutual aid request.
When the CB is activated for a mass fatality incident, it manages all information in relation to the recovery, reconciliation, identification and repatriation of victims, as well as criminal investigation.

Casualty Bureau manager
The CB manager reports directly to their SIM. Their delegated responsibilities are to lead and manage the CB, which is made up of three separate units:
 incident contact centre  input unit
 message assessment unit
The CB manager has a number of responsibilities and tasks, as set out in CBSAP 2024.Their main responsibility is the efficient setting up, execution and closure of the CB.
Family liaison

 Note: This section should be read and implemented in conjunction with SIM responsibilities.
Major/mass fatality incidents are very emotional for families and will clearly be distressing. They can also be a lengthy and frustrating process at times. One of the most important considerations is the relationship between bereaved families and the police. It is therefore essential that family liaison officers (FLOs) are deployed to families. FLOs are the primary point of contact for the family and this will be their sole and dedicated role following the incident.
The role of family liaison in a mass fatality event is different to that in a murder investigation or road traffic collision. The FLO helps the SIM and SIO achieve their identification and investigation strategies. This is different to a crisis support worker, who provides emotional and practical support to family or friends. Ante- mortem trained FLOs should be used when available, as they have additional expertise in ante-mortem collection in a major/mass fatality incident.
There may be times throughout the investigation when the SIM or SIO request a meeting with the families or vice versa. In the event of a major or mass fatality incident, the SIO or SIM may be unable to see families individually. It may, therefore, be advantageous for the families to be brought together for periodic briefings. These can be arranged by FLOs to meet the needs of all parties. However, it is important to consider families who are unable to attend or do not wish to attend and ensure they receive the same information.
Any requests to share information about bereaved families should be discussed with the families themselves and consent obtained prior to sharing. Families often request details of other families involved in the investigation as well as requests from media outlets and other organisations. These requests can cause an enormous amount of stress for the families.
To some extent, the police may be able to resolve this with other agencies. The police can, however, minimise the duplication of requests from other agencies to families by channelling them through the FLO.

Family liaison coordinator
The SIM should consider appointing a family liaison coordinator (FLC) if the scale and the nature of the incident requires the deployment of multiple family liaison advisors (FLAs) and FLOs. In a major incident or mass fatality, the deployment of an experienced FLC should be considered. They can support the SIM and lead on family liaison deployment. The lead FLC should establish how many FLAs and FLOs need to be deployed to the incident.
See family liaison coordinator suggested initial actions.

Family liaison adviser
Depending on the nature of the incident, it may be necessary to deploy FLAs to support the FLC. The scale and nature of the incident will dictate the amount and locations of FLAs. FLAs will be responsible for deploying and tasking FLOs and will report to a SIM, SIO, FLC or lead FLA.

Family liaison officer
The FLO helps the SIM and SIO achieve the identification and investigation strategies. This is different to a crisis support worker, who provides emotional and practical support to the family or friends. Ante-mortem trained FLOs should be used when available, as they have additional expertise in ante-mortem collection in a major/mass fatality incident.

Responsibilities

The FLO is responsible for:
 obtaining ante-mortem material as applicable
 working with the family to comply with their right to receive all relevant information connected to the enquiry
 explaining DVI procedures to the family
 obtaining ante-mortem evidence as per the FLO strategy (including fingerprints, medical and dental consent, and photographs of the missing person)
 completing the ante-mortem form as a matter of urgency  completing a victimology statement
 completing a death notification to HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal and any identification statement taken  providing the family with the Explaining Disaster Victim Identification in Major Incidents document  informing families of the INTERPOL website 
 if the incident is declared a criminal investigation, discussing with family/friends referral to the Victim Support Homicide Service and/or direct eyewitnesses referral
 if relevant, informing the family about the National Emergencies Trust
 establishing that referrals are made to support services
 returning personal property of the deceased in accordance with the wishes of the bereaved and SIM  supporting the family in their contact with the media
 facilitating family visits to the scene or family viewing area as appropriate (when safe to do so)  acting as the initial link between the family and the SIM
 maintaining a written log of all contact with the families and their representatives  facilitating contact with other statutory and voluntary agencies

Scene evidence recovery manager
DVI managers and personnel should have completed the College of Policing approved DVI courses relevant to their role.
The scene evidence recovery manager (SERM) is a police manager who is responsible for the retrieval of deceased persons, human remains, evidence and property from within the inner cordon. They work on behalf of HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal and the SIM.
On appointment, the SERM discusses the DVI strategy, policy and process with the SIM. They should attend the scene to liaise with the incident commanders. The SERM ensures that appropriate controls are in place at the scene to restrict access to authorised persons. They are responsible for collating and documenting evidence.
The SERM ensures that due respect is paid to the deceased lying within the scene, taking account of circumstances at that time.
The uninjured are evacuated from the scene and emergency triage provided to the injured. Following this, the rescue phase can be declared over. The response phase moves into retrieval and investigation. The SERM assumes responsibility for the area contained within the inner cordon from the fire and rescue scene commander.
The SERM assesses personnel, equipment and specialist assistance required for site clearance and the timescales involved using established JESIP principles to recover the deceased.

For further information see Scene Evidence Recovery Manager Suggested Initial Actions. 


Responsibilities

On appointment, the SERM is responsible for:
 overall scene management and coordination  ensuring scene preservation and security
 appointing, tasking and coordinating specialists at the scene
 implementing predetermined strategies for identification and investigation
 obtaining evidence, including seizing and retaining personal property for identification and/or criminal investigation at the scene(s)
 completing all appropriate documentation
 chairing the scene evidence recovery group and ensuring that effective briefings are conducted between multiple agencies using the JESIP Principles.
 fully documenting all decisions and rationale in a decision log
 liaising with other stakeholders, including initial responders and category 1 and 2 responders, in compliance with obligations set out in the Civil Contingencies Act 2004 managing the health, safety, welfare and wellbeing of all personnel at the scene
 identifying the importance of risk assessments, as well as health, safety, welfare and wellbeing strategies of themselves and their colleagues at all phases of DVI operations
 identifying and coordinating specialist logistical support provided by external contractors  managing family/VIP attendance at the scene

Police mortuary operations coordinator
DVI managers and personnel should have completed the College of Policing approved DVI courses relevant to their role.
A police mortuary operations coordinator (PMOC) should be appointed in any mortuary, whether based in existing mortuary facilities or an emergency mortuary. The PMOC is responsible for ensuring compliance with all police DVI procedures at the mortuary for identifying the deceased and investigating the incident.
The PMOC will be a suitably trained and qualified police officer or member of police staff.
The PMOC manages the police mortuary teams and liaises between the mortuary documentation officer and the supervising or lead pathologist, while ensuring that the agreed mortuary procedure is implemented.
See Police Mortuary Operations Coordinator Suggested Initial Actions. Responsibilities
The police mortuary operations coordinator (PMOC) is responsible for:
 obtaining, seizing and retaining evidence and personal property at the mortuary in line with strategies set by the senior investigating officer (SIO) and senior identification manager (SIM)
 liaising with the designated individual to ensure the provisions of the Human Tissue Act 2004 are adhered to within the mortuary
 ensuring continuity and security of evidence
 ensuring that all relevant Post Mortem documentation is completed  liaising with the emergency mortuary coordinator
 coordinating the activities of specialists in the mortuary  liaising with funeral directors
 liaising with the tactical health, safety, wellbeing and welfare lead to manage the health, safety, wellbeing and welfare of all personnel in the mortuary and ensuring that the appropriate risk assessments including all personal protective equipment (PPE) and respiratory protective equipment (RPE) are documented
 coordinating family attendance for viewing purposes  mortuary security
 documenting all personal decisions and the rationale for them
 assisting the mortuary facilities manager with decommissioning an emergency mortuary  ensuring all personal or sensitive information is handled correctly
 ensuring no photographs are taken in the mortuary unless authorised

Pathologist

A pathologist examines deceased persons or human remains and ensures that relevant data is recorded on the pink post-mortem form.
The pathologist’s main objectives are to:  ascertain cause of death
 gather evidence for criminal investigation
 contribute towards gathering identification evidence
The pathologist may take samples for histology and DNA analysis and undertake an autopsy when authorised to do so by HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal. Careful consideration should be given to obtaining this information by non-invasive examination, such as CT scanning.
It is important that those involved in the care of the deceased recognise the emotional impact that taking histology samples may have on the victims’ families, especially when taking samples from children. This should only be carried out following careful consideration.

Pathologist responsibilities

It is the pathologist’s responsibility to ensure recording of:
 external injuries and the position of injuries and/or burns
 a description and arrangement of traumas, fractures, internal bleeding and any upper respiratory issues  old surgical procedures and internal implants, for example pacemakers
 any anatomical particularities
The SIM or SIO will liaise with HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal around the level of pathology required. HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal will be responsible for appointing a lead forensic pathologist. Additional pathologists may be appointed to support the investigation and identification process.

Anatomical pathology technologist
The anatomical pathology technologist (APT) has an important role in the mass fatality incident. They should be familiar with the mortuary environment, as well as the procedures and risks there.
The APT assists pathologists at the post-mortem examination and assists police during the DVI process. They are experienced in handling bodies and removing clothing and other items during strip and search. APTs are also skilled in reconciling body parts and reconstructing the deceased. They prepare the deceased for viewing and release the bodies at the end of the DVI process.

Local authorities
Local authorities may have agreements with private sector organisations to support the response to a mass fatality incident. Any such arrangements should be incorporated into local or regional mass fatality plans.
Local authorities are responsible for providing:  an executive officer to attend the SCG
 a suitably desingated officer to support the MFCG
 immediate shelter and welfare support for survivors at a survivor reception centre  emergency mortuary capability if existing mortuary provision is exceeded
 inspection of dangerous structures to ensure they are safe for emergency personnel to enter  support for traffic management
 emergency transport facilities for evacuees, survivors and casualties
 medium-to-long-term welfare of survivors and the bereaved (for example, setting up survivor reception centres, evacuation and humanitarian assistance centres, and social care support)
 specialist environmental and public health advice
 coordination of activities of involved voluntary sector agencies and spontaneous volunteers
 facilities for waste disposal and facilitation of remediation and reoccupation of affected sites or areas
 assistance in organising plant, demolition and site clearance facilities and emergency accommodation and care for the displaced or homeless

Multi-agency partners
Various agencies and organisations (private and voluntary) may be involved in the response to a mass fatality incident. Each agency’s level of involvement is determined by the incident’s scale and nature. Each local resilience forum (LRF) has plans and arrangements in place for dealing with mass fatality incidents.
The multi-agency response will follow the Joint Emergency Services Interoperability Principles (JESIP).
 Co-location
 Communication  Coordination
 Joint understanding of risk
 Shared situational awareness
Further information can be found at JESIP.
Agencies that may be involved in the response to a mass fatality incident in the UK and abroad include the following.
 Home Office and Cabinet Office  LRFs
 Local authorities
 Fire and rescue services
 Department of Health and Social Care and the NHS  Ministry of Defence
 Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office (FCDO)
 UK National Disaster Victim Identification Unit (UK DVI)  National Police Coordination Centre (NPoCC)
 Health and Safety Executive (HSE)
 Air Accidents Investigation Branch (AAIB)
 Rail Accident Investigation Branch (RAIB)
 Marine Accident Investigation Branch (MAIB)
 Maritime and Coastguard Agency  INTERPOL
 Private sector organisations  Voluntary sectors

Fire and rescue services

The role of fire and rescue services in an emergency or major incident is to rescue those trapped by fire, wreckage or debris. They may also support recovering deceased persons and human remains.
Fire and rescue services have an urban search and rescue (USAR) capability. They can assist in recovering deceased and human remains from constricted sites, collapsed buildings or from the wreckage or transport incidents.
USAR is a functional support sector for fire and rescue services. USAR respond to incidents involving unstable and collapsed structures resulting from deliberate or accidental causes. They search, detect, locate and rescue trapped casualties and support the recovery of the deceased. This includes working in environments that are difficult to access such as underground, in restricted spaces or at heights. They also respond to serious transportation incidents involving trains, trams and aircraft.
In these challenging environments, USAR teams have various specialised methods and an array of equipment allowing them to conduct:
 technical searches
 breaking and breaching  lifting and moving
 propping and shoring to stabilise structures and prevent further collapse
The National Fire Chiefs Council and the National Police Chiefs’ Council have a memorandum of understanding to support policing in mass fatality incidents.
See: Joint Working Principles for Urban Search and Rescue Support to Police in Disaster Victim Identification (NFCC, NPCC and College of Policing, 2017)

Ambulance Hazardous Area Response Team (HART)
Hazardous area response teams are specifically recruited and trained personnel, equipped to provide the ambulance response to high-risk environments and complex emergency situations.
HARTs are based in each NHS Trust in England and Wales, providing cover across the whole of each country. In some cases, they may work together on specific, large scale or high-profile incidents, either accidental or deliberately caused.
HARTs work alongside the police and fire and rescue services within the inner cordon (or ‘hot zone’) of a major incident. The job of the HART is to triage and treat casualties and to help save lives in very difficult circumstances.
They are also there to look after other emergency personnel who may become injured while attending these difficult and challenging incidents.
The primary areas of ambulance service responsibility at a major incident are to:  save life together with the other emergency services
 provide treatment, stabilisation and care of casualties at the scene
 provide appropriate transport, medical staff, equipment and resources
 establish an effective triage sieve and sort system, prioritising the needs and evacuation requirements of the injured and establish a safe location for casualty clearing
 provide a focal point at the incident for all National Health Service (NHS) and other medical resources  nominate and alert receiving hospitals for the injured and inform other agencies
 arrange the most appropriate means of transporting the injured to hospitals  conduct the termination of death and verification of death

National interagency liaison officers (NILOs)
National interagency liaison officers (NILOs) are security vetted, trained and identifiable emergency responders from the fire and rescue service, ambulance service, HM Coastguard, military and police.
They may operate in either a command, tactical advisor or service specific role. They can support pre-planned or spontaneous operations at strategic, tactical and operational levels, including facilitating interoperable working with partner agencies.

Command and control
Operational structure
The SERM will assume control within the inner cordon from the fire and rescue scene commander. In addition to liaising with the tactical health, safety, wellbeing and welfare lead, a specialist health and safety adviser
should be consulted regarding scene safety, as appropriate to the type and scale of incident. The SERM will establish a:
 scene access control point
 scene evidence recovery group  joint health and safety cell
The SERM is responsible for:
 ensuring that the inner cordon is clearly delineated and secure  agreeing access and documentation for the inner cordon
 deploying specialist personnel, to work in confined spaces or work safely at height, and equipment The diagram below demonstrates the type of command structure that the SERM will operate under.
Diagram of the types of command structure that the SERM will operate under.

Operational plan
The SERM develops an operational plan for recovering the deceased, human remains, property and evidence. The senior identification manager (SIM) and senior investigating officer (SIO) should approve the plan.
It contains:
 a risk assessment of the scene
 health and safety procedures to be adopted (including personal protective equipment)
 details for establishing a victim holding audit area (VHAA) for the deceased persons and human remains  a property and evidence audit area

Scene evidence recovery group

The SERM will manage all actions undertaken during the retrieval and investigation stage of the operation at the scene until the scene is officially handed over to the local authority, normally at the recovery phase.
The SERM will develop and implement a coordinated plan to retrieve deceased persons, human remains, property and evidence from the scene. These exhibits will then be examined by appropriate investigating agencies. To achieve these outcomes, the SERM will form and chair a scene evidence recovery group consisting of people with a role to play in recovering the deceased, human remains, property and evidence from the scene (see diagram of a scene evidence recovery group).

Scene evidence recovery group members

This group may include:
 scene evidence recovery manager (SERM)  victim recovery team leader
 property recovery team leader  operational scene commander  police search adviser
 police forensic adviser or crime scene manager  health and safety coordinator
 Health and Safety Executive (HSE) adviser  fire and rescue service scene commander
 a representative of other statutory investigative agencies, for example, the air accident investigation branch (AAIB), marine accident investigation branch (MAIB) and rail accident investigation branch (RAIB)
 Logistics coordinator
 Environment Agency representative
 local authority representative, for example an emergency planning officer, building control inspector or environmental health officer
 specialist contractors, landowner(s) or property owner(s) or their representative Below is an example of a command structure for the retrieval and investigation phase. A diagram of an example command structure for the retrieval and investigation phase
The scene evidence recovery manager (SERM) will manage all actions undertaken during the retrieval and investigation stage of the operation at the scene on behalf of the SIM and SIO. Initially, the SERM will establish a scene evidence recovery group. This group will be responsible for delivering the outcomes required to clear the site of the incident in line with strategies set in relation to the investigation and identification process.

Strategic coordination group

The SCG has overall responsibility for the multi-agency management of the emergency. For further information, see civil contingencies APP.

Tactical coordination group

The tactical commanders of all responding agencies should come together to form a tactical coordination group (TCG). The TCG should meet at an appropriate mutually agreed location as soon as practicable. For further information, see civil contingencies APP.

Mass fatality coordination group

The mass fatality coordination group (MFCG) coordinates the DVI process on behalf of the gold commander and HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal It allows sensitive matters regarding the deceased to be discussed outside the SCG.
Normally the MFCG will be chaired by HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal or the SIM. Normally the MFCG will be chaired by HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal or the SIM. For further information see MFCG aide memoire.
Mass fatalities coordination group members

Members of the MFCG can include:
 HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal
 senior identification manager (SIM)  senior investigating officer (SIO)
 scene evidence recovery manager (SERM)  supervising or lead pathologist
 police mortuary operations coordinator (PMOC)  family liaison coordinator (FLC)
 a local authority representative with delegated powers around finance  a legal team representative
 a representative of the Human Tissue Authority (HTA)
 any other designated individual in relation to the HTA licence  key staff from planning, resourcing and logistics teams
Please note this list is not exhaustive and the MFCG group members will be dependent upon the incident and changing circumstances.
See here for example aide memoire.

Casualty bureau incident room

The Casualty Bureau (CB) Incident Room is the central point where all information related to an incident is received, collated and assessed. This includes information about people believed to be involved in the incident.
The CB Incident Room provides resources and a process to manage high-volume data, to identify key or critical information at the earliest opportunity. The CB Incident Room also provides a telephone line for the public to report people involved in an incident, as well as an online reporting facility, Major Incident Public Portal (MIPP).
This website can be used by the public to directly report information. It can also be used by police and other partner agencies to report people involved using the Investigative Triage Form (ITF), which is password- protected and predefined by the CB Manager.
A CB Incident Room is likely to be activated when there is a significant demand from the public for information that exceeds normal force call-handling capabilities. It may also be activated by the SIM to receive a significant volume of information from the public (using the ITF).
All police regions are required to have a CB Incident Room capability. All police forces can provide additional CB call-handling resources to support any other CB Incident Room upon a mutual aid request. All information received via the CB Incident Room telephone numbers and online via MIPP is recorded into a secure incident cloud-based account. This ensures that all information is collated in the same place.
When the CB Incident Room is activated for a mass fatality incident, it manages all information in relation to the recovery, reconciliation, identification and repatriation of victims, as well as criminal investigation.
For further information see Casualty Bureau Manager Suggested Initial Actions. For more information see the command, control and coordination section of the APP. Back to Disaster victim identification overview
Tags

Civil emergencies
24/03/2025  DVI roles and responsibilities
https://www.college.police.uk/app/civil-emergencies/disaster-victim-identification/dvi-roles-and- responsibilities


Page

DVI roles and responsibilities


This page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published
23 October 2013 Updated
11 February 2025
Written by College of Policing Disaster victim identification 16 mins read

Senior identification manager
DVI managers and personnel should have completed the College of Policing approved DVI courses relevant to their role.
The senior identification manager (SIM) is a senior police investigator and leader responsible for managing all aspects of the identification process.
The strategic commander appoints the SIM where there are fatalities or there is an expectation of fatalities.
 See SIM initial actions

Responsibilities
SIM responsibilities include:
 consulting with the senior investigating officer (SIO)
 assume overall responsibility for the management of the DVI process  liaising with HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal
 setting a casualty bureau (CB) and major incident public portal (MIPP) strategy and appointing a trained and competent CB manager
 setting a communications strategy in consultation with the strategic commander, tactical commander and SIO
 setting involvement gradings, including SIM questions  setting a missing persons cancellation policy
 briefing and debriefing
 quality assuring protocols, procedures and functionality during the identification process  appointing experienced family liaison coordinators (FLCs)
 establishing a family liaison strategy and risk assessment for obtaining Ante Mortem data.
 ensuring that the next of kin are kept informed throughout the investigation and identification process  submitting Ante Mortem and Post Mortem data to the identification commission in respect of fatalities  establishing effective protocols for information sharing in line with gold strategy
 establishing a policy book or file for recording all policy decisions
 liaising with the Welfare Tactical Commander with regard to managing and assessing risk, health, welfare and wellbeing issues
 consider appointing trained DVI manager such as scene evidence recovery manager (SERM), police mortuary operations coordinator (PMOC), Ante Mortem coordinator (AMC) and reconciliation coordinator. These key managers will provide support to strategies for identification of the deceased including recovery from the scene and mortuary operations. Careful consideration must be given to strategies involving engagement with families for reconciliation and repatriation of human remains and involve consultation with HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal, SIO, FLC and Lead Pathologist

Senior investigating officer
An emergency or major incident will require a criminal investigation. The senior investigating officer (SIO) will assume responsibility for all aspects of that investigation, including liaison with other authorised investigative bodies. The gold commander should consider early appointment of an SIO.
A police SIO is required to:
 perform the role of officer in charge of an investigation, as described in the Code of Practice under Part II of the Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996, and be accountable to chief officers for conducting the investigation
 develop and implement the investigative strategy
 develop the information management and decision-making systems for the investigation
 manager the investigations' health, safety, welfare and wellbeing issues, as well as allocated resources (people, finance an equipment)
The relationship between the SIO and the SIM is crucial for effectively managing any DVI or mass fatality incident. They should agree terms of reference soon after their appointments and should determine the actual relationship and reporting structure, taking into account the incident’s relevant circumstances. The designated strategic commander can ratify the SIO and SIM’s relationship, agreeing the command structure, and present these to the strategic coordination group (SCG). This enables all strategic and tactical commanders in the police service and partner agencies to understand where responsibilities lie.
Once agreed, the strategic commander, SIO and SIM should sign the terms of reference. The SIO and SIM must record any changes to the terms of reference in a policy log entry.

HM coroner or procurator fiscal
HM coroner or procurator fiscal in Scotland are responsible for chairing the identification commission, where the identity of the deceased is confirmed.
HM coroner or procurator fiscal conduct an inquest into the death of a person in their area, where they have reasonable cause to suspect that the deceased has died:
 a violent or unnatural death
 a sudden death of which the cause is unknown
 in prison, police custody or other state detention
It is HM coroner or procurator fiscal's responsibility to establish the deceased’s identity, as well as how, when and where the death occurred. They have the power to:
 take lawful possession, control and care of the deceased person or human remains from when the death is reported until all enquiries are complete. HM coroner or procurator fiscal are required to release the body as soon as reasonably practical
 authorise removing the deceased from their place of death to a mortuary for a full post-mortem examination

Procurator fiscal
In Scotland, the Lord Advocate is the Head of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. They are the public official responsible for prosecuting crime. They are also responsible for investigating all sudden, suspicious and unexplained deaths.
Supported by procurators fiscal, in circumstances where a death is sudden, suspicious or unexplained, the Lord Advocate will investigate the death and seek to establish the cause of death and the circumstances of the death. If necessary, this may involve instructing that a post-mortem examination is carried out.
Death investigations may lead to a fatal accident inquiry (FAI), which is a form of judicial inquiry governed by the Inquiries into Fatal Accidents and Sudden Deaths etc. (Scotland) Act 2016 (IFA(SD)A 2016).
The procurator fiscal carries out an investigation to determine whether there are circumstances that suggest the death may have been caused as a result of a criminal act or omission. If so, criminal proceedings may be taken. If not, the investigation may discover that the death has occurred in circumstances where an FAI is appropriate.
An FAI is essentially a fact-finding exercise carried out in the public interest. Its purpose is not to apportion blame for the death, but to determine:
 where and when the death took place  the cause of the death
 reasonable precautions whereby the death might have been avoided
 the defects, if any, in any system of working that contributed to the death or any accident resulting in the death
 other facts relevant to the circumstances of the death There are two types of fatal accident inquiry.
Mandatory
In terms of Section 2 of the IFA(SD)A 2016, a mandatory FAI is conducted where the death occurred in Scotland and where the death occurred:
as the result of an accident when the deceased was acting in the course of their employment or occupation, or
when the deceased was in legal custody or was a child detained in secure accommodation at the time of the death
Discretionary
In terms of Section 4 of the IFA(SD)A 2016, a discretionary FAI is conducted on the authority of the Lord Advocate, where the death occurred in Scotland and the Lord Advocate considers that the death was sudden, suspicious or unexplained. Or it occurred in circumstances that give rise to serious public concern and it is decided that it is in the public interest for an inquiry to be held into the circumstances of the death.
The FAI takes place in front of a sheriff (judge) and will lead to the sheriff issuing a determination. The purpose of an FAI is to identify any systemic defects in ways of working that led to the death. This is so that the sheriff can make recommendations as to how deaths can be prevented from occurring in similar circumstances in the future.

Casualty Bureau
The Casualty Bureau (CB) is the central point where all information related to an incident is received, collated and assessed. This includes information about people believed to be involved in the incident.
The CB provides resources and a process to manage high-volume data, to identify key or critical information at the earliest opportunity. The CB also provides a phone line for the public to report people involved in an incident, as well as an online reporting facility, the Major Incident Public Portal (MIPP).
The MIPP has two tiles for a CB activation. First there is a police and partner agency tile, which is active 24/7. It allows any police force in the country to collate the details of people involved at survivor reception centres or hospitals and includes an investigative triage form (ITF), which is password protected. The other tile can be activated for the public to directly report missing persons and other information.
A CB is likely to be activated when there is a significant demand from the public for information that exceeds normal force call-handling capabilities. It may also be activated by the SIM to receive a significant volume of information from the public (using the ITF) at Survivor Reception Centres and Hospitals.
It is important to note that the CB information contact centre can only receive details. It cannot be used to provide details to the public about the incident.
All police regions are required to have a CB capability. All police forces can provide additional CB call-handling resources to support any other CB following a mutual aid request.
When the CB is activated for a mass fatality incident, it manages all information in relation to the recovery, reconciliation, identification and repatriation of victims, as well as criminal investigation.

Casualty Bureau manager
The CB manager reports directly to their SIM. Their delegated responsibilities are to lead and manage the CB, which is made up of three separate units:
 incident contact centre  input unit
 message assessment unit
The CB manager has a number of responsibilities and tasks, as set out in CBSAP 2024.Their main responsibility is the efficient setting up, execution and closure of the CB.
Family liaison

 Note: This section should be read and implemented in conjunction with SIM responsibilities.
Major/mass fatality incidents are very emotional for families and will clearly be distressing. They can also be a lengthy and frustrating process at times. One of the most important considerations is the relationship between bereaved families and the police. It is therefore essential that family liaison officers (FLOs) are deployed to families. FLOs are the primary point of contact for the family and this will be their sole and dedicated role following the incident.
The role of family liaison in a mass fatality event is different to that in a murder investigation or road traffic collision. The FLO helps the SIM and SIO achieve their identification and investigation strategies. This is different to a crisis support worker, who provides emotional and practical support to family or friends. Ante- mortem trained FLOs should be used when available, as they have additional expertise in ante-mortem collection in a major/mass fatality incident.
There may be times throughout the investigation when the SIM or SIO request a meeting with the families or vice versa. In the event of a major or mass fatality incident, the SIO or SIM may be unable to see families individually. It may, therefore, be advantageous for the families to be brought together for periodic briefings. These can be arranged by FLOs to meet the needs of all parties. However, it is important to consider families who are unable to attend or do not wish to attend and ensure they receive the same information.
Any requests to share information about bereaved families should be discussed with the families themselves and consent obtained prior to sharing. Families often request details of other families involved in the investigation as well as requests from media outlets and other organisations. These requests can cause an enormous amount of stress for the families.
To some extent, the police may be able to resolve this with other agencies. The police can, however, minimise the duplication of requests from other agencies to families by channelling them through the FLO.

Family liaison coordinator
The SIM should consider appointing a family liaison coordinator (FLC) if the scale and the nature of the incident requires the deployment of multiple family liaison advisors (FLAs) and FLOs. In a major incident or mass fatality, the deployment of an experienced FLC should be considered. They can support the SIM and lead on family liaison deployment. The lead FLC should establish how many FLAs and FLOs need to be deployed to the incident.
See family liaison coordinator suggested initial actions.

Family liaison adviser
Depending on the nature of the incident, it may be necessary to deploy FLAs to support the FLC. The scale and nature of the incident will dictate the amount and locations of FLAs. FLAs will be responsible for deploying and tasking FLOs and will report to a SIM, SIO, FLC or lead FLA.

Family liaison officer
The FLO helps the SIM and SIO achieve the identification and investigation strategies. This is different to a crisis support worker, who provides emotional and practical support to the family or friends. Ante-mortem trained FLOs should be used when available, as they have additional expertise in ante-mortem collection in a major/mass fatality incident.

Responsibilities

The FLO is responsible for:
 obtaining ante-mortem material as applicable
 working with the family to comply with their right to receive all relevant information connected to the enquiry
 explaining DVI procedures to the family
 obtaining ante-mortem evidence as per the FLO strategy (including fingerprints, medical and dental consent, and photographs of the missing person)
 completing the ante-mortem form as a matter of urgency  completing a victimology statement
 completing a death notification to HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal and any identification statement taken  providing the family with the Explaining Disaster Victim Identification in Major Incidents document  informing families of the INTERPOL website 
 if the incident is declared a criminal investigation, discussing with family/friends referral to the Victim Support Homicide Service and/or direct eyewitnesses referral
 if relevant, informing the family about the National Emergencies Trust
 establishing that referrals are made to support services
 returning personal property of the deceased in accordance with the wishes of the bereaved and SIM  supporting the family in their contact with the media
 facilitating family visits to the scene or family viewing area as appropriate (when safe to do so)  acting as the initial link between the family and the SIM
 maintaining a written log of all contact with the families and their representatives  facilitating contact with other statutory and voluntary agencies

Scene evidence recovery manager
DVI managers and personnel should have completed the College of Policing approved DVI courses relevant to their role.
The scene evidence recovery manager (SERM) is a police manager who is responsible for the retrieval of deceased persons, human remains, evidence and property from within the inner cordon. They work on behalf of HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal and the SIM.
On appointment, the SERM discusses the DVI strategy, policy and process with the SIM. They should attend the scene to liaise with the incident commanders. The SERM ensures that appropriate controls are in place at the scene to restrict access to authorised persons. They are responsible for collating and documenting evidence.
The SERM ensures that due respect is paid to the deceased lying within the scene, taking account of circumstances at that time.
The uninjured are evacuated from the scene and emergency triage provided to the injured. Following this, the rescue phase can be declared over. The response phase moves into retrieval and investigation. The SERM assumes responsibility for the area contained within the inner cordon from the fire and rescue scene commander.
The SERM assesses personnel, equipment and specialist assistance required for site clearance and the timescales involved using established JESIP principles to recover the deceased.

For further information see Scene Evidence Recovery Manager Suggested Initial Actions. 


Responsibilities

On appointment, the SERM is responsible for:
 overall scene management and coordination  ensuring scene preservation and security
 appointing, tasking and coordinating specialists at the scene
 implementing predetermined strategies for identification and investigation
 obtaining evidence, including seizing and retaining personal property for identification and/or criminal investigation at the scene(s)
 completing all appropriate documentation
 chairing the scene evidence recovery group and ensuring that effective briefings are conducted between multiple agencies using the JESIP Principles.
 fully documenting all decisions and rationale in a decision log
 liaising with other stakeholders, including initial responders and category 1 and 2 responders, in compliance with obligations set out in the Civil Contingencies Act 2004 managing the health, safety, welfare and wellbeing of all personnel at the scene
 identifying the importance of risk assessments, as well as health, safety, welfare and wellbeing strategies of themselves and their colleagues at all phases of DVI operations
 identifying and coordinating specialist logistical support provided by external contractors  managing family/VIP attendance at the scene

Police mortuary operations coordinator
DVI managers and personnel should have completed the College of Policing approved DVI courses relevant to their role.
A police mortuary operations coordinator (PMOC) should be appointed in any mortuary, whether based in existing mortuary facilities or an emergency mortuary. The PMOC is responsible for ensuring compliance with all police DVI procedures at the mortuary for identifying the deceased and investigating the incident.
The PMOC will be a suitably trained and qualified police officer or member of police staff.
The PMOC manages the police mortuary teams and liaises between the mortuary documentation officer and the supervising or lead pathologist, while ensuring that the agreed mortuary procedure is implemented.
See Police Mortuary Operations Coordinator Suggested Initial Actions. Responsibilities
The police mortuary operations coordinator (PMOC) is responsible for:
 obtaining, seizing and retaining evidence and personal property at the mortuary in line with strategies set by the senior investigating officer (SIO) and senior identification manager (SIM)
 liaising with the designated individual to ensure the provisions of the Human Tissue Act 2004 are adhered to within the mortuary
 ensuring continuity and security of evidence
 ensuring that all relevant Post Mortem documentation is completed  liaising with the emergency mortuary coordinator
 coordinating the activities of specialists in the mortuary  liaising with funeral directors
 liaising with the tactical health, safety, wellbeing and welfare lead to manage the health, safety, wellbeing and welfare of all personnel in the mortuary and ensuring that the appropriate risk assessments including all personal protective equipment (PPE) and respiratory protective equipment (RPE) are documented
 coordinating family attendance for viewing purposes  mortuary security
 documenting all personal decisions and the rationale for them
 assisting the mortuary facilities manager with decommissioning an emergency mortuary  ensuring all personal or sensitive information is handled correctly
 ensuring no photographs are taken in the mortuary unless authorised

Pathologist

A pathologist examines deceased persons or human remains and ensures that relevant data is recorded on the pink post-mortem form.
The pathologist’s main objectives are to:  ascertain cause of death
 gather evidence for criminal investigation
 contribute towards gathering identification evidence
The pathologist may take samples for histology and DNA analysis and undertake an autopsy when authorised to do so by HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal. Careful consideration should be given to obtaining this information by non-invasive examination, such as CT scanning.
It is important that those involved in the care of the deceased recognise the emotional impact that taking histology samples may have on the victims’ families, especially when taking samples from children. This should only be carried out following careful consideration.

Pathologist responsibilities

It is the pathologist’s responsibility to ensure recording of:
 external injuries and the position of injuries and/or burns
 a description and arrangement of traumas, fractures, internal bleeding and any upper respiratory issues  old surgical procedures and internal implants, for example pacemakers
 any anatomical particularities
The SIM or SIO will liaise with HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal around the level of pathology required. HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal will be responsible for appointing a lead forensic pathologist. Additional pathologists may be appointed to support the investigation and identification process.

Anatomical pathology technologist
The anatomical pathology technologist (APT) has an important role in the mass fatality incident. They should be familiar with the mortuary environment, as well as the procedures and risks there.
The APT assists pathologists at the post-mortem examination and assists police during the DVI process. They are experienced in handling bodies and removing clothing and other items during strip and search. APTs are also skilled in reconciling body parts and reconstructing the deceased. They prepare the deceased for viewing and release the bodies at the end of the DVI process.

Local authorities
Local authorities may have agreements with private sector organisations to support the response to a mass fatality incident. Any such arrangements should be incorporated into local or regional mass fatality plans.
Local authorities are responsible for providing:  an executive officer to attend the SCG
 a suitably desingated officer to support the MFCG
 immediate shelter and welfare support for survivors at a survivor reception centre  emergency mortuary capability if existing mortuary provision is exceeded
 inspection of dangerous structures to ensure they are safe for emergency personnel to enter  support for traffic management
 emergency transport facilities for evacuees, survivors and casualties
 medium-to-long-term welfare of survivors and the bereaved (for example, setting up survivor reception centres, evacuation and humanitarian assistance centres, and social care support)
 specialist environmental and public health advice
 coordination of activities of involved voluntary sector agencies and spontaneous volunteers
 facilities for waste disposal and facilitation of remediation and reoccupation of affected sites or areas
 assistance in organising plant, demolition and site clearance facilities and emergency accommodation and care for the displaced or homeless

Multi-agency partners
Various agencies and organisations (private and voluntary) may be involved in the response to a mass fatality incident. Each agency’s level of involvement is determined by the incident’s scale and nature. Each local resilience forum (LRF) has plans and arrangements in place for dealing with mass fatality incidents.
The multi-agency response will follow the Joint Emergency Services Interoperability Principles (JESIP).
 Co-location
 Communication  Coordination
 Joint understanding of risk
 Shared situational awareness
Further information can be found at JESIP.
Agencies that may be involved in the response to a mass fatality incident in the UK and abroad include the following.
 Home Office and Cabinet Office  LRFs
 Local authorities
 Fire and rescue services
 Department of Health and Social Care and the NHS  Ministry of Defence
 Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office (FCDO)
 UK National Disaster Victim Identification Unit (UK DVI)  National Police Coordination Centre (NPoCC)
 Health and Safety Executive (HSE)
 Air Accidents Investigation Branch (AAIB)
 Rail Accident Investigation Branch (RAIB)
 Marine Accident Investigation Branch (MAIB)
 Maritime and Coastguard Agency  INTERPOL
 Private sector organisations  Voluntary sectors

Fire and rescue services

The role of fire and rescue services in an emergency or major incident is to rescue those trapped by fire, wreckage or debris. They may also support recovering deceased persons and human remains.
Fire and rescue services have an urban search and rescue (USAR) capability. They can assist in recovering deceased and human remains from constricted sites, collapsed buildings or from the wreckage or transport incidents.
USAR is a functional support sector for fire and rescue services. USAR respond to incidents involving unstable and collapsed structures resulting from deliberate or accidental causes. They search, detect, locate and rescue trapped casualties and support the recovery of the deceased. This includes working in environments that are difficult to access such as underground, in restricted spaces or at heights. They also respond to serious transportation incidents involving trains, trams and aircraft.
In these challenging environments, USAR teams have various specialised methods and an array of equipment allowing them to conduct:
 technical searches
 breaking and breaching  lifting and moving
 propping and shoring to stabilise structures and prevent further collapse
The National Fire Chiefs Council and the National Police Chiefs’ Council have a memorandum of understanding to support policing in mass fatality incidents.
See: Joint Working Principles for Urban Search and Rescue Support to Police in Disaster Victim Identification (NFCC, NPCC and College of Policing, 2017)

Ambulance Hazardous Area Response Team (HART)
Hazardous area response teams are specifically recruited and trained personnel, equipped to provide the ambulance response to high-risk environments and complex emergency situations.
HARTs are based in each NHS Trust in England and Wales, providing cover across the whole of each country. In some cases, they may work together on specific, large scale or high-profile incidents, either accidental or deliberately caused.
HARTs work alongside the police and fire and rescue services within the inner cordon (or ‘hot zone’) of a major incident. The job of the HART is to triage and treat casualties and to help save lives in very difficult circumstances.
They are also there to look after other emergency personnel who may become injured while attending these difficult and challenging incidents.
The primary areas of ambulance service responsibility at a major incident are to:  save life together with the other emergency services
 provide treatment, stabilisation and care of casualties at the scene
 provide appropriate transport, medical staff, equipment and resources
 establish an effective triage sieve and sort system, prioritising the needs and evacuation requirements of the injured and establish a safe location for casualty clearing
 provide a focal point at the incident for all National Health Service (NHS) and other medical resources  nominate and alert receiving hospitals for the injured and inform other agencies
 arrange the most appropriate means of transporting the injured to hospitals  conduct the termination of death and verification of death

National interagency liaison officers (NILOs)
National interagency liaison officers (NILOs) are security vetted, trained and identifiable emergency responders from the fire and rescue service, ambulance service, HM Coastguard, military and police.
They may operate in either a command, tactical advisor or service specific role. They can support pre-planned or spontaneous operations at strategic, tactical and operational levels, including facilitating interoperable working with partner agencies.

Command and control
Operational structure
The SERM will assume control within the inner cordon from the fire and rescue scene commander. In addition to liaising with the tactical health, safety, wellbeing and welfare lead, a specialist health and safety adviser
should be consulted regarding scene safety, as appropriate to the type and scale of incident. The SERM will establish a:
 scene access control point
 scene evidence recovery group  joint health and safety cell
The SERM is responsible for:
 ensuring that the inner cordon is clearly delineated and secure  agreeing access and documentation for the inner cordon
 deploying specialist personnel, to work in confined spaces or work safely at height, and equipment The diagram below demonstrates the type of command structure that the SERM will operate under.
Diagram of the types of command structure that the SERM will operate under.

Operational plan
The SERM develops an operational plan for recovering the deceased, human remains, property and evidence. The senior identification manager (SIM) and senior investigating officer (SIO) should approve the plan.
It contains:
 a risk assessment of the scene
 health and safety procedures to be adopted (including personal protective equipment)
 details for establishing a victim holding audit area (VHAA) for the deceased persons and human remains  a property and evidence audit area

Scene evidence recovery group

The SERM will manage all actions undertaken during the retrieval and investigation stage of the operation at the scene until the scene is officially handed over to the local authority, normally at the recovery phase.
The SERM will develop and implement a coordinated plan to retrieve deceased persons, human remains, property and evidence from the scene. These exhibits will then be examined by appropriate investigating agencies. To achieve these outcomes, the SERM will form and chair a scene evidence recovery group consisting of people with a role to play in recovering the deceased, human remains, property and evidence from the scene (see diagram of a scene evidence recovery group).

Scene evidence recovery group members

This group may include:
 scene evidence recovery manager (SERM)  victim recovery team leader
 property recovery team leader  operational scene commander  police search adviser
 police forensic adviser or crime scene manager  health and safety coordinator
 Health and Safety Executive (HSE) adviser  fire and rescue service scene commander
 a representative of other statutory investigative agencies, for example, the air accident investigation branch (AAIB), marine accident investigation branch (MAIB) and rail accident investigation branch (RAIB)
 Logistics coordinator
 Environment Agency representative
 local authority representative, for example an emergency planning officer, building control inspector or environmental health officer
 specialist contractors, landowner(s) or property owner(s) or their representative Below is an example of a command structure for the retrieval and investigation phase. A diagram of an example command structure for the retrieval and investigation phase
The scene evidence recovery manager (SERM) will manage all actions undertaken during the retrieval and investigation stage of the operation at the scene on behalf of the SIM and SIO. Initially, the SERM will establish a scene evidence recovery group. This group will be responsible for delivering the outcomes required to clear the site of the incident in line with strategies set in relation to the investigation and identification process.

Strategic coordination group

The SCG has overall responsibility for the multi-agency management of the emergency. For further information, see civil contingencies APP.

Tactical coordination group

The tactical commanders of all responding agencies should come together to form a tactical coordination group (TCG). The TCG should meet at an appropriate mutually agreed location as soon as practicable. For further information, see civil contingencies APP.

Mass fatality coordination group

The mass fatality coordination group (MFCG) coordinates the DVI process on behalf of the gold commander and HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal It allows sensitive matters regarding the deceased to be discussed outside the SCG.
Normally the MFCG will be chaired by HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal or the SIM. Normally the MFCG will be chaired by HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal or the SIM. For further information see MFCG aide memoire.
Mass fatalities coordination group members

Members of the MFCG can include:
 HM Coroner or Procurator Fiscal
 senior identification manager (SIM)  senior investigating officer (SIO)
 scene evidence recovery manager (SERM)  supervising or lead pathologist
 police mortuary operations coordinator (PMOC)  family liaison coordinator (FLC)
 a local authority representative with delegated powers around finance  a legal team representative
 a representative of the Human Tissue Authority (HTA)
 any other designated individual in relation to the HTA licence  key staff from planning, resourcing and logistics teams
Please note this list is not exhaustive and the MFCG group members will be dependent upon the incident and changing circumstances.
See here for example aide memoire.

Casualty bureau incident room

The Casualty Bureau (CB) Incident Room is the central point where all information related to an incident is received, collated and assessed. This includes information about people believed to be involved in the incident.
The CB Incident Room provides resources and a process to manage high-volume data, to identify key or critical information at the earliest opportunity. The CB Incident Room also provides a telephone line for the public to report people involved in an incident, as well as an online reporting facility, Major Incident Public Portal (MIPP).
This website can be used by the public to directly report information. It can also be used by police and other partner agencies to report people involved using the Investigative Triage Form (ITF), which is password- protected and predefined by the CB Manager.
A CB Incident Room is likely to be activated when there is a significant demand from the public for information that exceeds normal force call-handling capabilities. It may also be activated by the SIM to receive a significant volume of information from the public (using the ITF).
All police regions are required to have a CB Incident Room capability. All police forces can provide additional CB call-handling resources to support any other CB Incident Room upon a mutual aid request. All information received via the CB Incident Room telephone numbers and online via MIPP is recorded into a secure incident cloud-based account. This ensures that all information is collated in the same place.
When the CB Incident Room is activated for a mass fatality incident, it manages all information in relation to the recovery, reconciliation, identification and repatriation of victims, as well as criminal investigation.
For further information see Casualty Bureau Manager Suggested Initial Actions. For more information see the command, control and coordination section of the APP. Back to Disaster victim identification overview
Tags

Civil emergencies


Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Emergency Powers Act 1964. (See end of Document for details)







Emergency Powers Act 1964
1964 CHAPTER 38

An Act to amend the Emergency Powers Act 1920 and make permanent the Defence (Armed Forces) Regulations 1939.	[10th June 1964]


Amendment of s. 1(1) of Emergency Powers Act 1920.
F1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Defence (Armed Forces) Regulations 1939 made permanent.
The Defence (Armed Forces) Regulations 1939 in the form set out in Part C of Schedule 2 to the M1Emergency Laws (Repeal) Act 1959 (which regulations enable the temporary employment in agricultural work or in other work, being urgent work of national importance, of members of the armed forces of the Crown to be authorised) shall become permanent.


Short title and extent.
This Act may be cited as the Emergency Powers Act 1964.
Section 1 of this Act shall not extend to Northern Ireland.
2	Emergency Powers Act 1964 (c. 38)
Document Generated: 2025-03-21



Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Emergency Workers (Obstruction) Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)







Emergency Workers (Obstruction) Act 2006
2006 CHAPTER 39

An Act to make it an offence to obstruct or hinder persons who provide emergency services; and for connected purposes.	[8th November 2006]
BE IT ENACTED by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:—



1	Obstructing or hindering certain emergency workers responding to emergency circumstances
A person who without reasonable excuse obstructs or hinders another while that other person is, in a capacity mentioned in subsection (2) below, responding to emergency circumstances, commits an offence.
The capacity referred to in subsection (1) above is—
that of a person employed by a fire and rescue authority in England and Wales;
[F1(aa) that of a Ministry of Defence fire-fighter (as defined in section 16 of the Armed Forces Act 2016);]
in relation to England and Wales, that of a person (other than a person falling within paragraph (a) [F2or (aa)]) whose duties as an employee or as a servant of the Crown involve—
extinguishing fires; or
protecting life and property in the event of a fire;
that of a person employed by a relevant NHS body in the provision of ambulance services (including air ambulance services), or of a person providing such services pursuant to arrangements made by, or at the request of, a relevant NHS body;
2	Emergency Workers (Obstruction) Act 2006 (c. 39)
Document Generated: 2024-05-08
Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Emergency Workers (Obstruction) Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)






that of a person providing services for the transport of organs, blood, equipment or personnel pursuant to arrangements made by, or at the request of, a relevant NHS body;
that of a member of Her Majesty's Coastguard;
that of a member of the crew of a vessel operated by—
the Royal National Lifeboat Institution, or
any other person or organisation operating a vessel for the purpose of providing a rescue service,
or a person who musters the crew of such a vessel or attends to its launch or recovery.
For the purposes of this section and section 2 of this Act, a person is responding to emergency circumstances if the person—
is going anywhere for the purpose of dealing with emergency circumstances occurring there; or
is dealing with emergency circumstances or preparing to do so.
For the purposes of this Act, circumstances are “emergency” circumstances if they are present or imminent and—
are causing or are likely to cause—
serious injury to or the serious illness (including mental illness) of a person;
serious harm to the environment (including the life and health of plants and animals);
serious harm to any building or other property; or
a worsening of any such injury, illness or harm; or
are likely to cause the death of a person.
In subsection (2) above “relevant NHS body” means—
in relation to England and Wales,[F3the Secretary of State in the exercise of public health functions, a local authority in the exercise of public health functions, [F4NHS England], [F5an integrated care board,]] an NHS foundation trust, National Health Service trust, Special Health AuthorityF6... or Local Health Board;
in relation to Northern Ireland, a [F7Health and Social Care trust].
[F8(6) In subsection (5)(a) above “public health functions”—
in relation to the Secretary of State, has the same meaning as in section 1H(5)
(a) of the National Health Service Act 2006;
in relation to a local authority, has the same meaning as in section 1H(5)(b) of that Act.]

Emergency Workers (Obstruction) Act 2006 (c. 39)	3
Document Generated: 2024-05-08
Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Emergency Workers (Obstruction) Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)





Obstructing or hindering persons assisting emergency workers
A person who without reasonable excuse obstructs or hinders another in the circumstances described in subsection (2) below commits an offence.
Those circumstances are where the person being obstructed or hindered is assisting another while that other person is, in a capacity mentioned in section 1(2) of this Act, responding to emergency circumstances.


Provisions supplementary to sections 1 and 2
A person may be convicted of the offence under section 1 or 2 of this Act notwithstanding that it is—
effected by means other than physical means; or
effected by action directed only at any vehicle, vessel, apparatus, equipment or other thing or any animal used or to be used by a person referred to in that section.
For the purposes of sections 1 and 2 of this Act, circumstances to which a person is responding are to be taken to be emergency circumstances if the person believes and has reasonable grounds for believing they are or may be emergency circumstances.


Penalties
A person guilty of an offence under this Act is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale.
Emergency Workers (Obstruction) Act 2006 (c. 39)
Document Generated: 2024-05-08
Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Emergency Workers (Obstruction) Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)






Power to modify
The Secretary of State may by order modify this Act so as to add or remove a person or description of person to or from section 1(2) of this Act; and may make such provision connected with that modification as he thinks fit.
The Secretary of State shall not make an order under subsection (1) above unless it appears to him that the person to be added (or, as the case may be, each person of the description to be added) is one whose functions or activities are such that the person is likely, in the course of carrying them out, to have to deal with emergency circumstances.
Before making an order under subsection (1) above which relates to Wales the Secretary of State must consult the National Assembly for Wales.
The Secretary of State may not make an order under subsection (1) above which relates to Northern Ireland without the consent of any Northern Ireland department with responsibility for the emergency circumstances to which the persons being added or removed, or persons of the description being added or removed, respond.
An order under subsection (1) above is to be made by statutory instrument.
No such order shall be made unless a draft of it has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.


Repeals
Section 44(3) and (4) of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004 (c. 21) shall cease to have effect.


Short title, commencement and extent
This Act may be cited as the Emergency Workers (Obstruction) Act 2006.
This Act (except this section) comes into force on such day as the Secretary of State may, by order made by statutory instrument, appoint and different days may be so appointed for different purposes.
This Act extends to England and Wales and Northern Ireland.
Emergency Workers (Obstruction) Act 2006 (c. 39)	5
Document Generated: 2024-05-08
Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Emergency Workers (Obstruction) Act 2006. (See end of Document for details)




[F9(4) The following extend to Scotland—
sections 1 to 4 so far as they relate to obstructing or hindering a Ministry of Defence fire-fighter or a person assisting such a fire-fighter, and
this section.]

6	Emergency Workers (Obstruction) Act 2006 (c. 39)
Document Generated: 2024-05-08









Moving beyond “Best Practice”: Experiences in Police Reform and a Call for Evidence to Reduce Officer- Involved Shootings


By
ROBIN S. ENgEL, HANNAH D. McMANuS,
and gABRIELLE T. ISAzA
In post-Ferguson America, police departments are being challenged to implement evidence-based changes in policies and training to reduce fatal police-citizen encounters. Of the litany of recommendations believed to reduce police shootings, five have garnered wide- spread support: body-worn cameras, de-escalation training, implicit bias training, early intervention sys- tems, and civilian oversight. These highly endorsed interventions, however, are not supported by a strong body of empirical evidence that demonstrates their effectiveness. guided by the available research on evidence-based policing and informed by the firsthand experience of one of the authors in implementing departmental reforms that followed the fatal shooting of a civilian by an officer, this article highlights promis- ing reform strategies and opportunities to build the evidence base for effective use-of-force reforms. We call upon police executives to engage in evidence-based policing by scientifically testing interventions, and we call on academics to engage in rapid research responses for critical issues in policing.

Keywords: evidence-based policing; police shootings; use of force; police reform


n July 19, 2015, Samuel DuBose was stopped by university of Cincinnati Police Division (uCPD) Officer Raymond Tensing approximately 0.5 mile south of the university of Cincinnati (uC) campus for a minor equip- ment violation (missing front license plate, a traffic violation in the State of Ohio). After a brief exchange, DuBose, an unarmed 43-year- old black male, was shot and killed by Officer

Robin S. Engel is director of the IACP/UC Center for Police Research and Policy and a professor of criminal justice at the University of Cincinnati. She recently served as vice president for safety and reform at the University of Cincinnati. Her work includes establish- ing academic-practitioner partnerships and promoting evidence-based practices in policing, with empirical assessments of police behavior and evaluations of crime reduction strategies.

Correspondence: robin.engel@uc.edu
DOI: 10.1177/0002716219889328


146	ANNALS, AAPSS, 687, January 2020
MOvINg BEyOND “BEST PRACTICE”	147

Tensing, a 25-year-old white male. The incident was captured on Tensing’s depart- ment-issued body-worn camera (BWC), but still the circumstances surrounding the shooting were widely debated within the Cincinnati community, sparking protests, independent investigations, civil litigation, and criminal trials. An inde- pendent consulting firm commissioned by the university to perform an external review of the incident found that the shooting was “entirely preventable” and concluded it was the officer’s “critical errors in judgment that created an elevated risk of a serious or fatal bodily injury” (Kroll 2015, 46). Ten days after the incident, Tensing was indicted by the Hamilton County Prosecutor’s Office for murder. His first criminal trial concluded in November 2015, resulting in a hung jury, while a second trial in June 2017 garnered the same outcome. Concerns regarding racial bias overshadowed the criminal proceedings and flowed into the public discourse. In July 2017, the county prosecutor announced a third trial would not be con- ducted, and the charges against the defendant were dropped.1
This tragic incident and its aftermath sent shockwaves through the Cincinnati
community, a city with a troubled history of racial tension and damaged police- community relations (Eck and Rothman 2006); however, it is far from a unique story in American policing. The fatal DuBose-Tensing encounter in summer 2015 occurred amid a spate of other police-involved deaths of unarmed black males.2 Described by Sherman (2018) as the “Second great Awakening,” the reaction to these high-profile incidents involving the killing of unarmed citizens by American police has included public protests, civil unrest, widespread media attention, and heightened public scrutiny of police.
Notably, the growth in public angst regarding police bias and use of force has been accompanied by rising concerns regarding police officers’ safety. violent incidents, including the murder of five police officers and wounding of nine oth- ers in Dallas, Texas, in July 2016, followed by an ambush attack killing three officers and wounding three more in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, led to national reflection and discussions regarding officer safety. Although overall assaults, inju- ries, and death of officers in the line of duty have continually decreased over the

Hannah D. McManus is a research associate for the IACP/UC Center for Police Research and Policy and a doctoral candidate in the School of Criminal Justice at the University of Cincinnati. Her recent work includes the evaluation of police training, the study of public perceptions of police, and the promotion of evidence-based practice to enhance police officer safety and wellness.

Gabrielle T. Isaza is a research associate for the IACP/UC Center for Police Research and Policy and a doctoral candidate in the School of Criminal Justice at the University of Cincinnati. Her areas of research include police effectiveness; survey design; and evaluations of police training programs, including de-escalation and implicit bias.

NOTE: Ideas and concepts presented within this article were generated in coordination with other research conducted for the IACP / uC Center for Police Research and Policy, funded by Arnold ventures. The information and commentary within this article, however, are from the authors and do not necessarily represent the official positions or policies of Arnold ventures or the International Association of Chiefs of Police.
148	THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMy

last two decades, the number of officers injured or killed through ambush-style attacks has increased in the last 10 years, reaching a peak in 2016 (Federal Bureau of Investigation [FBI] 2019).
Acknowledging the dangers to both citizens and officers embedded in this police-community relations crisis, efforts have intensified to identify “solutions” to reduce the frequency and severity of violent encounters between police and the public. Expert panels, such as the President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing, have convened to explore best practices in policing that “can promote effective crime reduction while building public trust” (2015, 1). Simultaneously, American citizens have organized to demand police reform, including changes regarding officer use of force. These demands have emerged during a time when the applica- tion of evidence-based policy and practice by law enforcement is increasingly expected yet infrequently followed. Indeed, most “best practices” for police reform are not based on a strong body of empirical evidence (see Lum et al. 2016).
In an effort to better inform the discussion regarding “what works” to reduce the frequency and severity of potentially violent police-citizen encounters, this article considers the evidence regarding the effectiveness of routinely recom- mended police reforms, including (1) deployment of BWCs; (2) changes to use- of-force policies and training that emphasize de-escalation; (3) implicit bias training for officers; (4) early intervention (warning) systems; and (5) citizen oversight (review) boards. Although each of these interventions has been recom- mended by the President’s Task Force or other policing experts, careful consid- eration of the evidence available demonstrates a patchwork of studies that collectively provide little confidence that these reforms will directly impact police shootings. guided by the available research on police use of force and evidence-based practices and informed by the experience of one of the authors (Engel) in implementing reforms within the uCPD, this article highlights prom- ising strategies, along with the remaining gaps in knowledge and opportunities to build the evidence base for effective use-of-force reform.
We recognize that in the absence of evidence, police executives must still
move forward with recommended best practices. However, we further contend that it is an ethical duty of police officials to combine the implementation of innovative approaches with continuous review and testing to identify ineffective practices and unintended consequences. We articulate the urgent need for researchers to work collaboratively with police executives to generate and dis- seminate knowledge regarding these and other police reform efforts, generating a rapid research response (also see Engel, McManus, and Herold, forthcoming). Lacking this research, it cannot be stated with confidence that the proposed use- of-force reforms can prevent future fatal police-citizen encounters. As such, it is of the utmost importance that our academic and practitioner colleagues, along with local, state, and federal agencies and organizations and the philanthropic community, prioritize research designed to advance rigorous scientific testing of police reform efforts at the local level, including the reduction of fatal police shootings. The safety of our nation’s police officers, and members of the public they serve, hinges on this collective work.
MOvINg BEyOND “BEST PRACTICE”	149

Police use of Force
More than four decades ago, policing scholar Egon Bittner (1974) argued that police are defined by their ability—and duty—to use force. It is the public’s expectation that police use force when necessary that separates policing from all other occupations. It is this ability to use force that shapes all other aspects of police practice. given this distinction, it is surprising that we still know relatively little about how, when, and under what circumstances police officers use force (Engel and Serpas 2017; garner et al. 2018). As of this writing, the best available national databases capturing fatal police-citizen encounters are not compiled by government officials, but by reporters from The Guardian and the Washington Post (Sherman 2018; zimring 2017). Most notable of the findings from these data sources are as follows:
Over half of all fatal police shootings occur in small jurisdictions with fewer than 50,000 residents, and only one-third occur in cities with popu- lations greater than 250,000 residents (Sherman 2018).
There was no firearm present in 44 percent of fatal police shootings (zimring 2017).
When compared to the national population, African Americans are 2.3 times more likely to be killed by police than whites (zimring 2017).
Combined, these quantitative findings support the narratives generated through the sharing and resharing of individual images and videos of police-citizen encounters that have resulted in tragedy. What these figures do not provide, how- ever, is an understanding of the details regarding the individual, situational, envi- ronmental, and organizational factors likely to impact officer’s decision-making during encounters with citizens. Despite this lack of information, zimring (2017) boldly predicts that fatal interactions with police could be cut in half without com- promising officer safety. He bases this prediction, in part, on the large estimated percentage of fatal encounters with police where the suspect does not have a firearm. Referring to these fatal encounters as “unnecessary killings,” zimring and others argue that systematic changes in policing, implemented at the national level, could reduce citizen injury and death (Sherman 2018).
Within a nation that claims approximately eighteen thousand distinct police
organizations with little consistency in training, policies, and practices (Reaves 2011), the prospect of implementing significant police reform systematically is daunting. For police shootings specifically, it is even more challenging to impact individual officer decision-making during potentially violent encounters. Sherman (2018) argues for employing a system-accident framework to drive appropriate policies and research necessary to reduce fatal encounters with police. Similarly, David Klinger (2005, this volume) has renewed his proposal to use Perrow’s (1984) normal accidents framework to guide understanding of violent police- citizen encounters. Further, zimring (this volume) argues that creating a statisti- cal and research branch within the federal government is likely the only way to implement needed police reforms designed to reduce police killings.
150	THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMy

In contrast to the apparent logic of these recommendations, our premise is that the decentralized nature of policing in the united States will make many efforts to reduce officer shootings at the federal and state levels ineffective. Even when mandated or otherwise influenced by oversight at the state or federal lev- els, meaningful changes in police practice must be implemented and embraced at the local level. Citizens intuitively recognize this. Although there is often pres- sure placed on state and federal officials to “do something” about police use of force, the majority of citizen demands involve changes directly targeted at indi- vidual police agencies. Therefore, much of the movement in police reform is occurring at the local level, agency by agency. In this context, this article consid- ers the role of evidence-based policing (EBP) in reducing officer shootings at the local level by presenting the most common calls for change, reviewing the evi- dence-base supporting these recommendations, and considering the experience of the university of Cincinnati Police Division in the implementation of evi- dence-based police use-of-force reform.

The Role of Evidence-Based Policing in Reform
At its core, EBP is a movement encouraging the use of research to guide practice and evaluate practitioners (Sherman 1998). Seeking to progress beyond the use of anecdotal or experiential evidence alone, EBP suggests that police decision-making on “what works” to address specific problems should be guided by objective facts produced from scientific research. Further, EBP encourages police to embed sci- ence within their respective agencies through the evaluation of current policies and practices (Sherman 1998, 2013). Police agencies that use and generate research to guide strategic and tactical decision-making should experience greater success in identifying cost-effective approaches (Weisburd and Neyroud 2011).
The movement toward EBP has been a gradual one, gaining significant trac- tion in the last 20 years due to the increased availability and application of research and innovative technologies in policing (Lum, Koper, and Telep 2011; Sherman 2013). Many scholars, practitioners, and policy-makers now adopt the view that EBP is critical for successful reform across a number of outcomes, including reducing police use of lethal force (Telep 2016). However, our review of existing evidence on five commonly recommended police reforms provides a limited picture on “what works” in addressing police use of force, particularly lethal force, at the local level (also see Lum et al. 2016).
Regardless of the availability of scientific evidence to support critical decisions, police administrators are responsible for crisis management. Furthermore, police administrators are often pressed through public and political demands to make significant changes to policies and training immediately following critical incidents, leading to the perception that police accountability is best measured by the speed of response. Police executives are acutely aware that their jobs often hinge on how they respond to community pressure within the first few days following a critical incident. Within this time constraint, the careful planning of an evidence-based
MOvINg BEyOND “BEST PRACTICE”	151

response is often unrealistic. Therefore, although the clamor for police reform has been pervasive, it also appears that these reform efforts are largely divorced from the expectation that these interventions be evidence-based.


Reform within the university of Cincinnati Police Division
The uCPD is a fully empowered law enforcement agency with a complement of seventy-two sworn officers that provides all public safety services for the uC com- munity (seventy thousand students and employees), including primary jurisdiction on all university-owned and operated buildings. Based on a Memorandum of understanding with the City of Cincinnati, uCPD also patrols and conducts police activities in city neighborhoods in the one-mile corridor surrounding the uC uptown campus. The uCPD has approximately five hundred or fewer Part I crime incidents reported on campus each year, which are largely driven by reports of theft/larceny (Isaza et al. 2017).3 In general, the uCPD does not record many instances of police use of force in any given year. Between January 2017 and December 2018, for example, the agency reported only four use-of-force incidents, one of which included a display of force only (Exiger 2019). Overall, the uCPD is representative of many midsize police agencies that have few critical incidents. However, the uCPD’s experience with the fatal DuBose-Tensing encounter dem- onstrates the magnitude of a single police-citizen interaction gone terribly wrong. In the aftermath of the shooting, immediate changes in police executive lead- ership were made at the university. The lead author of this article (Engel) was appointed to the newly created position of vice president for safety and reform to develop and implement an immediate police reform effort. Two weeks later, she added executive leadership positions to her team, including a director of public safety (with operational oversight of the uCPD) and director of police community relations. She led her team in the design and implementation of over three years of systematic reforms, including top-to-bottom organizational changes in policies, procedures, training, and accountability systems, along with the completion of voluntary external monitorship.4 Although the reform efforts implemented by this team were intended to be evidence-based, the immediacy of implementation, as well as the general lack of evidence available to inform organizational change (as articulated below), characterizes these efforts more appropriately as “best practices.” The selection and implementation of reform strategies and the evidence-base surrounding the effectiveness of these efforts is
discussed in greater detail below.


The Evidence Base for Agency-Level Solutions to Reduce Police Shootings
Following the shooting of Samuel DuBose, the political and public demands for change in Cincinnati were highly predictable, echoing the approaches being
152	THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMy

requested and implemented across the country to reduce fatal police encounters and rebuild community trust. First, although uCPD officers were already equipped with BWCs, calls for more transparency within the police department reverberated. Second, uCPD’s use-of-force policy and training were heavily scrutinized and, ultimately, dramatically changed to incorporate de-escalation tactics. Third, direct calls for implicit bias training for officers were made and answered with the rapid delivery of the leading curriculum in the field. Additionally, an early intervention system—designed to identify potentially prob- lematic officers prior to a critical incident—was hastily implemented. Finally, the long and challenging task of rebuilding public trust through increased commu- nity engagement and citizen oversight began. Each of these approaches—(1) BWCs, (2) de-escalation training, (3) implicit bias training, (4) early intervention systems, and (5) civilian oversight—are the most typical and frequently called for reform efforts after a controversial shooting. As such, many might be surprised to learn that the body of evidence supporting the effectiveness of most of these initiatives is generally thin and, in some cases, nearly nonexistent. The remaining sections of this article outline the research evidence for each of the five initiatives outlined above, highlighting the uCPD’s experience in the implementation of use-of-force reforms. Implications for evidence-based use-of-force reform are discussed, and critical next steps for effective change are highlighted.

Body-worn cameras
Calls for police to adopt BWCs have proliferated in recent years across the united States. A recent study using a nationally representative sample of police agencies estimated that one-third of American law enforcement agencies cur- rently deploy BWCs to some or all of their officers, and an additional 50 percent of agencies have immediate plans to deploy them (Police Executive Research Forum 2018). These devices are theorized to impact officer behavior through their deterrent effect on unconstitutional interactions with the public, particu- larly for excessive use of force (Ariel, Farrar, and Sutherland 2015). There is an abundance of research suggesting that when people know they are being observed, they alter their behavior to better adhere to social norms (Diener and Wallbom 1976). Theory follows, then, that when officers know they are being recorded, they will be more likely to behave in a constitutional manner. Despite this assumption, a majority (over 90 percent) of surveyed police agencies indicate that the primary reason for their adoption of BWCs is to improve community trust by promoting accountability, transparency, and legitimacy (Police Executive Research Forum 2018), not necessarily to change police behavior.
Research on BWCs has increased exponentially in recent years, spurred on, in
part, by significant interest and funding from the philanthropic community. This research has examined multiple outcomes with varying units of analysis, includ- ing the attitudes and behavior of officers and citizens, police investigations, and organizational effects (Lum et al. 2019). A recent comprehensive review of research on BWCs, conducted by Lum and colleagues (2019), identified seventy studies, sixteen of which specifically measured officers’ reported use of force as
MOvINg BEyOND “BEST PRACTICE”	153

a dependent variable. These studies report inconsistent findings concerning the impact of BWCs on officers’ use of force. Specifically, multiple experimental studies indicate that officers wearing cameras used significantly less force com- pared to those who did not wear cameras. yet several other studies using experi- mental and quasi-experimental designs found no statistical differences among officers wearing cameras and those who do not.
One particular study provides important insight regarding these mixed find- ings. Ariel and colleagues (2016) conducted a subgroup analysis of ten rand- omized control trials examining BWCs to better understand why BWCs did not statistically impact officers’ use of force in a single direction. They conclude that officers are more likely to use higher levels of force when turning BWCs on dur- ing a citizen encounter is left to their discretion. While this finding offers an interesting nuance related to the impact of BWCs on use of force, few research studies have tracked the activation of cameras. Therefore, it is unclear whether these findings would be replicated elsewhere (Lum et al. 2019).
Collectively, this research suggests that simply outfitting officers with BWCs is insufficient to significantly reduce police use of force. Rather, it is likely that deployment of the cameras needs to be coupled with strong policies and super- visory oversight to achieve maximum benefits in reducing use of force. It also remains unclear what impact, if any, BWCs could expect to have on reducing fatal police encounters, which are significantly less likely than other uses of force. Indeed, in the case of the uCPD, the introduction of BWCs did not decrease officers’ use of force or the likelihood of a fatal police-citizen encounter. It did, however, capture video of the fatal police-citizen encounter (Noble 2015). Rather than bring clarity to that incident, the video footage demonstrated that citizens (and competing experts) could watch the same images yet have significantly dif- ferent interpretations regarding the legitimacy and legality of the use of force. Indeed, Tensing’s two separate murder trials resulted in hung jury decisions where the primary piece of evidence was the body camera footage (grasha 2017).

Use-of-force/de-escalation policies and training
A primary recommendation for police reform has been the incorporation of use-of-force/de-escalation policies and training within law enforcement. Many law enforcement leaders supporting the adoption of de-escalation training espouse that these techniques can help to resolve police-citizen encounters with less frequent and severe uses of force and, thereby, also increase officer safety. Notably, de-escalation tactics and training received an endorsement from the President’s Task Force; and more recently, the National Consensus Policy on use of Force (International Association of Chiefs of Police 2017, 3) encouraged offic- ers to use de-escalation techniques “whenever possible or appropriate before resorting to force.”
De-escalation policies and training are not without critics, however, with a growing number voicing serious concerns about perceived risks to officer safety (Blake 2017; Landers 2017; Williams 2015). Several tactics common in de-escalation training run counter to more traditional operational responses
154	THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMy

in policing. Critics argue that changes in the traditional approach could increase the risk of officer injury. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, Landers (2017) argues that “by sending officers to de-escalation training courses, chiefs and sheriffs have risked these men and women becoming hesitant about using force”; and furthermore that “while [de-escalation] concepts are practical and effective in some situations, they are useless and even dangerous in others.” Concerns regarding officer safety run deep within police organizational cultures, and some trainers have resorted to avoiding the use of the word de-escalation altogether in training sessions, rather describing these techniques as opportuni- ties to defuse situations.
In many ways, these concerns are amplified by the ambiguity of de-escalation policies and training. Specifically, there is no uniformly accepted definition of de-escalation within the policing field. Most recommendations, including from the President’s Task Force, neglect to provide a specific definition, or even a general description, of de-escalation. As such, de-escalation has become a catch- all of sorts, symbolizing a different but perhaps more progressive policing approach for handling potential use-of-force encounters. A systematic review of literature across disciplines finds de-escalation to typically refer to a process or tactics used to prevent, reduce, or manage behaviors associated with conflict— including verbal or physical agitation, aggression, violence, or similar behaviors— during an interaction between two or more individuals (for review, see Engel, McManus, and Herold, forthcoming).
Similar to most other police training curricula, de-escalation training has not been subjected to rigorous scientific testing (National Research Council 2004; Lum at el. 2016; Skogan, van Craen, and Hennessy 2015). As a result, little is known about the development, delivery, and impact of police de-escalation train- ing. To assess this gap in knowledge, Engel, McManus, and Herold (forthcoming) conducted a multidisciplinary systematic review, identifying only a limited num- ber of de-escalation training evaluations appearing across professions (n = 64), and no evaluations within the realm of policing or criminal justice were identified. The findings from studies outside of policing provide some insight on the attitudi- nal (i.e., self-reported) and behavioral effects that de-escalation training could have on officer use-of-force outcomes. Specifically, studies examining self- reported outcomes suggest that de-escalation training in other professions has led to favorable effects on the attitudes, perceptions, and self-reported experiences and behaviors of trained individuals. The impact of de-escalation training on behavioral outcomes, however, has not been established. Although the majority of the studies report favorable effects of de-escalation training (e.g., reduction in number and severity of violent incidents, increased application in use of de-esca- lation techniques), there were also findings that suggest de-escalation training has no effect and, in some cases, unfavorable effects on use-of-force outcomes.
Confidence in the validity and generalizability of these findings is threatened by several factors, including the (1) substantial variation across de-escalation training programs under examination; (2) reliance on pretest/posttest research designs with no comparison groups; (3) heavy focus on self-reported, rather than  behavioral,  outcomes;  and  (4)  emphasis  on  short-term  outcomes
MOvINg BEyOND “BEST PRACTICE”	155

(Engel et al., forthcoming). As a result, recommendations for de-escalation, as well as larger conversations on the safety and well-being of police officers and the individuals they encounter, rely heavily on anecdotal evidence and untested propositions about best practice. Nevertheless, a majority of police agencies in large cities across the country are currently training officers in de-escalation tech- niques, as this is one of the most common demands from community activists and political officials (CBS News 2019). Although more rigorous research studies of de-escalation training curriculums for police are under way (e.g., Engel et al. 2019; McLean et al., this volume; White and Pooley 2018), the current state of evidence leaves many questions related to the effectiveness of de-escalation poli- cies and training unanswered.
Based on the limited evidence from other disciplines, anecdotal accounts,
reviews of practice in other agencies, experts’ advice, and our best judgments, the uCPD executive team engaged in a comprehensive and innovative overhaul of all use-of-force policies, procedures, and training. The underlying principle of the sanctity of life—respecting the value of every human life—along with the implementation of a robust training and accountability structure necessary to support the use of de-escalation tactics were the primary focus of the uCPD team (Police Executive Research Forum 2016). While the scientific evidence regarding the likelihood of reducing use of force based on these changes was quite limited, a robust accountability structure was embedded, and several evalu- ation opportunities to build our own body of evidence were undertaken. For example, when officers were trained in use of force and de-escalation, a series of surveys (pre, post, and follow-up) were created and administered to officers to identify changes in officers’ attitudes, knowledge, and self-reported behaviors. These survey instruments are now being used by other agencies looking to exam- ine the impact of similar de-escalation trainings (see Engel et al. 2019). Coupled with strong research designs (e.g., randomized controlled trials) for training delivery, this evidence base will quickly grow, and soon critical information regarding the impact of de-escalation training on officer use of force will be available.

Implicit bias training
Racial and ethnic disparities in policing practices—including vehicle and pedestrian stops, citations, searches, arrests, and use of force—have been noted for decades. The reasons for these disparities, however, are multifaceted, and researchers have traditionally struggled to disentangle critical factors to deter- mine if disparities are the result of discrimination (Engel and Swartz 2014). Nevertheless, based on the supposition that differences in policing outcomes are the result of individual police bias or discrimination, the operational response to reduce racial disparities has consistently involved the provision of additional training for officers. For example, racial sensitivity training was adopted in the 1980s and 1990s, followed by antiracial profiling training in the 2000s, and bias- free policing in the early 2010s. The most recent training proposed to address the
156	THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMy

problems associated with racial/ethnic disparities in policing—including dispari- ties in use of force—is implicit bias training (Fridell 2017; Nix et al. 2017).
Implicit bias refers to an unconscious prejudice that people may develop due to differential life experiences (Devine 1989). In contrast to explicit bias, which is akin to traditional “racism,” all humans are subject to some form of unconscious bias that may impact perceptions and behaviors, resulting in discriminatory decision- making (Dovidio, Kawakami, and gaertner 2002). Due to the high rates of minor- ity citizen contact with police, the impact of implicit bias in policing could be especially profound. Indeed, the existence of implicit bias has been demonstrated in research using police as subjects (Payne 2001).
The President’s Task Force (2015) specifically acknowledged implicit bias and its role in producing disparities in outcomes, calling for police training to reduce the impact of such biases. Based upon a large body of psychological research demonstrating that biases can be managed (see Monteith, Arthur, and Flynn 2010; Pettigrew and Tropp 2005), interventions typically begin by educating indi- viduals regarding the existence of implicit bias and, subsequently, teaching vari- ous skills to reduce and manage these biases (Fridell 2017). A meta-analysis of nearly five hundred studies identified that implicit bias is malleable (albeit with relatively weak effects). However, changes in implicit bias measures may not necessarily translate into changes to explicit bias or in behavior (Forscher et al. 2018; also see Atewologun, Cornish, and Tresh 2018). Specifically, Forscher and colleagues (2018) conclude that although interventions to change implicit bias may not consistently change behavior, some procedures for change are more effective than others. Others conclude that an important key is to not only raise awareness of implicit biases but to complement trainings with strategies to reduce and manage biases (Atewologun, Cornish, and Tresh 2018).
Of concern, some research has suggested that there may be unintended con-
sequences of implicit bias training, including increases in the expression of bias. For example, research has identified a “rebound effect,” which occurs when individuals attempt to suppress stereotypical thoughts. The act of suppression may cause the stereotypical thoughts to later reappear with even greater insist- ence had they not been suppressed (Macrae et al. 1994). Other research has suggested that trainings to increase awareness of stereotypes may also normalize stereotyping, thereby undermining the desired effect of the training (Duguid and Thomas-Hunt 2015). It is unknown how these potential negative consequences may impact implicit bias training for law enforcement.
Collectively, this research presents a mixed picture regarding the impact of implicit bias training on changes in behavior. And despite the accumulating evi- dence from other disciplines, there remains a critical need to examine implicit bias training for police, as reviews have found no experimental evaluations of implicit bias training for police officers that have been completed (Mitchell and James 2018). In short, agencies across the country are training officers in implicit bias without evidence that this training is effective. For most police executives, however, the cost-benefit analysis for providing implicit bias training may hinge on whether they perceive that their agency will receive a boost in community trust and improve police-community relations, rather than any expected changes
MOvINg BEyOND “BEST PRACTICE”	157

in police officers’ attitudes and behaviors due to the training. For example, despite being unaware of its likely impact or effectiveness, within three months of the uCPD officer-involved shooting, all uCPD officers were trained in implicit bias, and a special session was conducted with community members in an attempt to both educate and rebuild trust (Jones 2015). The impact of this training was never formally assessed within the uCPD. However, recognizing the lack of evidence regarding the impact of implicit bias training, the lead author of this article secured funding and is overseeing a larger research team conducting a randomized control trial evaluation of implicit bias training with the New york City Police Department. Findings are scheduled for release in spring 2020. given the popularity of implicit bias training within police agencies across the united States, replication studies could and should be generated.

Early intervention systems
Another frequently mentioned opportunity for changing officer behavior is the implementation of early intervention systems (EIS), also referred to as early warning systems. EIS are data-driven administrative systems used to detect officer misconduct. The goal of EIS is to identify officers whose performance includes a pattern of undesirable behavior and to implement corrective interven- tions quickly. By monitoring indicators of problematic behavior (e.g., citizen complaints, use of force, high-speed pursuits), police administrators may be able to identify officers at risk of future misconduct and intervene before that miscon- duct occurs (Worden et al. 2013). EIS generally consist of four components: performance indicators, procedures for officer identification, intervention, and postintervention monitoring. Typically framed as a nonpunitive approach, these systems often operate external to a law enforcement agency’s disciplinary pro- cesses, providing the opportunity for officer retraining, counseling, or other interventions (Worden et al. 2018).
The use of EIS spread rapidly across the landscape of American law enforce-
ment in the 1990s and 2000s. The proliferation of these systems was supported, in particular, by the inclusion of recommendations for EIS in consent decrees developed by the u.S. Department of Justice as part of their investigations of the “pattern or practice” of citizen rights violations within police agencies (Walker 2003). By 2007, 40 percent of agencies serving populations of fifty thousand or more reported having implemented an EIS within their agency (Worden et al. 2018). Among many, EIS are now considered a “best practice” for police account- ability, particularly regarding officer use of force (Harmon 2009; Walker 2003). The use of EIS is not without criticism, however. The ability of systems to accu- rately identify problematic officers is a primary concern. Though law enforce- ment agencies have begun to incorporate secondary screening measures (e.g., supervisory review) to bolster the review and selection of “problem” officers, the process for identification remains an imperfect science (Worden et al. 2018).
Furthermore, despite the “best practice” label, EIS have not been a common
subject of evaluation. A recent review of EIS evaluations (Worden et al. 2018) identified only six evaluations appearing in four research studies examining the
158	THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMy

impact of agencies’ EIS interventions on citizen complaints against officers, officer use of force, and officer arrest activity. Due to agency specificity in the structure of EIS components, including the types of indicators used and the nature of interven- tions, it has been suggested that each evaluation is best defined as a case study (Worden et al. 2013). As a whole, these six case studies report positive findings, suggesting that EIS interventions may reduce the likelihood of future complaints against officers and subsequent uses of force. However, our confidence in the accu- racy and generalization of these findings is limited by the considerable threats to internal validity within each study (Worden et al. 2018). Further doubt is cast on the effectiveness of EIS interventions because the most rigorous evaluation pro- vides the least favorable results (see Worden et al. 2013). Overall, the evidence supporting the use of EIS as a mechanism to decrease officer use of force, and in particular officer-involved shootings, is not strong. The limited number of evalua- tions, combined with weak research designs, and the limited scope of the outcomes examined leaves many questions surrounding the positive effects, as well as the potential unintended consequences, of EIS interventions.
The uCPD was already in the process of implementing an EIS when the
officer-involved shooting occurred. The purchased software was quickly inte- grated into the records management system, and the use of the EIS was publicly announced. However, inherent issues within the tracking system (e.g., setting appropriate thresholds to identify outliers within a small agency) presented con- tinuous challenges for effectiveness. Likewise, integrating the EIS into a more comprehensive accountability and oversight strategy within the uCPD became an overarching goal. The impact of this specific reform, however, has not been adequately studied, as the small number of uCPD officers assigned to similar shifts and tasks creates a challenge for identifying outliers and determining impact based on statistical significance. What is measured and tracked, however, is the use of the system by supervisors to identify subordinate behavior that is potentially problematic.

Civilian oversight
A final popular call to reduce officer killings includes multiple forms of com- munity engagement, including citizen oversight of the police. For example, the President’s Task Force (2015) highlights the use of civilian oversight mechanisms and specifically recommends that incidents involving suspect death or officer- involved shootings be subject to external oversight, including external review boards and serious incident review boards. The President’s Task Force suggests that the purpose of these boards is to “identify any administrative, supervisory, training, tactical, or policy issues that need to be addressed” (2015, 88). From a broader perspective, these oversight mechanisms are viewed to provide an important alternative to “police investigating complaints against police” and are typically recommended to increase police transparency and accountability, as well as help to build trust and perceptions of police legitimacy within the com- munity (Briggs 2017, 146).
MOvINg BEyOND “BEST PRACTICE”	159

Research on the prevalence of civilian oversight, particularly in the form of civilian review boards, suggests oversight is fairly common among large police agencies, with approximately 80 percent of the fifty largest u.S. police agencies incorporating such oversight mechanisms (Lum et al. 2016), but much less com- mon in mid- to small-size agencies, with estimates of fewer than 150 departments nationwide that incorporate these oversight mechanisms (De Angelis, Rosenthal, and Buchner 2016). Furthermore, significant variation in the composition and role in oversight processes are observed among the civilian review boards that exist. In many cases, this variation is a function of factors both internal and exter- nal to specific law enforcement agencies (De Angelis, Rosenthal, and Buchner 2016; Ferdik, Rojek, and Alpert 2013).
Despite calls for research (National Research Council 2004; Walker 2001), the
evidence for civilian oversight of police agencies remains limited (Lum et al. 2016). The extreme variability across civilian review boards has proven a difficult hurdle in the examination of the prevalence, effects, and best models for over- sight. Additionally, the question remains of how best to measure the effectiveness of civilian oversight within law enforcement agencies (De Angelis, Rosenthal, and Buchner 2016), although available research studies typically opt to examine rates of sustained complaints. Collectively, this research provides mixed findings regarding the sustained rates of citizen complaints when civilian oversight is pre- sent, with some noting fewer sustained complaints in agencies with some form of civilian oversight (Hickman 2006), while others observe higher rates of sustained complaints when oversight is present (Terrill and Ingram 2015).
In the immediate weeks following the officer-involved shooting in Cincinnati,
the uC executive team established the Community Advisory Council (CAC) to provide community input and guidance regarding reform efforts of the uCPD. Modeled after the Cincinnati City Manager’s Advisory group (MAg), which has been identified as a model for a successful citizen oversight organization (Eck and Rothman 2006; Wasserman 2014), the CAC became a primary mechanism for community input and collaboration. Representatives include uC students, faculty, staff, and alumni; neighborhood community groups; city civic, faith, and business leaders; and law enforcement officials. The varied membership of the CAC was designed to reflect the diverse makeup of the larger Cincinnati com- munity and to promote diversity of thought, ideas, and information exchange. Although the effectiveness of this council was not quantitatively evaluated, quali- tative assessments suggest a profound enhancement of police community rela- tions. The CAC (renamed the Community Compliance Council) is now beginning a new phase of work, including review of the processes followed for all com- plaints against uCPD officers and use-of-force incidents.

Discussion
In response to the recent national crisis in police-community relations sparked by controversial police-involved shootings, police executives in the united States are
160	THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMy

routinely encouraged (and in some cases, mandated) to implement reforms, including deploying BWCs, de-escalation training, implicit bias training, early intervention systems, and civilian oversight. Similar to other recent reviews (e.g., Lum et al. 2016), our examination of the available policing research exposes vast gaps in the collective knowledge regarding the effectiveness of reforms most commonly recommended to reduce officer use of force. As police executives seek to answer calls for reform while meeting expectations of evidence-based practice, there is limited scientific research to support them. yet the pressure is intensify- ing for police executives to rapidly implement changes designed to reduce use- of-force incidents, as the public is eager to move “beyond what is legal and start focusing on what is preventable” (Kindy 2015). These recommended reforms, however, likely do more in the way of “damage control” after a critical incident than actually preventing future fatal police-citizen encounters.
In the immediate aftermath of the fatal shooting of Samuel DuBose, the uC
executive team focused on crisis management, while still seeking to implement evidence-based strategies for long-term reform and sustainability. As protesters gathered and politicians demanded action, we searched for evidence-based solu- tions. What we found, instead, was a collection of best practices—that is, inter- ventions that were supported by anecdotal accounts and experts’ endorsements, but not scientifically validated. While the effectiveness and unintended conse- quences of many of our reform efforts were largely unknown, the immediate nature of police work did not allow time for years of study and debate. ultimately, we selected and implemented interventions based on the limited science availa- ble, along with our best judgments and intuition. Our experience reflects a reality in American policing: changes in policing practice are happening now, and police executives cannot wait for the research field to keep pace. This experience also highlights a reality in policing research: we often fail to adequately test innova- tions in policing practices, and we rarely examine the impact of police training. Even more concerning is the lack of scholarly interest (or perhaps opportunity or ability) to test the effects of interventions designed to directly impact what many have identified as the crucial issue underlying the current policing crisis—officer use of force.
What can be done? To facilitate the implementation of evidence-based
approaches in reducing officer-involved shootings and other police reforms, law enforcement agencies must (1) consider findings from available research; and (2) where evidence is lacking, engage in opportunities to fill that void. Our review demonstrates that much of the evidence base surrounding the most popular reform initiatives to reduce officer shootings is limited in scope or nonexistent. Therefore, to advance EBP principles for reform, agencies must monitor the application and impact of training, policies, and procedures designed to reduce police use of force. That is, law enforcement must take responsibility in collecting data to generate evidence on the delivery and effects of their practices (Sherman 2013), moving beyond being consumers of research and instead engaging in the production of knowledge.
This is the approach we used to facilitate the reform efforts within the uCPD.
Our first step was to redesign data collection systems to include the data necessary
MOvINg BEyOND “BEST PRACTICE”	161

to evaluate the impact of our work. Our executive team modified existing data col- lection processes and also mandated the collection of new data. Changes in data collection instruments and practices resulted in new data generated during traffic and pedestrian stops, during the citizen complaint process, through the review and cataloging of BWC footage, during potential use-of-force encounters (e.g., when officers draw their Tasers or firearms but do not deploy them), along with multiple citizen and officer surveys. Each of these data collection changes required an accompanying change in policy, training, and supervisory oversight to ensure that the data were being properly collected and used. The uCPD is now in a better position to test specific propositions about the effectiveness of our own reform efforts. Based on these experiences, we believe that our best chance to reduce officer-involved shootings is working at the local (agency) level by building and sharing capacity for EBP and testing to determine what works.
given the realities of policing, as new policies are introduced and officer training
advances, police executives must take it upon themselves to consider how they might evaluate these practices to understand the effects on their agency, including partnering with researchers when their expertise is needed. unfortunately, with the exception of a handful of progressive police agencies, this type of testing is rare. Nevertheless, as the EBP movement continues to gain acceptance, a tipping point in the profession is likely to occur. Similar to the impact in medicine and other disciplines, the acceptance of evidence-based practices should ultimately propel the proliferation and dissemination of research in policing.
For this change to come to light, however, policing researchers, as a profes- sion, must also do better. We must develop the infrastructure to provide a rapid research response to the most pressing issues in policing. Currently, our approaches to research are too slow, and the topics selected for examination are too limited. The scientific evaluation of training and technical assistance within law enforcement must be recognized as a worthwhile area of research, deserving dedication of time and resources. A faster and more relevant research response will require the establishment of fully collaborative police-academic partnerships (Engel and Henderson 2013; Engel and Whalen 2010). Academics must step away from the ivory tower to take a seat at the table with police agencies and, simultaneously, police agencies must be gracious hosts. In sum, we must work together to build the evidence base necessary to better guide police agencies in their reform efforts. In the specific case of police use of force, facilitating the transition from “best practice” to evidence-based practice through research has the potential to reduce officer and citizen injuries and fatalities. In the collective, such research will fill a tremendous gap in knowledge, informing the field on successful models and overall effectiveness to better direct the national conversa- tions surrounding policing and police reform.


Notes
Prior to the criminal trials, the university settled a civil rights and wrongful death claim with DuBose’s family valued at $5.3 million. Tensing ultimately settled a union grievance with the university for
162	THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMy

wrongful termination and was awarded approximately $345,000 for back pay and legal fees but was not reinstated within the uCPD.
During this time period, other high-profile deaths of unarmed black males by police included Michael Brown (Ferguson, MO, 2014), Tamir Rice (Cleveland, OH, 2014), Eric garner (New york, Ny, 2014), Walter Scott (North Charleston, SC, 2015), Freddie gray (Baltimore, MD, 2015), and Terence Crutcher (Tulsa, OK, 2016), among others.
The uniform Crime Report (uCR) produced by the FBI identifies Part I crime incidents to include eight types of offenses: criminal homicide, rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, larceny-theft, motor vehicle theft, and arson (see uCR Offense Definitions at https://www.ucrdatatool.gov/offenses.cfm).
A comprehensive independent review of all uCPD policies, procedures, practices, and training resulted in a hefty report containing 129 findings and 276 specific recommendations to meet best practices (Exiger 2016). In the final stages of the planned reforms, all but one of these recommendations were deemed as meeting substantial compliance by the external monitor. The lone recommendation not meet- ing substantial compliance was found in partial compliance awaiting an additional assessment period (Exiger 2019).


References
Ariel, Barak, William A. Farrar, and Alex Sutherland. 2015. The effect of police body-worn cameras on use of force and citizens’ complaints against the police: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Quantitative Criminology 31 (3): 509–35.
Ariel, Barak, Alex Sutherland, Darren Henstock, Josh young, Paul Drover, Jayne Sykes, Simon Megicks, and Ryan Henderson. 2016. Report: Increases in police use of force in the presence of body worn cameras are driven by officer discretion: A protocol based subgroup analysis of ten randomized experiments. Journal of Experimental Criminology 12 (3): 453–63.
Atewologun, Doyin, Tinu Cornish, and Fatima Tresh. 2018. Unconscious bias training: An assessment of the evidence for effectiveness. Manchester: Equality and Human Rights Commission. Available from www.equalityhumanrights.com.
Bittner, Egon. 1974. Florence Nightingale in pursuit of Willie Sutton: A theory of the police. The Potential for Reform of Criminal Justice 3:17–44.
Blake, David. 3 November 2017. Does de-escalation endanger police officers or save lives? PoliceOne.
Briggs, William. 2017. Police oversight: Civilian oversight boards and lessons learned from our neighbors to the north. Suffolk Transnational Law Review 40 (1): 139–64.
CBS News. 7 August 2019. We asked 155 police departments about their racial bias training. Here’s what they told us. CBS News.
De Angelis, Joseph, Richard Rosenthal, and Brian Buchner. 2016. Civilian oversight of law enforcement: Assessing the evidence. Tucson, Az: National Association for Civilian Oversight of Law Enforcement. Available from www.ncjrs.gov.
Devine, Patricia g. 1989. Stereotypes and prejudice: Their automatic and controlled components. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 56 (1): 5–18.
Diener, Edward, and Mark Wallbom. 1976. Effects of self-awareness on antinormative behavior. Journal of Research in Personality 10 (1): 107–11.
Dovidio, John F., Kerry Kawakami, and Samuel L. gaertner. 2002. Implicit and explicit prejudice and interracial interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 82 (1): 62–68.
Duguid, Michelle M., and Melissa C. Thomas-Hunt. 2015. Condoning stereotypes? How awareness of stereotyping prevalence impacts expression of stereotypes. Journal of Applied Psychology 100 (2): 343–59.
Eck, John E., and Jay Rothman. 2006. Police-community conflict and crime prevention in Cincinnati, Ohio. In Public security and police reform in the Americas, eds. John Bailey and Lucia Dammert, 225–44. Pittsburgh, PA: university of Pittsburgh Press.
Engel, Robin S., Nicholas Corsaro, gabrielle T. Isaza, and Hannah D. McManus. 2019. Proposal for the evaluation of ICAT training for the Louisville Metro Police Department. Submitted to the Louisville Metro Police Department, Louisville, Ky.
MOvINg BEyOND “BEST PRACTICE”	163

Engel, Robin S., and Samantha Henderson. 2013. Beyond rhetoric: Establishing police-academic partner- ships that work. In The future of policing, ed. Jennifer M. Brown, 247–66. London: Routledge.
Engel, Robin S., Hannah D. McManus, and Tamara D. Herold. Forthcoming. Does de-escalation training work? A systematic review and call for evidence in police use of force reform. Criminology and Public Policy.
Engel, Robin S., and Ronal Serpas. 2017. Evidence-based use-of-force policy: How research could improve development and training. Police Chief, April: 28–36.
Engel, Robin S., and Kristin Swartz. 2014. Race, crime, and policing. In The Oxford handbook of ethnicity, crime, and immigration, eds. Sandra M. Bucerius and Michael Tonry, 135–65. New york, Ny: Oxford university Press.
Engel, Robin S., and James L. Whalen. 2010. Police–academic partnerships: Ending the dialogue of the deaf, the Cincinnati experience. Police Practice and Research: An International Journal 11 (2): 105–16. Engel, Robin S., Robert E. Worden, Nicholas Corsaro, Hannah D. McManus, Danielle Reynolds, Hannah Cochran, gabrielle T. Isaza, and Jennifer Calnon Cherkauskas. 2019. The power to arrest: Lessons
from research. New york, Ny: Springer.
Exiger. 2016. Final report for the comprehensive review of the University of Cincinnati Police Department. Submitted to university of Cincinnati Office of Safety and Reform, Cincinnati, OH. Available from www.uc.edu.
Exiger. 2019. Final report of the independent monitor for the University of Cincinnati Police Division. Submitted to university of Cincinnati Board of Trustees Audit Committee, Cincinnati, OH. Available from www.uc.edu.
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). 2019. Law enforcement officers killed and assaulted. Available from www.fbi.gov/leoka.
Ferdik, Frank v., Jeff Rojek, and geoffrey P. Alpert. 2013. Citizen oversight in the united States and Canada: An overview. Police Practice and Research 14 (2): 104–16.
Forscher, Patrick S., Calvin K. Lai, Jordan R. Axt, Charles R. Ebersole, Michelle Herman, Patricia g. Devine, and Brian A. Nosek. 2018. A meta-analysis of procedures to change implicit bias measures. Pre-Print.
Fridell, Lorie A. 2017. Producing bias-free policing: A science-based approach. New york, Ny: Springer. garner, Joel H., Matthew J. Hickman, Ronald W. Malega, and Christopher D. Maxwell. 2018. Progress
toward national estimates of police use of force. PLos ONE 13 (2): 1–23.
grasha, Kevin. 18 July 2017. No third trial for ex-uC cop Ray Tensing in shooting death of unarmed motorist Sam DuBose. Cincinnati Enquirer.
Harmon, Rachel A. 2009. Promoting civil rights through proactive policing reform. Stanford Law Review
62 (1): 1–68.
Hickman, Matthew J. 2006. Citizen complaints about police use of force. Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice Statistics. Available from www.bjs.gov.
International Association of Chiefs of Police. 2017. National consensus policy on use of force. Alexandria, vA: International Association of Chiefs of Police. Available from www.theiacp.org.
Isaza, gabrielle, Murat yildirim, Jillian Shafer, and Murat Ozer. 2017. 2016 campus crime report. Submitted to the university of Cincinnati Campus Crime Reduction Committee, Cincinnati, OH. Available from www.uc.edu.
Jones, Hannah g. 12 October 2015. The science of bias policing. Local 12 News.
Kindy, Kimberly. 30 May 2015. Fatal police shootings in 2015 approaching 400 nationwide. Washington Post.
Klinger, David. 2005. Social theory and the street cop: The case of deadly force. Washington, DC: Police Foundation. Available from www.policefoundation.org.
Klinger, David. 2020. Organizational accidents and deadly police-involved violence: Theory, research, public policy, and police practice. The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science (this volume).
Kroll. 2015. Review and investigation of Officer Raymond M. Tensing’s use of deadly force on July 19, 2015: University of Cincinnati Police Department. Submitted to the university of Cincinnati Office of general Counsel, Cincinnati, OH. Available from www.uc.edu.
Landers, Brian. 14 October 2017. Are de-escalation policies dangerous? Police Magazine. Available from https://www.policemag.com/342333/are-de-escalation-policies-dangerous.
164	THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMy

Lum, Cynthia, Christopher S. Koper, Charlotte gill, Julie Hibdon, Cody Telep, and Laurie Robinson. 2016. An evidence-assessment of the recommendations of the President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing – Implementation and research priorities. Fairfax, vA: Center for Evidence-Based Crime Policy, george Mason university. Available from www.cebcp.org.
Lum, Cynthia, Christopher S. Koper, and Cody W. Telep. 2011. The evidence-based policing matrix.
Journal of Experimental Criminology 7 (1): 3–26.
Lum, Cynthia, Megan Stoltz, Christopher S. Koper, and J. Amber Scherer. 2019. Research on body-worn cameras: What we know, what we need to know. Criminology and Public Policy 18 (1): 1–26.
Macrae, C. Neil, galen v. Bodenhasuen, Alan B. Milne, and Jolanda Jetten. 1994. Out of mind but back in sight: Stereotypes on the rebound. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 67 (5): 808–17.
McLean, Kyle, Scott E. Wolfe, Jeff Rojek, geoffrey P. Alpert, and Michael R. Smith. 2020. Evaluating a long-term social interaction police training program: A randomized controlled trial in the real world. The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science (this volume).
Mitchell, Renee J. and Lois James. 2018. Addressing the elephant in the room: The need to evaluate implicit bias training effectiveness for improving fairness in police officer decision-making. Police Chief Magazine. Available from https://www.policechiefmagazine.org/addressing-the-elephant-in-the-room. Monteith, Margo J., Steven A. Arthur, and Sara M. Flynn. 2010. Self-regulation and bias. In The SAGE handbook of prejudice, stereotyping and discrimination, eds. John F. Dovidio, M. Hewstone, P. glick,
and v. M. Esses, 493–507. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
National Research Council. 2004. Fairness and effectiveness in policing: The evidence. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Nix, Justin, Bradley A. Campbell, Edward H. Byers, and geoffrey P. Alpert. 2017. A bird’s eye view of civilians killed by police in 2015: Further evidence of implicit bias. Criminology & Public Policy 16 (1): 309–40.
Noble, greg. 29 July 2015. Watch: Body cam video released in Sam DuBose shooting. WCPO Cincinnati. Payne, B. Keith. 2001. Prejudice and perception: The role of automatic and controlled processes in mis-
perceiving a weapon. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 81 (2): 181–92.
Perrow, Charles. 1984. Normal accidents: Living with high risk technologies. New york, Ny: Basic Books. Pettigrew, Thomas F., and Linda R. Tropp. 2005. Allport’s intergroup contact hypothesis: Its history and influence. In On the nature of prejudice: Fifty years after Allport, eds. John F. Dovidio, Peter glick,
and Laurie A. Rudman, 262–77. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Police Executive Research Forum. 2016. Critical issues in policing series: Guiding principles on use of force. Washington, DC: Police Executive Research Forum.
Police Executive Research Forum. 2018. Cost and benefits of body-worn camera deployments: Final report. Washington, DC. Available from www.policeforum.org.
President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing. 2015. Final report of the President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing. Washington, DC: Office of Community Oriented Policing Services.
Reaves, Brian A. 2011. Census of state and local law enforcement agencies, 2008. Washington, DC: u.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics. Available from www.bjs.gov.
Sherman, Lawrence W. 1998. Evidence-based policing. Ideas in American Policing Series. Washington, DC: Police Foundation. Available from www.policefoundation.org.
Sherman, Lawrence W. 2013. The rise of evidence-based policing: Targeting, testing, and tracking. Crime and Justice 42 (1): 377–451.
Sherman, Lawrence W. 2018. Reducing fatal police shootings as system crashes: Research, theory, and practice. Annual Review of Criminology 1:421–49.
Skogan, Wesley g., Martin van Craen, and C. Hennessy. 2015. Training police for procedural justice.
Journal of Experimental Criminology 11 (3): 319–34.
Telep, Cody W. 2016. Expanding the scope of evidence-based policing. Criminology & Public Policy 15
(1): 243–52.
Terrill, William, and Jason R. Ingram. 2015. Citizen complaints against the police: An eight city examina- tion. Police Quarterly 19 (2): 150–79.
Walker, Samuel. 2001. Police accountability: The role of citizen oversight. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Walker, Samuel. 2003. The new paradigm of police accountability: The u.S. Justice Department “pattern or practice” suits in context. St. Louis University Public Law Review 22 (3): 3–52.
MOvINg BEyOND “BEST PRACTICE”	165

Wasserman, R. 2014. Building relationships of trust: Recommended steps for chief executives. Tallahassee, FL: Institute for Intergovernmental Research.
Weisburd, David, and Peter Neyroud. 2011. Police science: Toward a new paradigm. Washington, DC: Office of Justice Programs, National Institute of Justice. Available from www.ncjrs.gov.
White, Michael D., and Michael Pooley. 2018. Testing the impact of de-escalation training on officer behavior: The Tempe, Arizona SPI. Presented to Tempe Police Department, Tempe, Az.
Williams, Timothy. 27 June 2015. Long taught to use force, police warily learn to de-escalate. New York Times.
Worden, Robert E., Moonsun Kim, Christopher J. Harris, Mary Anne Pratte, Shelagh E. Dorn, and Shelley S. Hyland. 2013. Intervention with problem officers: An outcome evaluation of an EIS inter- vention. Criminal Justice Behavior 40 (4): 409–37.
Worden, Robert E., Sarah J. McLean, Kelly J. Becker, Eugene A. Paoline III, Hannah Cochran, and Chris Harris. 2018. Police early intervention systems: The state of the art. Albany, Ny: The John F. Finn Institute for Public Safety, Inc.
zimring, Franklin E. 2017. When police kill. Cambridge, MA: Harvard university Press.
zimring, Franklin E. 2020. Police killings as a problem of governance. The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science (this volume).
24/03/2025 Ethical policing principles https://www.college.police.uk/ethics/code-of-ethics/principles Page


Ethical policing principles



Principles that form the Code of Ethics, along with the guidance for ethical and professional behaviour in policing.
First published 24 January 2024
The ethical policing principles are a series of guiding statements that should be used to help people in policing do the right things, in the right way, for the right reasons.
Everyone in policing routinely makes important decisions. We make these decisions because it is our duty to uphold the law, prevent crime and disorder, protect and reassure communities, investigate crime and bring offenders to justice.
Carrying out these duties can be physically, mentally and emotionally demanding. Our decisions can raise complex ethical issues because they affect other people, often at difficult times in their lives. Deciding what to do is not always straightforward and the best course of action may only become apparent after decisions have been made.
Everyone in policing holds a privileged position in society that depends on the consent of the public. Our mission, to help keep the public safe, relies on us having public acceptance and cooperation. We must all strive to deliver an honourable and legitimate police service deserving of the public’s support.
We work with, and for, the public. We earn the public’s confidence when we listen to what they have to say, make decisions that are fair and unbiased, and are open and honest about our decisions. Securing public trust also means working within the limits of the law and being accountable for our actions.
Each of us is responsible for upholding the integrity of our profession. We support each other, but never to the detriment of the public. We treat each other with respect and behave in ways that demonstrate and reinforce the standards of our society and the standards expected of us.
The ethical policing principles help us to achieve this.

Using the principles

We will use the ethical policing principles to help us make and reflect on our professional decisions. As policing professionals, we commit to the following.
 Courage – making, communicating and being accountable for decisions, and standing against anything that could bring our profession into disrepute.
 Respect and empathy – encouraging, listening to and understanding the views of others, and seeking to recognise and respond to the physical, mental and emotional challenges that we and other people may face.
 Public service – working in the public interest, fostering public trust and confidence, and taking pride in providing an excellent service to the public.
Download a poster


Ethical policing requires courage, respect and empathy, and public service. These principles help us make and reflect on our professional decisions.
As policing professionals, we commit to
Courage – making, communicating and being accountable for decisions, and standing against anything that could bring our profession into disrepute.
Respect and empathy – encouraging, listening to and understanding the views of others, and seeking to recognise and respond to the physical, mental and emotional challenges that we and other people may face.
Public service – working in the public interest, fostering public trust and confidence, and taking pride in providing an excellent service to the public.
Ethical policing principles help people in policing do the right things, in the right way, for the right reasons.

Gallwch wylio'r fideo yma yn Gymraeg (You can watch this video in Welsh)

Courage

We show courage by:
 taking responsibility  setting an example
 challenging unprofessional behaviour and practice  being honest, open and accountable
 encouraging feedback and scrutiny

Ethical policing requires courage
We show courage by taking responsibility

 We are responsible for doing the right thing, even when the circumstances are difficult. Deciding the right course of action is not always easy, particularly in situations that are uncertain.
 We embrace the trust placed on us by the public.
 As part of our decision-making process, we consider our options and think about the impact that our decisions could have on those affected.
 We are open and transparent, clearly communicating our rationale for the decisions and actions we take.  We take ownership of our actions, address the consequences and learn from the experience.

We show courage by setting an example

 We are role models and consistently demonstrate professional behaviour.  We support our leaders in creating a positive ethical culture.
 We seek to build and maintain the confidence of the public we serve, and with our colleagues and partners, through the way that we conduct ourselves.
 We help to protect ourselves, our colleagues and those around us by maintaining professional boundaries.


We show courage by challenging unprofessional behaviour and practice

 We always challenge behaviours, language and attitudes that undermine our profession.
 We challenge all prejudice, discriminatory behaviour and any activity that undermines the impartiality of policing.
 We are courageous in challenging colleagues, irrespective of rank or grade.
 We support an environment where ethical issues can be raised and addressed.
 We may have to engage in difficult conversations with colleagues when we hear or see things that are unprofessional.
 We call out unprofessional behaviour, report incidents of unprofessional conduct, ask for assistance and/or offer support to those involved.

We show courage by being honest, open and accountable

 We demonstrate integrity and understand the need to be truthful in accounting for our decisions and actions.
 We expect to be judged by the quality of our decision-making, rather than just the outcome.

We show courage by encouraging feedback and scrutiny

We welcome feedback, scrutiny and challenge on our decisions, including where we make mistakes. We reflect on our actions and their impact so that we can learn and develop.

 Gallwch wylio'r fideo yma yn Gymraeg (You can watch this video in Welsh)

Taking responsibility
 We are responsible for doing the right thing, even when the circumstances are difficult. Deciding the right course of action is not always easy, particularly in situations that are uncertain.
 We embrace the trust placed on us by the public.
 As part of our decision-making process, we consider our options and think about the impact that our decisions could have on those affected.
 We are open and transparent, clearly communicating our rationale for the decisions and actions we take.  We take ownership of our actions, address the consequences and learn from the experience.

Setting an example

 We are role models and consistently demonstrate professional behaviour.  We support our leaders in creating a positive ethical culture.
 We seek to build and maintain the confidence of the public we serve, and with our colleagues and partners, through the way that we conduct ourselves.
 We help to protect ourselves, our colleagues and those around us by maintaining professional boundaries.

Challenging unprofessional behaviour and practice

 We always challenge behaviours, language and attitudes that undermine our profession.
 We challenge all prejudice, discriminatory behaviour and any activity that undermines the impartiality of policing.
 We are courageous in challenging colleagues, irrespective of rank or grade.
 We support an environment where ethical issues can be raised and addressed.
 We may have to engage in difficult conversations with colleagues when we hear or see things that are unprofessional.
 We call out unprofessional behaviour, report incidents of unprofessional conduct, ask for assistance and/or offer support to those involved.

Being honest, open and accountable

 We demonstrate integrity and understand the need to be truthful in accounting for our decisions and actions.
 We expect to be judged by the quality of our decision-making, rather than just the outcome.

Encouraging feedback and scrutiny

 We welcome feedback, scrutiny and challenge on our decisions, including where we make mistakes.  We reflect on our actions and their impact so that we can learn and develop.

Download a poster

Code of Ethics – Courage A4 poster (pdf) 46.87 KB

Respect and empathy
We show respect and empathy by:
 acting with respect
 listening to and understanding different perspectives  understanding the impact of emotions and welfare
 responding to individual needs  being fair and impartial

Ethical policing requires respect and empathy
We show respect and empathy by acting with respect

 We treat everyone with dignity, respect, patience and courtesy where at all possible.
 We recognise that everyone may respond to the same situation in different ways, so we always seek to consider how others are thinking, feeling or behaving.

We show respect and empathy by listening to and understanding different perspectives

 We ensure that people feel valued and listened to by giving them opportunities to share their views and taking these views into account.
 We seek to understand people’s experiences, values and beliefs, and we recognise that their perspectives may differ from our own.
 Through keeping an open mind, we challenge our preconceptions and consider alternative ways of responding.

We show respect and empathy by understanding the impact of emotions and welfare

 We try to recognise the physical, mental and emotional challenges that people may face, and listen to ensure that they feel valued and heard.
 We are aware of our own emotions and of the impact that we may have on those around us.
 Through reflection, we assess our biases, assumptions and knowledge gaps, understanding that they may have an impact on our decision-making.
 We recognise when we and our colleagues have been affected by the demands, stresses and traumas that can exist in policing.
 We seek help when it is needed and we understand that doing so is important for everyone’s wellbeing.

We show respect and empathy by responding to individual needs

As we engage with people who have a wide range of experiences and needs, we provide a service that takes account of each individual’s unique circumstances.
In ensuring that everyone is treated equally and fairly, regardless of background or circumstance, we recognise the need to tailor our response to ensure that we are being responsive to individual needs and acting with integrity and respect.
We show respect and empathy by being fair and impartial

We respond fairly, impartially and with sensitivity to people’s needs and situations. We accept this as part of the selflessness required to undertake our roles.

 Gallwch wylio'r fideo yma yn Gymraeg (You can watch this video in Welsh)

Acting with respect

 We treat everyone with dignity, respect, patience and courtesy where at all possible.
 We recognise that everyone may respond to the same situation in different ways, so we always seek to consider how others are thinking, feeling or behaving.

Listening to and understanding different perspectives

 We ensure that people feel valued and listened to by giving them opportunities to share their views and taking these views into account.
 We seek to understand people’s experiences, values and beliefs, and we recognise that their perspectives may differ from our own.
 Through keeping an open mind, we challenge our preconceptions and consider alternative ways of responding.

Understanding the impact of emotions and welfare

 We try to recognise the physical, mental and emotional challenges that people may face, and listen to ensure that they feel valued and heard.
 We are aware of our own emotions and of the impact that we may have on those around us.
 Through reflection, we assess our biases, assumptions and knowledge gaps, understanding that they may have an impact on our decision-making.
 We recognise when we and our colleagues have been affected by the demands, stresses and traumas that can exist in policing.
 We seek help when it is needed and we understand that doing so is important for everyone’s wellbeing.

Responding to individual needs

 As we engage with people who have a wide range of experiences and needs, we provide a service that takes account of each individual’s unique circumstances.
 In ensuring that everyone is treated equally and fairly, regardless of background or circumstance, we recognise the need to tailor our response to ensure that we are being responsive to individual needs and acting with integrity and respect.

Being fair and impartial

 We respond fairly, impartially and with sensitivity to people’s needs and situations. We accept this as part of the selflessness required to undertake our roles.

Download a poster
Code of Ethics – Respect and empathy A4 poster (pdf) 49.42 KB

Public service

We provide public service by:
 delivering a service to be proud of  acting lawfully
 understanding and responding to the public's needs
 reflecting on and applying knowledge and experience  improving our self, our peers and our profession

Ethical policing requires public service
We provide public service by delivering a service to be proud of

 We are committed to working in the public interest and we take pride in providing an excellent service.  We respect the authority and influence afforded to us by our role in society.
 We work collaboratively with colleagues, agencies and partners in service of the public.

We provide public service by acting lawfully

 We take responsibility for using our powers within the law.
 We respect the degree of discretion that we have, and we apply powers when lawful, proportionate and necessary.
 We help to foster a working environment in which everyone can – in the public interest – question, challenge and report any unlawful, unethical or unprofessional actions.

We provide public service by understanding and responding to the public's needs

 We engage with a wide range of people, including some experiencing trauma and adversity.
 We seek to understand the experience and history of different communities and we take them into account in our decisions where appropriate, while always ensuring that we treat people as individuals and with impartiality.
 We build and maintain strong relationships with the public and others we work with, including agencies and bodies.

We provide public service by reflecting on and applying knowledge and experience

We recognise the limits of our knowledge and skills, seeing these as opportunities to develop and improve.
 When making decisions and taking actions, we draw from the best available evidence, as well as our own professional judgement, practical wisdom and experience.
 We reflect on our actions and decisions to examine what went well and what could be changed to improve the service we offer to the public.
 We understand that reflecting openly, honestly and objectively might be difficult, uncomfortable or embarrassing.

We provide public service by improving our self, our peers and our profession

To help improve ourselves, our peers and our profession, we foster a safe and open working environment where everyone can – in the public interest – share experiences, evaluate good practice and exchange feedback.
We expect our leaders to demonstrate a commitment to self-improvement.
We recognise that our leaders are responsible for providing a supportive organisational culture that facilitates learning and development, and for ensuring that honest reflection is supported and valued.

 Gallwch wylio'r fideo yma yn Gymraeg (You can watch this video in Welsh)

Delivering a service to be proud of

 We are committed to working in the public interest and we take pride in providing an excellent service.  We respect the authority and influence afforded to us by our role in society.
 We work collaboratively with colleagues, agencies and partners in service of the public.

Acting lawfully

 We take responsibility for using our powers within the law.
 We respect the degree of discretion that we have, and we apply powers when lawful, proportionate and necessary.
 We help to foster a working environment in which everyone can – in the public interest – question, challenge and report any unlawful, unethical or unprofessional actions.

Understanding and responding to the public's needs

 We engage with a wide range of people, including some experiencing trauma and adversity.
 We seek to understand the experience and history of different communities and we take them into account in our decisions where appropriate, while always ensuring that we treat people as individuals and with impartiality.
 We build and maintain strong relationships with the public and others we work with, including agencies and bodies.

Reflecting on and applying knowledge and experience

We recognise the limits of our knowledge and skills, seeing these as opportunities to develop and improve. When making decisions and taking actions, we draw from the best available evidence, as well as our own professional judgement, practical wisdom and experience.
 We reflect on our actions and decisions to examine what went well and what could be changed to improve the service we offer to the public.
 We understand that reflecting openly, honestly and objectively might be difficult, uncomfortable or embarrassing.

Improving our self, our peers and our profession

 To help improve ourselves, our peers and our profession, we foster a safe and open working environment where everyone can – in the public interest – share experiences, evaluate good practice and exchange feedback.
 We expect our leaders to demonstrate a commitment to self-improvement.
 We recognise that our leaders are responsible for providing a supportive organisational culture that facilitates learning and development, and for ensuring that honest reflection is supported and valued.

Download a poster

Code of Ethics – Public service A4 poster (pdf) 58.7 KB

Mapping of Code of Ethics (2014) policing principles to the ethical policing principles
The policing principles contained in the 2014 Code of Ethics included:  the seven principles of public life:
 accountability  honesty
 integrity
 leadership  objectivity  openness
 selflessness
 two additional principles that were identified from the research carried out by the College of Policing at the time:
 fairness  respect
The following table shows where this revised version of the principles has drawn from the original and has built upon its strengths.

Ethical policing principles
Code of Ethics (2014) policing principles
Courage	Accountability, honesty, integrity, leadership, objectivity, openness, fairness, respect
Respect and empathy	Objectivity, openness, selflessness, fairness, respect
Ethical policing principles
Code of Ethics (2014) policing principles
Public service	Accountability, honesty, integrity, leadership, objectivity, openness, selflessness, respect
Tags

Code of Ethics
