Home  Crime, justice and law  Anti-social behaviour principlesHome O?ceThe Anti-social Behaviour Strategic Board has developed a set of principles which seek to describe a consistent approach to understanding and addressing antisocial behaviour in local communities. The principles are not intended to fetter local decision making but rather to act as a guide in seeking to deliver the best possible outcomes for victims of antisocial behaviour.1. Victims should be encouraged to report antisocial behaviour and expect to be taken seriously. They should have clear ways to report, have access to help and support to recover, and be given the opportunity to choose restorative approaches to tackling antisocial behaviour.2. Agencies will have clear and transparent processes to ensure that victims can report antisocial behaviour concerns, can understand how the matter will be investigated and are kept well informed of progress once a report is made.3. Agencies and practitioners will work across boundaries to identify, assess and tackle antisocial behaviour and its underlying causes. Referral pathways should be clearly set out between services and published locally. This includes pathways for the anti-social behaviour case review and health services.4. The public’s antisocial behaviour concerns should always be considered both nationally and locally in strategic needs assessments for community safety. Best practice should be shared through a network of antisocial behaviour experts within each community safety partnership, each policing area and nationally.5. Adults and children who exhibit antisocial behaviour should have the opportunity to take responsibility for their behaviour and repair the harm caused by it. Agencies should deliver appropriate interventions, which may include criminal justice options, based on the seriousness, risks and vulnerabilities of the case.The Home O?ce chairs the Anti-social Behaviour Strategic Board, which brings together a range of partners and representatives from relevant agencies and government departments to work together to identify and assess strategic issues relating to antisocial behaviour and share information and good practice in order to support an e?ective multi-agency response to antisocial behaviour.The principles have been endorsed by: ASB Help Association of Police and Crime Commissioners Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities  Historic England Home O?ce Local Government Association  National Fire Chiefs Council National Police Chiefs’ Council  Resolve Victims’ Commissioner  Welsh GovernmentAudience for the principlesThe principles are designed to be used by any agency or partner involved in tackling antisocial behaviour, for example, local authorities, community safety partnerships, police forces, health agencies, housing associations, civil society organisations, police and crime commissioners and any other agency involved in the process right from the moment an incident has occurred through to case closure and victim support. We recognise that depending on the service an agency provides, some principles might not be applicable. It is for individual agencies and local areas to take a position on which principles apply to them.Combating antisocial behaviour involves many di?erent partners at local level and we hope that they will apply the principles.Implementing the principlesThe principles seek to describe a consistent approach to understanding and addressing antisocial behaviour in local communities. The principles are not intended to fetter local decision making but rather to act as a guide in seeking to deliver the best possible outcomes for victims of antisocial behaviour. They are endorsed by the Anti-social behaviour Strategic Board and are also reflective of the antisocial behaviour statutory guidance. We encourage partners to assess local practice against the standard outlined in the principles. Back to topServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Crime, justice and law  Crime preventionCollectionAntisocial behaviour: guidance for professionalsBrings together information for professionals working with antisocial behaviour including the statutory guidance.From: Home O?cePublished 27 March 2023Statutory guidance for frontline professionalsThe Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 provides the police, local authorities and other local agencies with powers that they can use to respond quickly and e?ectively to antisocial behaviour.The Home O?ce has published statutory guidance to support local areas to make e?ective use of these powers. It sets out the importance of focusing on the needs of the victim and the local community.Anti-social behaviour powers27 March 2023 Statutory guidanceAnti-social Behaviour Action PlanThe plan sets out measures that will support local areas to reduce the antisocial behaviour in their communities.Anti-Social Behaviour Action Plan21 March 2024 Policy paperAnti-social behaviour principlesThe Anti-social Behaviour Strategic Board has created principles for taking a consistent approach to understanding and addressing antisocial behaviour in local communities.The principles can be used by any agency tackling anti-social behaviour. This could include local authorities, community safety partnerships, police forces, health agencies, housing associations, civil society organisations, and police and crime commissioners.Anti-social behaviour principles27 March 2023 GuidanceAnti-social behaviour case reviewThe anti-social behaviour case review, formerly known as a community trigger, gives victims of persistent antisocial behaviour the right to request a multi-agency review of their case.Agencies, including local authorities, the police, local health teams and registered providers of social housing have a duty to undertake a case review when requested by someone whose case meets a locally defined threshold.Anti-social behaviour case review27 March 2023 GuidanceRelated guidance and best practiceMore guidance and best practice is available from the links in this section. You can also: refer to the College of Policing ’s anti-social behaviour toolkit create a Knowledg e Hub account - used by the police and local authorities to share best practice and useful documents visit the Local Government Association and Welsh Local Government Association websites for more guidance and case studies on antisocial behaviourLevelling Up the United Kingdom2 February 2022  Policy paperThe charter for social housing residents: social housing white paper22 January 2021  Policy paperA guide to civil mediation20 July 2021 GuidanceLitter and refuse: code of practice19 October 2023 Statutory guidanceConsultationA consultation on the relationship between community safety partnerships and police and crime commissioners, the role of community safety partnerships and police and crime commissioners in tackling antisocial behaviour and the expansion of antisocial behaviour powers.Community safety partnerships review and antisocial behaviour powers14 November 2023  Consultation outcomeResearch reportsThese reports present findings on how antisocial behaviour is managed locally, the experiences of victims across the incident journey stages, and the impacts of antisocial behaviour on individuals and communities.Impacts of anti-social behaviour on individuals and communities27 March 2023 Research and analysisIncident journey of anti-social behaviour: from reporting to resolution27 March 2023 Research and analysisPublished 27 March 2023Explore the topicCrime preventionServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
MenuHome Crime, justice and law PolicingGuidanceApply for or manage a section 5, shooting club or museum licenceHow to license a firearm, manage weapons for a shooting club or get a museum licence.From: Home O?cePublished 19 September 2017Last updated 25 November 2024 — See all updatesRelated contentFirearms security handbook 2020 Firearms licensing lawCircular 006/2019: Firearms (Fees) Regulations 2019Prohibited weapons and ammunition (section 5) authorityYou need a section 5 authority to handle prohibited weapons, component parts and prohibited ammunition. This includes: keeping or using heritage pistols under section 7(3) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 private maritime security companies  carriers airlines and ground handlersTo renew a section 5 authority, you must apply at least 4 months before your current licence expires. This is because the Home O?ce will need to contact the police before considering the application.When you applyApplications must include a cover letter and evidence of trade in order for an initial assessment to take place, without this the application may be rejected.Cover letter to include the requirement for a section 5 authority (maximum 2 pages). Application must include: business name authority holder(s) name and personal details  companies house number (if applicable)Documents to show evidence of your business need for a section 5 authority will need to cover every item or quantities requested.Examples of documents required: valid registered firearms dealer (RFD) (if applicable)  copy of your current authority (renewal only) current or future contracts / expressions of interest  invoices from the last 6 months (renewal only) addresses of the business premises where the prohibited items will be stored the types and quantities of prohibited items you want the authority to coverNew applicants / existing licensees with a new work streamThese applications must also include a business plan (maximum 2 pages) that sets out the company background and the requirement for a section 5 authority and evidence of prospective trade.For example: current or future contracts invoices from the last 6 months letters of sponsorship from the past 6 months  a valid import licence, if applicable details of third part storage, if applicable addresses of the business premises where the prohibited items will be stored the types and quantities of prohibited items you want the authority to coverthe personal details of one or 2 named authority holders: home address date and place of birth  nationality contact details, including email of main contact if this is not the authority holderCarriers airlines and ground handlersCover letter to include the requirement for a section 5 authority (maximum 2 pages): details of how the prohibited items will be obtained and used reasons you need to possess weapons and/or ammunition sought  your previous section 5 authority (renewal only) evidence that your proposed airline or ground handler is in possession of a valid section 5 authority.For more information, see chapter 3 of the guide on Firearms Licensing Law.To renew a section 5 authority, you must apply at least 4 months before your current licence expires. This is because the Home O?ce will need to contact the police before considering the application.The Defence and Security Equipment International (DSEI) exhibitionThe Defence and Security Equipment International (DSEI) exhibition is held every 2 years for 1 week in September in the Excel Centre in London.If you want to exhibit prohibited weapons at the event you will need a section 5 authority. If issued, this authority will only be valid for the period of the DSEI event and will be solely for the purpose of exhibiting prohibited weapons at the event.Along with the application form, you will need to provide a cover letter to include: the reason you are applying for a section 5 authority (maximum 2 pages)  your RFD certificate number or whether you have applied for an RFDYour application form must include a UK address for the invoice details. If you do not have a UK address then you must use the DSEI address, stating your company name. The DSEI address is:c/o The Defence and Security Equipment International exhibition The Excel CentreVictoria Dock Road E16 1XLFor more information on the event, visit the DSEI website.England and WalesScotlandShooting clubsEngland and WalesApplications will only be accepted by the Home O?ce. Do not apply directly to the police.We will review your application and pass it to the relevant police force, who will make necessary enquiries before sending the application to us for consideration.If you do not give us enough information and supporting evidence your application is likely to be rejected as invalid and you will need to submit it again.Before you apply, make sure you meet the criteria in the g uidance for rifle and muzzle loading pistol clubs.To renew a section 5 authority, you must apply at least 4 months before your current licence expires. This is because the Home O?ce will need to contact the police before considering the application.What happens nextWe will review your application and contact you if we need more information. We will also carry out checks, including inspecting any storage arrangements.ScotlandApply in writing to:Safer Communities Directorate Police Powers UnitSt Andrew’s House EdinburghEH1 3DGMuseum licencesMuseums must apply for a museum licence to display or store weapons or ammunition for exhibition purposes.Museums in England and Wales should apply online: for a new museum licence to renew an existing licence to amend an existing licence, such as adding new storage locations Licences cost up to £200 and are valid for 5 years.What a museum licence coversA museum licence covers: obtaining, owning, transfer and disposal of section 1 and section 2 weapons owning section 5 weapons transferring section 5 weapons to a museum in the same museum group, which is named on the licenceYou need a section 5 authority as well as a museum licence to: transfer section 5 weapons to a di?erent legal entity or organisation - for example, to loan to another museum dispose of section 5 weaponsIt’s free to apply for a section 5 authority.Who can applyYou can only apply for a museum licence if you’re: maintained by Parliament or local government accredited by the Museum, Libraries and Archives Council (MLA) or Arts Council England and WalesNon-accredited, privately funded and private collections cannot apply for this licence. You’ll need to apply for a firearm or shotgun certificate.What happens nextWe will review your application and contact you if we need more information. We will also carry out certain checks, including inspecting any storage arrangements.For more information, view chapter 17 of the g uide on Firearms Licensing Law.To renew a section 5 authority, you must apply at least 4 months before your current licence expires. This is because the Home O?ce will need to contact the police before considering the application.If your firearms application is approvedWe consider each case in its own merit. If your licence is approved, you will receive an email with instructions for payment. We will not issue your licence until the fee is paid. Once you have paid, the licence will be sent electronically by email.If you cancel your applicationWe consider how much to charge for cancellations case by case. You may be charged administration, travel or accommodation costs if you cancel your application: following a police inspection  after you receive an outcomeWe may also ask for our administrative costs to be paid within 10 working days.Contact the Drugs and Firearms Licensing Unit (DFLU)Firearms enquiriesEmail public.enquiries@homeo?ce.gov.uk for queries about UK firearms legislation and other firearms questions.Firearms applicationsFor application queries, email dflu.firearmslicensing@homeo?ce.gov.uk.FeesFor queries about firearms licensing fees, invoices and billing, email dflu.fees@homeo?ce.gov.uk.Customer complaintsEmail dflu.complaints@homeo?ce.gov.uk for complaints about firearms licences.Before you email the DFLU, you should try to resolve any issues with the firearms team directly using the other contact details above.You can contact the Home O?ce by telephone on 0300 105 0248.Published 19 September 2017Last updated 25 November 2024 + show all updatesExplore the topicPolicingServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home O?ceGuidanceApproval of rifle and muzzle- loading pistol clubsUpdated 28 March 2024
Crown copyright 2024is publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where herwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-  ence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gov.uk.here we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from e copyright holders concerned. is publication is available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/approval-of-rifle-and- uzzle-loading-pistol-clubs/approval-of-rifle-and-muzzle-loading-pistol-clubs-accessible 
This guidance is about the approval of rifle, miniature rifle and muzzle-loading pistol clubs by the Home Secretary and the Scottish Government. It explains what approval means and how clubs can apply for it. It also explains the criteria and conditions which they must meet in order to obtain approval and remain approved and provides more detailed guidance on the important role and responsibilities of club liaison officers.It supersedes all other government guidance on the subject.Approved clubsUnder section 44 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1997, a person wishing to possess a rifle or muzzle-loading pistol solely for target shooting must be a member of an approved rifle club or, as the case may be, approved muzzle- loading pistol club. Section 44(1)(b) requires an approved club to be specified on the firearm certificate. The certificate should not list all clubs of which the holder is a member.Any rifle, miniature rifle or muzzle-loading pistol club can apply to the relevant authority (the Home Office for clubs in England and Wales or the Scottish Government for clubs in Scotland) for approval. Approval is granted under section 15(1) of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 (as amended by section 45 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1997).When approval has been granted, members of that club can possess firearms and ammunition without holding a personal firearm certificate “when engaged as a member of the club in connection with target shooting” (section 15(1) of the 1988 Act as amended by section 45 of the 1997 Act).Approval also allows the police to grant a free firearm certificate to a responsible officer of the club to enable him or her to purchase and acquire firearms and ammunition for members to use for target shooting. Club members may not purchase or acquire firearms or ammunition unless they have been granted a personal firearm certificate by the police.How to apply for approvalIf you would like to vary, renew or apply for a Home Office shooting club approval letter, please apply online at: Section 5, shooting club and museum firearms licence applications (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/apply-for-or-manage-a-section-5-
shooting-club-or-museum-licence).Please be advised that all applications will be subject to fees. The fee charged will depend on the type of application made, for example whether it is an application for a club requiring Home Office approval for the first time or an existing club applying to renew or vary its approval.For further details regarding the different types of application and the fees they will incur, see the Home Office circular on Firearms Fees Regulations 2019 (https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/892823/Fees_Circular.pdf).Criteria for approvalClubs will not be granted approval unless they meet the criteria set out below. These criteria translate into conditions of the approval, if granted. Approved clubs which fail to meet these conditions can expect approval to be withdrawn.The criteria as set out below should be observed:. the club is a genuine target shooting club with a written constitution (see note 2). the principal officers of the club are responsible people who can be entrusted with the proper administration of the club (see notes 3 and 4). the club has at least 10 members at the time of application and at all times whilst approved unless, exceptionally, the Secretary of State or Scottish Government determines that there are special circumstances which justify a lesser number. members are of good character (also see notes 3 and 4). the club must appoint a member to act as a liaison officer with the police, and the chief officer of police must have confidence that this person is providing the police with such information as they require to ensure that the activities of the club and its members are conducted properly and safely in accordance with the criteria and give no cause for concern (see Annex A to this guidance and notes 1 and 5 below). the club will maintain a register of the attendance of all members together with details for each visit of the firearms which they used (see note 6). the club will inform the police of any person, other than a guest member, who has ceased to be a member for whatever reason (see notes 1 and 7)
. the club will inform the police of any member, other than a guest member, who has not shot with the club for a period of 12 months (see notes 1 and 7). the club will inform the police of any application for membership, giving the applicant’s full name and address, date and place of birth, and the date on which they become a full member (see notes 1 and 8). no application for full or probationary membership will be granted unless the applicant has informed the club of whether he or she has ever had an application for a firearm or shotgun certificate refused by the police, or had a certificate revoked (see note 9). members, prospective members and guest members must sign a declaration that they are not prohibited from possessing a firearm or ammunition by virtue of section 21 of the Firearms Act 1968 (which applies to persons who have served a term of imprisonment or been given a suspended sentence of 3 months or longer) (also see note 9). the club has regular use of ranges for the categories of firearm in respect of which approval is being sought or given, as the case may be. Adequate financial arrangements must be in place to meet any injury or damage claim (see note 10). the security arrangements for the storage of club firearms and ammunition are satisfactory (see notes 1 and 11). the club does not run a day or temporary membership scheme, other than for guest members within the constraints of paragraphs O and P below (see note 12). guest members must be: members of a recognised outside organisation; people who are known personally to at least one full member of the club; members of another approved club visiting as members of that club; or visitors possessing firearms that fall within the terms of the club’s approval and that are held on their personal Firearm Certificate or Visitor’s permit or Permit under section 7 of the 1968 Firearms Act (see note 13). the club does not have more than 12 guest days a year – guest members, (other than members of another approved club or visitors with a firearm certificate, visitor’s permit or permit under section 7 of the 1968 Firearms Act as above,) may only shoot during a guest day, and must be supervised on a one-to-one basis at all times when handling firearms and ammunition by either a full club member or someone who is a coach recognised by the governing bodies; the club secretary must notify each guest day to the police firearms licensing department of the area in which the guest day is to take place at least 48 hours in advance (see notes 1 and 13). anyone who applies for membership must be sponsored by at least one full club member. before becoming a full member, individuals must have a probationary period of
at least 3 months during which time they must attend and shoot regularly; the probationary member must be given a course in the safe handling and use of firearms on a one-to-one basis by someone who is either a full member of the club or who is a coach with a qualification recognised by the governing bodies (see notes 14,15 and 16). until a probationary member has satisfactorily completed a course in the safe handling and use of firearms, he/she must be supervised at all times when in possession of firearms or ammunition by either the range officer, a full member of the club, or someone who is a coach with a qualification recognised by the governing bodies (see notes 14 and 15). the probationary period may be waived, at the club’s discretion, for someone who is already a full member of another club which has been approved by the Secretary of State or Scottish Government in respect of the same type or types of firearm; or holds a Firearm Certificate; or has handled firearms in the course of his/her duty in the police or the armed services, and has a statement from his/her existing or former senior/commanding officer saying that he/she is fully trained in handling the type of firearms in respect of which the club has obtained approval and is able to use them safely without supervision (see notes 14 and 17). the club never has more probationary members than full members unless the Secretary of State determines that there are special circumstances which justify a greater number of probationary members (see note 18). there is nothing else that would make the club unsuitable for approval.If approval is granted, the approval will be subject to a set of standard conditions which will reflect the approval criteria listed above. In certain cases, the Secretary of State may attach further specific conditions to a club’s approval.Notes on the criteria. All notifications should be sent to the police firearms licensing department through whom approval was granted. There is no requirement to report guest membership under the procedures for guest day attendance.. The club must be a genuine rifle and/or muzzle-loading pistol club set up for the purpose of target shooting. The constitution of the club should implement the conditions of approval.. Club officers must be people who are not disqualified from possessing a firearm.. Club officers should be aware of firearms laws relevant to the membership of
the club and make their best efforts to ensure that all members continue to be persons of good character. Police firearms licensing departments should not be asked to disclose whether or not someone has a criminal record.Prospective members should not be required to apply for a firearm or shotgun certificate as a means of determining ‘good character’. The police will not normally grant a certificate to somebody who is only a probationary member of a club.. The liaison officer should normally be a member of the club committee. He or she should establish contact with the local police firearms licensing officer and decide between them how information should be supplied and with what frequency. They should also set up a system so that the liaison officer can contact the firearms licensing officer as necessary and vice versa. See further guidance on the role and responsibilities of club liaison officers in Annex A.. An attendance register should be kept of all members. In the case of a firearm held on a member’s firearm certificate, the register will record the calibre, type and serial number of the firearm(s) used and the date. All visiting shooters should be logged in the same way. In the case of competition shoots between clubs, the responsibility for recording the attendance of a team member will lie with the club that the shooter represents. In the case of open competitions, the organising club will record details of competitors. Clubs should retain their attendance records for a minimum of 6 years.. Notifying the police when a person’s membership has ceased, or as soon as such a person has not shot with the club for a period of 12 months, will allow the chief officer of police to check in the case of certificate holders whether that individual is still using his or her firearm(s) regularly at another club or approved range. The police should be informed within 1 month of cessation of membership.. Casual membership enquiries need not be reported - only those which reach the stage of a formal application. The police should be advised when an application is submitted formally to the club.. Whether a prospective member has ever had an application for a firearm or shotgun certificate refused, or had a certificate revoked, should form the basis of a question on the club’s membership application form. There are many reasons for refusal/revocation and not all will count against an individual.Clubs will therefore need to ascertain why the certificate was refused/revoked in order to make an informed decision.. There are three categories of approval: full-bore rifle, small-bore rifle and muzzle-loading pistol. Rifles chambered for pistol ammunition above .22 rim- fire calibre are regarded as full-bore rifles. Clubs seeking approval in order to use such rifles will therefore need access to a suitable range with adequate financial arrangements in place to meet any injury or damage claim. The National Associations are able to provide advice on the construction and use of ranges.
. The security arrangements for storing firearms must be satisfactory to the local chief officer of police acting through the force firearms licensing department.. The ban on day or temporary membership is to stop casual shooters being able to come in off the street and shoot. It should not be confused with properly organised guest days, competition shoots between clubs or events open to individuals who are not members of that club. An organised and notified guest day is required only for guest members who are neither members of another approved club nor firearm certificate holders, visitor’s permit holders or holders of permits issued under section 7 of the 1968 Firearms Act.. Examples of recognised outside organisations whose members may be guest members of approved rifle and muzzle-loading pistol clubs are scouts and guides, schools, rotary clubs and Women’s Institutes. The duty to notify the police of guest days is laid on the club secretary. This may be delegated to the appointed liaison officer.. A probationary period of 3 months is a minimum. It is open to clubs to set a longer probationary period should they wish, or to extend the probationary period for an individual if they deem this necessary. The club may end a probationer’s membership at any time.. Recognised coaching qualifications for the purposes of the Home Office and Scottish Government criteria for approved clubs are: National Rifle Association: Club Instructor, Cadet Adult Instructor, Range Conducting Officer; Range Conducting Officer Assessor National Smallbore Rifle Association: Range Conducting Officer, Club Instructor (Rifle, Pistol or Airgun) NSRA Club Coach, NSRA County Coach, Regional Coach and Youth Proficiency Scheme Instructor The Muzzle Loaders Association of Great Britain: Approved Instructor  UKPSA Range Officers: Range Officer, Approved Instructor or Trainer. The national associations are able to give advice on safety training courses for probationary members.. Although the probationary period may be waived in certain cases, the individual concerned has no right to insist on this. It is for the club to decide whether or not the probationary period should be waived for specific persons.. The Secretary of State or Scottish Government may, in exceptional circumstances, allow a club to have more probationary members than full members. This may be appropriate, for example, in a university club at the beginning of the academic year.. Clubs can have non-shooting categories of membership such as associate, family, social or honorary. Such members are not covered by section 15 of the
Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988 (as amended) and must not have access to firearms and ammunition except as participants in a guest day.Extent of approvalThe approval will only cover target shooting with the type or types of firearm listed in the approval. There are three possible categories: full-bore rifles small-bore rifles muzzle-loading pistolsRifles chambered for pistol ammunition above .22 rim-fire calibre are regarded as full-bore rifles.The decision about which categories will be listed in the approval will mainly depend on whether suitable ranges are available.Variations in the terms of the criteria for approvalIt is possible that, exceptionally, the Home Secretary or the Scottish Government may allow some variation of the criteria, or the conditions of approval. He/she must be satisfied that it would be reasonable to do so in the exceptional circumstances which come to his notice.Extending or renewing club approvalPlease see the section How to apply for approval.Cadet corps and school clubs
The Secretary of State or Scottish Government approves cadet corps for the possession of firearms and ammunition under section 54(5)(b) of the Firearms Act 1968 (as amended by section 28 of the Armed Forces Act 1996). The information contained in this leaflet does not apply to cadet corps, nor does it apply to school rifle clubs. For further information contact the Home Office or the Scottish Government at the addresses given earlier.Miniature rifle ranges and shooting galleriesA person operating a miniature rifle range or shooting gallery at which either miniature rifles not exceeding .23” calibre or air weapons are used may possess, purchase or acquire such miniature rifles and their ammunition without holding a firearm certificate. This will not be the case when the provisions of the Firearms Act 2023 are commenced and make it a requirement for the operator of a miniature rifle range to have a firearm certificate and limits the rifles for use on a MRR to .22 rimfire rifles. Anyone may use these rifles and ammunition at a range or gallery of this type without a firearm certificate. No club approval is necessary.Further adviceIf you would like further advice on any of the information in this leaflet, please contact the Home Office, the Scottish Government, your local police firearms licensing department or the organisations listed below.Addresses of national shooting organisationsThe British Shooting Sports Council PO Box 79Halesworth IP19 1BBThe National Rifle Association Bisley CampBrookwood Woking, Surrey GU24 0PB
The National Smallbore Rifle Association Lord Roberts CentreBisley Camp Brookwood Woking Surrey GU24 0NPAnnex A: The role and responsibilities of club liaison officersThe personThe club liaison officer:. must be a person of good standing and normally a firearms certificate holder; some flexibility can, however, be built into the role, for example to allow for cover during sick absences or extended holiday periods or to allow the appointment of a long-standing member of the club who wishes to remain involved in its running but who no longer wants to keep their own firearm. must be familiar with the matters that the local police firearms department requires from the club in line with Home Office Guidance; this will include the matters listed in Note 1 below, although other information may be required, as necessary. must operate with the authority of the club committee and should normally be a member of that committee; however, the club should have the capacity to appoint an interim liaison officer should the need arise. must be IT literate, must have an email address and be contactable by telephone or by email at any reasonable time – they should also retain up-to- date contact details (email and telephone number) of the local police firearms licensing department. must be familiar with and understand fully the Home Office criteria for the approval of rifle and muzzle-loading pistol clubs
ResponsibilitiesIt is the responsibility of the club liaison officer to:. establish and maintain contact with the local police firearms licensing department and to agree arrangements for the relevant exchange of information (see Note 2 below). notify the local firearms licensing department at the first convenient time where the member of the club has not engaged in shooting activities over the past 12 months. notify the local firearms licensing department, as a matter urgency, where there are serious wellbeing concerns about a club member displayed through unusual or erratic behaviour or arising from circumstances such as those listed in Note 3 – referring such concerns to the police will not automatically result in the member’s firearms being removed or certificate revoked; it will, however, give the police an opportunity to ensure that the person’s continuing access to firearms does not create a risk to themselves or to wider public safetyNotes1. Information required by the police from the club liaison officer includes: For new probationary members: full name of the person, including any previous name(s)  full address, including postcode telephone number/mobile telephone number (where available)  date and place of birthFor new full members  as above with the date of full membershipClub members who have not shot there within the last 12 months  full details (name, address, date of birth) the date that the person was last recorded as being present at the club for shooting activities, noting any known mitigating factors that may be relevant
Members who cancel or fail to renew membership full details (name, address, date of birth) providing any known reasons for cancellation or failure to renewClub guest days notification to the police preferably at least 2 weeks before the events to allow Firearms team to respond in good time, but no less than 48 hours (see paragraph P of the guidance)2. It is important to have trust between the club liaison officer and the local police firearms licensing department achieved through regular meetings. In some circumstances it may be necessary to meet very frequently, but much will depend on the size of the club and the nature of the activities undertaken by it. The liaison officer and the local police should, therefore, agree between themselves how information is to be supplied and with what frequency and how often they should meet, but this must not be less than once each year.3. Behaviour that might give rise to wellbeing concerns might include, but is not restricted to:erratic or unusual behaviourdomestic abuse (concerns that the member has been a victim or perpetrator) divorce/separation/relationship difficultiesknown financial pressuresalcohol and/or drug abuse medical/ill health concerns such as: severe stress caused by trauma suicidal thoughts or self-harm to self or others  depression or anxiety dementia any other medical or physical condition which may affect safe use of firearmsAll content is available under the Open GovernmentLicence v3.0, except where otherwise stated	© Crown copyright
   Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Assaults on Emergency Workers (Offences) Act 2018. (See end of Document for details)Assaults on Emergency Workers (Offences) Act 20182018 CHAPTER 23An Act to make provision about offences when perpetrated against emergency workers, and persons assisting such workers; to make certain offences aggravated when perpetrated against such workers in the exercise of their duty; and for connected purposes.	[13th September 2018]BE IT ENACTED by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:—Aggravation1	Common assault and battery(1) The section applies to an offence of common assault, or battery, that is committed against an emergency worker acting in the exercise of functions as such a worker.(2) A person guilty of an offence to which this section applies is liable—(a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding [F1the general limit in a magistrates’ court], or to a fine, or to both;(b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding [F22 years], or to a fine, or to both.(3) For the purposes of subsection (1), the circumstances in which an offence is to be taken as committed against a person acting in the exercise of functions as an emergency worker include circumstances where the offence takes place at a time when the person is not at work but is carrying out functions which, if done in work time, would have been in the exercise of functions as an emergency worker.(1) 
(4) In relation to an offence committed before [F32 May 2022], the reference in subsection (2)(a) to [F4the general limit in a magistrates’ court] is to be read as a reference to 6 months.(5) In consequence of subsections (1) to (3), in section 39 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 (which provides for common assault and battery to be summary offences punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months)—(a) the existing text becomes subsection (1);(b) after that subsection insert—“(2) Subsection (1) is subject to section 1 of the Assaults on Emergency Workers (Offences) Act 2018 (which makes provision for increased sentencing powers for offences of common assault and battery committed against an emergency worker acting in the exercise of functions as such a worker).”(6) This section applies only in relation to offences committed on or after the day it comes into force.F52	Aggravating factor. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3 Meaning of “emergency worker”(1) In sections 1 and 2, “emergency worker” means—(a) a constable;(b) a person (other than a constable) who has the powers of a constable or is otherwise employed for police purposes or is engaged to provide services for police purposes;(c) a National Crime Agency officer;(d) a prison officer;(a) 
Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Assaults on Emergency Workers (Offences) Act 2018. (See end of Document for details)(e) a person (other than a prison officer) employed or engaged to carry out functions in a custodial institution of a corresponding kind to those carried out by a prison officer;(f) a prisoner custody officer, so far as relating to the exercise of escort functions;(g) a custody officer, so far as relating to the exercise of escort functions;(h) a person employed for the purposes of providing, or engaged to provide, fire services or fire and rescue services;(i) a person employed for the purposes of providing, or engaged to provide, search services or rescue services (or both);(j) a person employed for the purposes of providing, or engaged to provide—(i) NHS health services, or(ii) services in the support of the provision of NHS health services,and whose general activities in doing so involve face to face interaction with individuals receiving the services or with other members of the public.(2) It is immaterial for the purposes of subsection (1) whether the employment or engagement is paid or unpaid.(3) In this section—“custodial institution” means any of the following—(a) a prison;(b) a young offender institution, secure training centre, secure college or remand centre;(c) a removal centre, a short-term holding facility or pre-departure accommodation, as defined by section 147 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999;(d) services custody premises, as defined by section 300(7) of the Armed Forces Act 2006;  “custody officer” has the meaning given by section 12(3) of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994;“escort functions”—(a) in the case of a prisoner custody officer, means the functions specified in section 80(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1991;(b) in the case of a custody officer, means the functions specified in paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 to the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994;  “NHS health services” means any kind of health services provided as part of the health service continued under section 1(1) of the National Health Service Act 2006 and under section 1(1) of the National Health Service (Wales) Act 2006;  “prisoner custody officer” has the meaning given by section 89(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1991.General4 Extent, commencement and short title(1) This Act extends to England and Wales only.(1) 
(2) This Act comes into force at the end of the period of two months beginning with the day on which it is passed.(3) This Act may be cited as the Assaults on Emergency Workers (Offences) Act 2018.(1) 

24/03/2025  Assisting offender debriefinghttps://www.college.police.uk/app/covert-policing/assisting-offender-debriefing PageAssisting offender debriefingThis page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published23 May 2016Updated14 June 2022Written by College of Policing Covert policing1 min readSection 71 and section 72 of the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (SOCPA) and certain sectionsof the Sentencing Act 2020 (‘the Sentencing Act’) may be used by prosecutors to secure intelligence or evidence from offenders to assist in an investigation or prosecution (of an indictable offence or an offence triable either way). Offenders who provide such assistance are known as assisting offenders and may receive: immunity from prosecution (section 71 SOCPA)  restricted use undertakings (section 72 SOCPA) a reduction in sentence (section 74 of the Sentencing Act) a review of their sentence (section 388 of the Sentencing Act)The decision as to whether it is appropriate to offer a formal written agreement in any particular case is entirely that of the specified prosecutor.If an offender is believed to fall within the remit of the SOCPA or Sentencing Act, consultation should take place with the relevant police debrief unit.Only a specified prosecutor can offer any agreement or undertaking. Only those who are trained and accredited should assist with any agreement or undertaking.Further information See the Crown Prosecution Service’s legal guidance, Assisting Offenders (Immunity, Undertakings and Agreements)Back to Covert policing overview
TagsCovert policing
U4 Helpdesk Answer 2018:5Best practices in addressing police- related corruptionAuthor(s): Krista Lee-Jones Reviewer(s): Leslie Holmes Date: 13 June 2018The police force is commonly identified as one of the most corrupt governmental institutions. The cases of Hong Kong, Georgia and Singapore highlight how determined police administrations, continuous political commitment, and an anti-corruption approach with wide alliances between the public, private and civil society sectors, can make a huge difference in anti- corruption reform effortsU4 Anti-Corruption HelpdeskA free service for staff from U4 partner agencies
QueryWhat recent insights are there regarding best practices to address police-related corruption and police reform to reduce corruption in the (security) sector? Are there success stories? And what are the lessons learnt from, for example, reform in Georgia (after a few years)? What are the crucial points to consider, also taking into account criticism regarding the weaknesses, rule of law standards, long-term sustainability and so on?
Contents1. Overview of police-related corruption2. Case studies3. Lessons learnt4. ReferenceSummaryIn many countries, the police force is commonly identified as one of the most corrupt governmental institutions (Transparency International 2017b). Police-related corruption may comprise of petty corruption where, for example, the public are expected to pay bribes for alleged traffic violations; at the other end of the spectrum, corrupt police officers can conspire with criminals and organised crime gangs in the trafficking of drugs, humans and weapons (DCAF 2012).Case studies and literature reveal that there is no “one size fits all” approach to curbing police-related corruption. Rather, the case studies explored in this paper demonstrate that any measures must take into consideration the political, economic and social environment of a country and address the root causes of corruption rather than adopting a symptomatic approach. For example, in Singapore and Georgia, low salaries and poor working conditions for members of the police force were identified as a cause of corruption among lower level
police. The cases of Hong Kong, Georgia and Singapore also highlight how determined police administrations, continuous political commitment, and an anti-corruption approach with wide alliances between the public, private and civil society sectors, can make a huge difference in anti-corruption reform efforts (DCAF 2012; Hope 2015).1. Overview of police-related corruptionBackgroundMuch of the literature adopts a broad definition of police corruption, which follows Transparency International’s definition of corruption: “the abuse of entrusted power for private gain”. Police corruption broadly refers to “acts of misconduct by police officers aimed at obtaining financial benefits or other personal gains in exchange for selectively enforcing or manipulating rules, as well as the conduct of investigations and arrests” (Chêne 2010).However, cultural considerations must be taken into account in any study of police corruption. Police officers are often confronted with morally ambiguous dilemmas in the course of their work and, as discussed briefly below, corruption in the police can take many forms and occur in many
situations across many different cultures. This moral ambiguity is exemplified by the dilemma of “noble cause corruption”. Police are agents of the state and are bound by strict policies and procedures. On the other hand, they are morally committed to the “good end” (Crank, Flaherty & Giacomazzi 2007). These roles can be conflicting because the policies and procedures in place to protect officers and the public can obstruct an officer from obtaining this good end (Caldero & Crank 2011). Noble cause corruption therefore occurs when a person tries to produce a just outcome through unjust methods, for example, police manipulating evidence to ensure a conviction of a known offender (Merrington et al 2014)Pyman (2012) argues that it is more pragmatic to accept a broad definition that permits further, healthy discussion. Further discussion on the definition of police corruption can be found in Arresting Corruption in the Police: The Global Experience of Police Corruption Reform Efforts.Types of police corruptionCorruption in the police ranges from petty corruption and small acts of bribery to criminal infiltration and political corruption (Chêne 2010). Several reports provide a more in-depth discussion of the different types of police corruption (see, for example, USAID 2007; DCAF 2012; TransparencyInternational 2012; Council of Europe 2015). However, police corruption is generally categorised into four types:ï Petty corruption among lower level police officers includes acts of bribery in everyday interactions with citizens (for example, by traffic police). According to Transparency International’s Global Corruption Barometer, the police is the institution most often reported as being the recipient of bribes (Pyman et al
2012). For example, in the Middle East and North Africa, one in four people who dealt with police paid a bribe (Transparency International 2016).ï Bureaucratic corruption or administrative corruption refers to the misuse of internal procedures and administrative processes and resources for private gain, such as licensing or a lack of response to citizen’s complaints against police officers.ï Corruption linked with criminal groups includes misconduct such as misleading investigations or tampering with evidence.ï High level or political corruption occurs where high level police officials abuse their power for personal gain or for the benefit of political groups to which they are formally or informally affiliated – in other words, criminal infiltration of the state. Political interference may also occur in police investigations, false investigations and the “framing” of political opponents.The impact of police corruptionThe impact of corruption in the police can be far reaching. When basic functions of law and order are compromised by corrupt practices within a police force, the state cannot legitimately prevent and punish violations of the law or protect human rights (Pyman et al. 2012). Police corruption results in public mistrust of the police, rendering it more difficult for the police to perform what should be their primary task, countering crime (DCAF 2012). It compromises the institutional integrity of a policing system and undermines its legitimacy (Hope 2015). Further, if the public is to respect the law, they must be confident that the police adhere to the law in general, and that, in applying the law, they treat people equally (DCAF 2012).
A serious result of police corruption is weakening ethical standards in society. If the public perceives the police to be benefiting from corruption, this could lower their own moral standards and make them more willing to engage in criminal behaviour (DCAF 2012). Police corruption can also damage a state’s international reputation if, for example, there is evidence of police involvement in transnational arms, drugs or human trafficking (DCAF 2012). In short, police corruption can be harmful to democracy, the role of police in society and the community trust’s in the police force (Council of the European Union 2014). Further reading on the consequences of police corruption can be found in the Toolkit on Police Integrity.2. Case studiesEfforts to curb police corruption have occurred in many countries around the world, some more successful than others. The following section examines a number of case studies where reform efforts have been identified as successful, at least in part, in curbing police-related corruption.GeorgiaGeorgia is an often-cited example of successful reform to tackle police corruption. According to the US Department of State, low level corruption is almost completely eradicated in Georgia due to dramatic police and institutional reforms (US Department of State 2017), and overt bribery and extortion have virtually disappeared in Georgia (Light 2014).Before the Rose Revolution of 2003, the Georgian Ministry of Internal Affairs was a militarised Soviet-style structure whose mission was to defend government authority. It had close connections with organised crime, and the drug trade in particular. Police officers extorted bribes from drivers daily, passing a portion of their gains to
their superiors. Corruption within the police and other state organs in Georgia was so deeply institutionalised that an official position had to be purchased, and taking bribes was seen as a necessity to repay this initial investment (Di Puppo 2010).With the election of Mikheil Saakashvili as president in 2004, the new government immediately targeted the corrupt police service. The reforms saw mass dismissals of police and Ministry of Internal Affairs officials, allowing for increased salaries (Di Puppo 2010; DCAF 2012). There was also institutional restructuring and service provision – eliminating several agencies and shifting mandates – whereby changes in jurisdiction removed the military from policing and limited police to law enforcement. Salary, training and personnel policy for the police were also significantly overhauled and revamped (Light 2014). The reform included education for police officers to train them to enhance professionalism, awareness and adherence to human rights and the rule of law (DCAF 2012).Di Puppo concluded that targeting highly visible areas of corruption can quickly enhance public trust in state institutions and the reform of the traffic police had an immediate positive effect on the lives of ordinary Georgians (Di Puppo 2010).However, despite its successes, there is evidence that high-level misconduct persists in the Georgian police force (Kupatadze 2012; Light 2014), and weak accountability of police structures remains a significant problem (Di Puppo 2010). Further, there is a mixed record on the human rights protections afforded by the police (Di Puppo 2010; Kupatadze 2012; Light 2014). The Ministry of Interior remains a powerful, centralised and hierarchical state organ and lacks transparency, accountability and external oversight (Kupatadze
2012). Without adequate checks and balances, the result may be a police force still perceived not as protectors of the citizens but rather of executive interests (Di Puppo 2010).SingaporePolice corruption was rampant in Singapore during the British colonial period (Quah 2014). Analyses of police corruption in colonial Singapore indicate that it was the result of at a series of factors including: low salaries; poor working conditions; a high degree of formalism in the police force; poor recruitment and selection procedures; a lack of training programmes; and ample opportunities for corruption due to inadequate controls (Quah 2001). Measures to tackle corruption in the police force were introduced in 1952 with the establishment of the Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau (CPIB). Since then, a myriad of reforms has reduced corruption within the Singaporean Police Force. Corruption among the police in Singapore is now very low, and Singapore is placed equal sixth in Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index (Transparency International 2017c).The reasons for Singapore’s success is considered to be fourfold: i) political will and the commitment of the government; ii) salaries and working conditions; iii) recruitment and selection procedures and iv) training and socialisation (DCAF 2012).It is important to note, however, the social, political and economic context in which these reforms took place. Singapore is neither a developing nor a post- conflict country, and it has enjoyed decades of political stability and benefited from a considerable head start in the development of an independent anti-corruption body. Further, its small size means it must contend with few of the problems encountered by geographically sparse countries
(Transparency International 2012). This does nothing to detract from Singapore’s success, but suggests that countries requiring police reform might need a considerable period of time before truly positive results can be expected (Transparency International 2012).Hong KongHong Kong is often provided as an example of a state that has been particularly successful in reducing corruption, including police corruption. Mass demonstrations in 1966 and 1973 saw the Hong Kong public demand that the authorities control corruption, especially in the police service. In response, the Hong Kong authorities established the Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC) in 1974, one of the most highly regarded anti-corruption bodies in the world.From an institutional perspective, the establishment of ICAC was essential for holding the police accountable but also for enhancing institutional capacity in maintaining political order. The high degree of institutional continuity and integrity is one of the hallmarks of the Hong Kong ICAC (Hope 2015). Simultaneously, organisational reforms to the Hong Kong Police Force occurred with legal and regulatory instruments developed to ensure the proper ethical discharge of police duties which impose disciplinary measures on officers guilty of offences contained in the regulation.Other preventive measures were also put in place, including transparent recruitment procedures and robust selection procedures. Integrity management has also been incorporated into the organisational structure of the Hong Kong Police Force through education and culture building, governance and control, enforcement and deterrence, rehabilitation and support (Hope 2015).
There are several factors that could account for the low level of police corruption in Hong Kong. First is the institutional integrity of the internal and external control mechanisms. The multi-pronged approach toward police anti-corruption in Hong Kong has created an institutional structure that discourages rent-seeking behaviour by the police.Second, the development of a values-based framework within the police force has facilitated the creation of a corruption-free organisational setup. In particular, the emphasis placed on professionalism, integrity and honesty is considered important in establishing a service- oriented police culture (Wong 2012). Third, the high degree of fairness and predictability in determining the pay and benefits of police force personnel is considered to be a factor discouraging police corruption (Hope 2015).South AfricaIn one study in South Africa, a reduction of bribery in the South African Police Service (SAPS) prompted research into the possible causes of such a reduction. Data showed that perceptions of corruption in the police had fallen in the Limpopo province between 2011 and 2015, suggesting that a wider shift had taken place in police-community relationships in the province. In 2011, according to Afrobarometer, more than half of those surveyed in Limpopo said that “most or all police are corrupt”; in 2015 that figure had nearly halved (28 per cent). The study found that police-related bribery reduction in Limpopo occurred at the same time that the national government led an unprecedented high-level anti-corruption intervention in several provinces (Peiffer et al. 2018).The research suggests the police in Limpopo may have been especially reluctant to engage in bribery during this time because of an uncertainty as to whether they were also under investigation for
corruption and because of the heightened anti- corruption action that took place. The drivers of bribery reduction in this case were likely indirect and unanticipated, a “benign side effect” of a separate anti-corruption intervention. The intervention in Limpopo was not targeted at local police, yet police likely feared they were under greater scrutiny as part of the perceived efficient degree of “command and control” national-level agents were exerting. The sustainability of the intervention’s impact on bribery reduction in Limpopo is therefore questionable (Peiffer et al. 2018).This case demonstrates that certain types of disruption may work to reduce bribery patterns, but only in a relatively short timeframe. For longer impact, disruption strategies likely need to be continuously inventive and re-inventive, and driven by strong leadership (Peiffer et al. 2018).3. Lessons learnedSeveral analysts warn that there is no single anti- corruption strategy that has been sufficient to fully address police corruption (Newburn 1999). Such a complex problem needs a similarly multi-faceted solution, and second, no absolute solution is likely to be possible, although a huge reduction in the quantity of cases is.Several caveats must be borne in mind in any discussion of police corruption. Firstly, the fluid nature of corruption makes it unpredictable and far from universal: some police departments are capable of operating for long stretches of time with relatively little scandal. Secondly, the exposure of police corruption, while frequently necessary to urge reform, can have the undesirable effect of destroying the morale of the police force as a whole: although this is a far lesser problem than the continuation of corruption. Thirdly, while the motivations behind corruption might be similar in
vastly different environments, local traditions and structures mean that effective reforms need to be tailored to the targeted locations (Transparency International 2012).Several best practices emerge from the literature and case studies explored above. As a general rule, for anti-corruption strategies to be successful and comprehensive they need to be embedded in the broader framework of democratic institution- building (Chêne 2010).Social, economic and political contextPolice reform clearly needs to be grounded in the political and social realities of the country and the characteristics of the local police (Chêne 2010) rather than adopting a “one size fits all” approach. While some aspects of police corruption and misconduct appear to be universal, others are unique to – or at least more salient in – some contexts and cultures (DCAF 2012).As Quah (2017) points out, Singapore and Hong Kong have favourable policy contexts for countering corruption, such as smaller land areas and smaller populations than their Asian counterparts. Geography can be an obstacle if the physical location, size or topography of a country hinders the implementation of policies (Quah 2007). Further, economic affluence means that their civil servants are adequately paid to discourage them from accepting bribes (Quah 2017).In Light’s (2014) qualitative analysis of police reform in Georgia, he finds contextual factors play a key role in explaining the success of police reforms and concludes that a significant reduction of corruption in the police force was possible as a result of a unique mix of domestic and international factors.
Light also concludes that the way in which a regime (democratic or authoritarian) came to power seems to matter as much as the type of regime.Democracies that emerge from “pacted transitions” (as opposed to revolutionary ones) may struggle to implement more drastic reforms such as those adopted in Georgia, and may require a more gradual approach. While the support of foreign donors may help, it is essential for the reforming government to be motivated and committed. In other words, domestic politics and power dynamics are crucial factors in ensuring the effectiveness of reforms (Light 2014).Leadership and political willA crucial factor in any attempt to reduce police corruption and other forms of inappropriate behaviour is political will. Political will is only a necessary, not a sufficient, condition; without sufficient state capacity to support political will, the latter will make little impression in the struggle to improve police behaviour (DCAF 2012). States that are serious about reducing and containing police corruption must commit to a long-term approach. Although short-term tactics are at times appropriate for specific instances of misconduct, a successful struggle against corruption requires an on-going strategy of socialisation and vigilance (DCAF 2012).Building political will is a prerequisite for police reform, as fighting corruption may challenge powerful vested interests that are likely to resist reform. Quah (2017) suggests that the most important reason for both Singapore’s and Hong Kong’s success in curbing corruption is the strong political will of their political leaders.In view of the political risks attached it is also important to develop a solid understanding of the political economy of police reform. Similarly, it is important to gain support from civil society, which
can prove challenging in deeply polarised and traumatised societies (Chêne 2010).Address the cause not the symptomsIn his recent assessment of the state of research on corruption, Heywood (2017, 2018) reports that much of corruption research has been focused on the nation state as a unit of analysis, and, in doing so, has largely failed to differentiate between different types of corruption, different localities of corruption and the differences in how corruption behaves across sectors. With respect to the latter of these observations, Heywood (2017) calls for a more “meso-level approach” that can draw attention to corruption’s sector-specific characteristics, so as to provide better understanding about the “modalities of corruption and corruption related risks in key areas”.Heywood (2017) argues for a more detailed understanding of how and why corruption takes place within these sectors: what it looks like in practice, what particular characteristics it has and how to better identify risks.In Singapore, the government’s comprehensive anti-corruption strategy is based on a logic of corruption control which views corruption as caused by both the incentives and opportunities to be corrupt, “attempts to eradicate corruption must be designed to minimize or remove the conditions of both the incentives and opportunities that make individual corrupt behaviour irresistible” (Quah 1989).Corruption in the police can stem from different sources. For example, in Singapore, low salaries were identified as a cause of corruption. The unfavourable working conditions of the local policemen were further manifested in the lack of provision of housing accommodation, pension or medical care for them. Another consequence of the low salaries and unfavourable working conditions
was that it could not attract suitably qualified candidates to join the police (Quah 2014).Likewise, in Georgia, police corruption was driven by wages that were below subsistence levels (Devlin 2010). Officers arbitrarily imposed fines and fees, and pocketed receipts for themselves. The same low pay allowed criminal elements to buy off entire divisions of the force (Devlin 2010).Quah (2007, 2014) argues that corruption can only be minimised in a country if comprehensive measures are initiated to rectify the various causes which contribute to the incentives and opportunities for corrupt behaviour.However, these strategies need to be well considered. For example, before salaries are raised, it should be considered whether such a measure is supported by sustained economic growth (Quah 2007). While increasing salaries may reduce petty corruption among junior officials it likely does not eliminate grand corruption among senior civil servants and politicians. Further, raising salaries alone is ineffective in solving the problem of corruption if the incumbent government lacks the political will to do so, if the anti-corruption agency is ineffective, if corrupt officials are not punished and if opportunities for corruption are not reduced (Quah 2007).Meritocracy and quality control of personnelThe complex nature of policing means that the issue of ethics is central to corruption control and placing ethical scrutiny at the heart of recruitment and selection procedures and within in-service training is vital to the development of a policing culture that is intolerant of corruption (Newburn 2015).Quah (2014) credits reliance on meritocracy to recruit more qualified candidates, and training and
values to enhance job performance and integrity as a factor in curbing corruption among the Singapore Police Force. Likewise, a transparent recruitment process and a robust selection process for the Hong Kong Police Force was identified as a contributing factor to Hong Kong’s success in curbing police corruption (Hope 2015).The role of civil societyA study undertaken by Transparency International UK in 2011-12 found there has been very little involvement of civilian groups or civil society organisations in police corruption reform. The report concluded that “there is a major, urgent need for civil society to find more effective ways of contributing to, stimulating and monitoring police anti-corruption efforts” (Transparency International 2012).Civil society organisations, including media organisations, can play an important role in police reform efforts (Transparency International 2012). In the past, civil society has played a key role in raising awareness of corruption scandals and driving reform.Community-based policing promotes partnerships between police and communities to address community concerns and ensure that the police respond to the needs of the broader public. This can be facilitated, for example, through setting up community consultation forums (Chêne 2010). The success of such initiatives relies on a set of contextual factors such as a minimum degree of order, a conducive political context and support from key actors such as government, the police and civil society (Groenewald & Peake 2004).However, Menocal (2015) notes that “there is very little credible evidence regarding the effectiveness of citizen oversight agencies” and there is no evidence to determine whether external
accountability mechanisms are more or less effective than internal ones.Ivkovic (2005) further highlights that the role of civil society also has its shortcomings. In short, she says, current oversight tends to be “assigned to institutions that are temporary (e.g., independent commissions) or sporadic (e.g., the media), institutions whose focus is either too wide or too narrow (e.g., the mayor), or institutions that at best have the authority to examine only some elements of the agency’s control system (e.g. citizen reviews)” (Ivkovic 2005). She concludes that the challenge is to design an institution, or set of institutions, that will effectively be able to oversee and control the police agency’s control system as a whole on a continuous basis.Independent oversight of the policeCorruption control is unlikely to be successful without significant attention also being paid to external oversight and governance (Newburn 2015). External accountability mechanisms – human rights commissions, citizen complaint and review boards, police auditors – are widely heralded as important instruments of police accountability. Indeed, reform efforts are often limited and incomplete if undertaken without strong, independent external monitoring (Transparency International 2012).Quah (2007, 2017) recommends the establishment of an independent watchdog for the police, one that is independent from police and political control.Hong Kong’s ICAC is often considered highly effective. Scott (2017) suggests that the success of Hong Kong’s ICAC is due to the complex process of winning public trust, of ensuring certainty in outcomes, of establishing the authority of the commission in relation to other institutions and of
monitoring anti-corruption systems. If this can be achieved, hostile exogenous factors may not easily disrupt long-established practices and may allow an ACA to retain or regain public support even in the face of serious scandals (Scott 2017).Hong Kong’s ICAC adopts a three-pronged approach to fighting corruption through enforcement, education and prevention. Public education is a crucial element of its three-pronged strategy to reduce corruption. Early efforts of the ICAC saw community liaison officers place special emphasis on publicising the arrest and successful prosecution of prominent police members. This helped establish the commission‘s strong reputation for a determined crack-down on large scale corruption (Chêne 2010). Large scale public education campaigns also enhance the legitimacy of the ICAC, promote the knowledge of anti- corruption laws, and mobilise the public to report corruption (Chêne 2010).Singapore’s CPIB is also widely regarded as successful. It enjoys extensive legal powers. For example, CPIB officers can propose legislative reforms, seize passports, and freeze assets. They also have extensive powers to carry out their investigations such as the authority to arrest a person suspected of corruption and the ability to access a suspect’s financial accounts or premises to search for evidence. However, like Hong Kong’s Independent Commission against Corruption (ICAC), the CPIB has no power to prosecute directly (Transparency International 2012).Although deemed a successful measure against corruption, the CPIB produces no formal reports or quantifiable evidence to formally assess its success (Transparency International 2012). Further, some commentators highlight that the powers awarded to its officers risk potential abuses of authority (Transparency International 2012).
4. ReferencesAfrobarometer. 2018. Afrobarometer Survey.Chêne, M. 2010. Anti-corruption and Police Reform.Chêne, M. 2013. Codes of Ethics for the Police.Crank, J., & Caldero, M. A. 2000. Police ethics: noble cause corruption.Crank, J., Flaherty, D., & Giacomazzi, A. (2007).The noble cause: An empirical assessment.Council of Europe. 2015. Risk Analysis of Corruption within Law Enforcement.Council of the European Union. 2014. Handbook of Best Practices for the Self-Assessment of Law- Enforcement Forces to Prevent Corruption and Enhance Integrity.DCAF. 2012. Toolkit on Police Integrity.Devlin, M. 2010. Seizing the Reform Moment: Rebuilding Georgia’s Police, 2004-2006.Di Puppo, L. 2010. Police Reform in Georgia. Cracks in an Anti-Corruption Success Story.Heywood, P. 2017. Rethinking Corruption: Hocus- Pocus, Locus and Focus.Heywood, P. 2018. Combatting Corruption in the Twenty-First Century: New Approaches.Hope, K.R. 2015. Police corruption and police reforms in developing societies.Ivkovi?, S.K. 2005. Police (mis)behaviour: a cross- cultural study of corruption seriousness.Ivkovi?, S.K. 2005. Fallen Blue Knights: Controlling Police Corruption.Kupatadze, A. 2012. Police Reform in Georgia.
Light, M. 2014. Police Reforms in the Republic of Georgia: The Convergence of Domestic and Foreign Policy in An Anti-Corruption Drive.Light, M. 2015. Policing Following Political and Social Transitions: Russia, Brazil and China Compared.Mann, C. 2011. Corruption in Justice and Security.Menocal, A.R. 2015. Why Corruption Matters: Understanding Causes, Effects, and How to Address Them. DFID Evidence Paper.Newburn, T. 1999. Understanding and Preventing Police Corruption: Lessons from the LiteratureNewburn, T. 2015. Literature Review: Police Integrity and Corruption.Peiffer, C. et al. 2018. The Surprising Case of Police Bribery Reduction in South Africa.Pyman, N et al. 2012. Arresting Corruption in the Police: The Global Experience of Police Corruption Reform Efforts.Quah, J.S.T. 2006. Preventing Police Corruption in Singapore: The Role of Recruitment, Training and Socialisation.Quah, J.S.T. 2007. Combatting Corruption Singapore-style: Lessons for other Asian Countries.Quah, J.S.T. 2009. Defying institutional failure: learning from the experiences of anti-corruption agencies in four Asian countriesQuah, J. S. T. 2014. Curbing Police Corruption in Singapore: Lessons for Other Asian Countries.Quah, J.S.T. 2017. Minimising Corruption in Hong Kong and Singapore: Lessons for Asian Policy Makers.
Scott, I. 2017. The Challenge of Preserving Hong Kong’s Successful Anti-Corruption System.Transparency International. 2012. Arresting Corruption in the Police: The Global Experience Of Police Corruption Reform Efforts.Transparency International. 2015. People and Corruption: Africa Survey 2015.Transparency International. 2016. People and Corruption: Middle East and North Africa Survey 2016.Transparency International. 2017a. People and Corruption: Asia Pacific 2017.Transparency International. 2017b. People and Corruption: Citizen’s Voices from Around the World. Global Corruption Barometer.Transparency International. 2017c. 2017 Corruption Perception Index.Transparency International. 2017d. People and Corruption: Latin America and the Caribbean.UNODC. 2011. Handbook on Police Accountability, Oversight and Integrity: Criminal Justice Handbook Series.USAID. 2007. USAID Program Brief: Anti- Corruption and Police Integrity: Security Sector Reform Program.USAID. 2016. Effectiveness of Police Accountability Mechanisms.US Department of State, 2017. Investment Climate Statements for 2017.Van Halderen, R. C & Kolthoff, E. 2016. Noble Cause Corruption Revisited: Toward a Structured Research Approach.
World Bank. 2012. Fighting Corruption in Public Services. Chronicling Georgia’s Reforms.
DisclaimerAll views in this text are the author(s)’ and may differ from the U4 partner agencies’ policies.Partner agenciesDFAT (Australia), GIZ/BMZ (Germany), Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Finland, Danida (Denmark), Sida (Sweden), SDC (Switzerland), Norad (Norway), UK Aid/DFID.About U4The U4 anti-corruption helpdesk is a free research service exclusively for staff from U4 partner agencies. This service is a collaboration between U4 and Transparency International (TI) in Berlin, Germany. Researchers at TI run the helpdesk.The U4 Anti-Corruption Resource Centre shares research and evidence to help international development actors get sustainable results. The centre is part of Chr. Michelsen Institute (CMI) in Bergen, Norway – a research institute on global development and human rights.www.U4.no U4@cmi.noKeywordspolice – bribery – Hong Kong – Singapore – GeorgiaOpen accessWe apply a Creative Commons licence to our publications: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0.U4 Partner staff can use the helpdesk for free. Email us at helpdesk@u4.no
24/03/2025 Boost your digital IQ and understanding of deepfakes https://www.college.police.uk/article/boost-your-digital-iq-and-understanding-deepfakes PageBoost your digital IQ and understanding of deepfakesBoost your digital IQ and understanding of deepfakesPublished on 6 March 2025Join the College of Policing's free online knowledge and practice sharing events News1 min readIn today's digital age, understanding digital investigations is essential for all officers, not just specialists. As technology evolves, so do the methods used in crime, fraud, and cybersecurity threats.
From social media and encrypted messaging to financial transactions and data breaches, digital evidence is now critical to solving cases and delivering justice.For police forces, strengthening digital investigation skills enhances the ability to collect, analyse, and interpret evidence effectively. By staying ahead of emerging threats, forces can improve investigative outcomes, protect communities, and contribute to a safer, more secure digital landscape.Digital deception: understanding the deepfake challengeDate: 19 March 2025, 9:30amYou can find out more about the speakers and sessions in this online event in the agenda. Book your placeBoosting digital IQ: essential knowledge for modern law enforcementDate: 20 March 2025, 9:30amYou can find out more about the speakers and sessions in this online event in the agenda. Book your placeTagsDigital intelligence and investigation
MenuHome Crime, justice and law  Data protection Borders, immigration and citizenship: privacy information notice
Home O?ce
UK Visas and Immigration
Immigration Enforcement
Border Force
IntroductionThe Home O?ce hold and process personal information supplied or collected for the purposes of: entering or leaving the UK  securing the border making an application for a visa leave, settlement, citizenship or other immigration service  claiming asylum other forms of protection Or processed as part of: the process of securing the border  enforcing immigration laws law enforcement for criminal matters any other lawful matter including those related to public health The Home O?ce is based at 2 Marsham Street, London SW1P 4DF.The Home O?ce is the controller for this information. This includes when the information is collected or processed by third parties on our behalf.Data protection law in the UK changed on 25 May 2018. This notice reflects your rights under the new laws and lets you know how we will look after and use your personal information. This includes what you tell us about yourself, what we learn about you as you engage with the borders, immigration and citizenship system, and what others share with us to fulfil their legal obligations or help prevent abuse of the immigration system and/or prevent and detect crime. It also covers what information we may share with other organisations.The Home O?ce has appointed a data protection o?cer (DPO) to help ensure that we fulfil our legal obligations when processing personal information. You can contact the DPO for more information.How we protect your personal informationWe have a duty to safeguard and ensure the security of your personal information. We do that by having systems and policies in place to limit access to your information and prevent unauthorised disclosure. Sta? who access personal information must have appropriate security clearance and a business need for accessing the information, and their activity is subject to audit and review.How we gather and use your personal informationWe are only allowed to use, gather and share personal information where we have an appropriate legal basis to do so under the UK General Data Protection Regulations (UK GDPR) or the Data Protection Act 2018. The Home O?ce collects and processes personal information to fulfil its legal and o?cial functions. We will only use personal information when the law allows us to and where it is necessary and proportionate to do so.The legal basis for the processing of your data will, in most cases, be Article 6(1)(e) of the (UK GDPR) – that is, that the processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of o?cial authority vested in the controller.At points, for example in considering asylum claims and verifying your identity, we also process special categories of personal data on the basis of Article 9(2)(g) of the UK GDPR where the processing is necessary for reasons of substantial public interest. This may include information about political beliefs, sexual orientation, religious beliefs and biometrics.We may also process personal data under Part 3 (law enforcement processing) of the Data Protection Act 2018, such as for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal o?ences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public or national security.The legal basis for processing law enforcement data is section 31 of the Data Protection Act 2018 in that it is necessary for the performance of our statutory functions, which include crime prevention, prosecution and bringing o?enders to justice.If we have asked you to provide your consent in order to process your personal data, you also have the right to withdraw your consent at any time. When we ask for your consent, we will tell you how we will process your data, how long we will keep it for and the steps we will take to delete it. We will also outline the steps we will take if you decide to withdraw consent and explain your data protection rights.Examples of ways in which we may process your personal information include when:  you travel to and from the UK you enter the UK by crossing the UK border, for example, an airport  you enter a country in the Common Travel Area you make an application or claim (online, on paper or in person)  you attend an interview we seek to verify your information, documents or identity you supply a biometric (for example, fingerprints or a facial biometric) we receive information from a sponsor or other third party in relation to your application we receive allegations or intelligence from law enforcement agencies and others involved in preventing crime and fraud we are notified of a relevant criminal conviction sound and visual imagery, such as CCTV and facial recognition  intelligence sources incident details such as crime reportsWe may also request information from third parties. For example, this might be for the purposes of verifying information you supplied in support of an application, obtaining information needed for a safeguarding purpose, obtaining new address details of people we are trying to trace, or undertaking other enforcement actions. This may involve, for example: contacting your sponsor or linked applicant obtaining information from other government departments – these may include HM Revenue & Customs (HMRC), Department for Work and Pensions (DWP), Department for Education(DfE), Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA), and Driver and Vehicle Standards Agency (DVSA) obtaining information from credit reference agencies, fraud prevention agencies or banks, and local authorities seeking to verify documents, information, or identity in relation to your application or other relevant purpose – this may include private and public authorities in other countries local authority services (for example, social services) United Kingdom health bodies for reasons relating to public health The main ways we process personal information are shown below.We process and hold personal information for visas, leave, settlement, citizenship, EU residence permits, extensions, renewals or transfers of conditions, and so on. Examples of how we may use your data: to verify your information, documents and identity to engage with your sponsors, or other relevant individuals including dependants and responsible adults to keep in contact with you we may notify you when your period of leave is due to come to an end  to detect and prevent crime to support enforcement operations to ensure compliance with employment regulations  for safeguarding purposes to support appeals and review processes  for immigration related research purposesWe decide claims for asylum and other forms of protection.Examples of how we may use your data: to confirm your identity and details of claims to keep in contact with you while we process your application  to provide accommodation and financial support for safeguarding purposes  to detect and prevent crime for unaccompanied asylum seeking children, we may make family tracing checks provided this will not put you at any risk to check with other countries to determine if your claim should be processed elsewhere to support appeals processesWe will not share any of your information with authorities in your country of origin if this would put you or your family at risk.We secure the UK border.Examples of how we may use your data: to control entry of people and goods subject to immigration and customs controls  to protect against threats to public security and safety to detect and prevent crime to refuse carriers authority to carry individuals who are within the scope of the Authority to Carry Scheme to develop risk and fraud profiles to work with Public Authorities in the discharge of their duties, such as public healthWe enforce UK immigration law, protect public security and prevent crime.Examples of how we may use your data: to promote voluntary return to support removals and deportation to plan and undertake enforcement operations  to prevent, detect and investigate crime to enforce right to work legislation  to maintain the compliant environment  to develop risk and fraud profiles for detention purposes  for safeguarding purposesWe safeguard and promote the welfare of children and adults.Examples of how we may use your data: to ensure that relevant authorities and services are able to provide support to vulnerable individuals and families to support decisions on vulnerable people  to identify people at riskWe process your application to join a premium service such as the Registered Traveller Service, or to support applications to join Global Entry.Examples of how we may use your data: to decide your application  to keep in contact with you  to improve the service we may notify you when your membership period is due to come to an end in order you may consider renewingWhich other organisations have access to your personal informationA number of organisations from the private, public and charity sectors are either contracted by, or subject to agreement with, the Home O?ce to provide functions in relation to the borders, immigration and citizenship system. To do this they may process personal data on our behalf and under our direction.Examples of these functions where we use other organisations in this way include:  to support the visa process – we may use contractors to take payments, takebiometrics on our behalf, to operate visa centres overseas, and print biometricresidence permits to conduct customer experience research and operate customer contact centres  to help provide services in relation to vulnerable people and those seekingprotection – this extends from support for the processing of resettlement cases overseas, support for unaccompanied asylum seeking children, and the provision of helplines the operation of detention centres and holding facilities, and associated health services escorting services  border processing to protect public healthWhich other organisations we share data withWe will also share data for law enforcement purposes and to prevent fraud and to assist other organisations in delivering their statutory functions.These include, for example: law enforcement agencies to support the prevention of crime, or for national security purposes – this may include international agencies, for example, Interpol, and national authorities organisations involved in the prevention of fraud – for example credit reference agencies local authorities and charity organisations to assist them in delivering their statutory duties in particular protecting children and other vulnerable individuals in the community HMRC, DWP, and the NHS in relation to rights to access public services other government departments and agencies as necessary for them to deliver their statutory duties and public functions HM Courts and Tribunals Service in relation to appeals banks, financial organisations and financial providers in accordance with the 2014 and 2016 Immigration Act provisions and other relevant legislation current, past and prospective employersAutomated decision-making and profilingArticle 22 of the UK GDPR provides the right not to be subject to a decision made solely on the basis of automated processing which produces legal or other significant e?ects. Parts of our processing may involve degrees of automation, but complex or adverse decisions will always be taken by a trained o?cer or caseworker.We may use personal information, for example from previous applicants, to develop tools that allow us to assess and then process applications in a particular way. This helps us to target our resources and ensure our processing is e?cient, allowing us to minimise costs while protecting the public e?ectively. However, an o?cer would still be available to decide and/or review any such decision. Any profiling must comply with our wider obligations under equality legislation.Data transfers outside of the European Economic Area (including The Common Travel Area)The UK GDPR applies to all personal data within the European Union, but rights may be enforced, where applicable, in other parts of the World.We may transfer personal information to authorities or organisations in countries outside the European Economic Area. This includes when you enter or seek to enter the Common Travel Area via Ireland, the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man. When we do, this will be for specific purposes.These may include, for example, validating aspects of your application, preventing or detecting of crime, including fraud, supporting returns or helping to identify or prevent those who may seek to enter or remain in the UK who may not comply with the conditions attached to their entry or leave to remain. When we do this, we seek to take appropriate steps to safeguard your information, for example by agreeing memoranda of understanding. We may rely on the derogation in Article 49(1)(d) of the UK GDPR where necessary.Transfers for criminal law enforcement will be carried out under section 73 of the Data Protection Act 2018, where necessary we may rely on section 76, but only when the special circumstances conditions are met.Contacting you using your personal informationBeyond the normal processing of your application, we may use your personal information (for example, email address and mobile number) to send you prompts. For example, to remind you when your period of leave is coming to an end or to issue a renewal reminder in advance of the expiry of your membership of any premium passenger service, such as the Registered Traveller Service, to facilitate your renewal. In addition, we may use your details to seek feedback on the handling of your application to help us improve our services or for research purposes related to immigration matters.How long we keep your personal information forWe will keep your personal information for as long as it is necessary for permitted purposes. In the borders, immigration and citizenship system, we maintain a long-term record of immigration history and immigration o?ending to support future decision- making and enforce penalties.Personal data will be typically retained for 25 years after a decision to grant settlement or naturalisation and for 15 years after the last action in other cases. Information on foreign national o?enders may be retained until the death of the data subject. At the border, passenger name records data is retained for up to 5 years. Advance passenger information may be retained for 10 years. Arrest and detention records may be held for 6 years. We continue to keep retention periods under review to ensure they meet our role of securing the UK border and ensuring we can support those who are seeking to enter or remain in the UK.A blanket moratorium to prevent the destruction of all Home O?ce business information, including all operational records and case files, was introduced in 2015 as a result of the Independent Inquiry into Child Sexual Abuse (IICSA).Although the requirement to preserve information for IICSA no longer exists, the mechanisms to prevent the destruction of information will remain until work to replace with targeted moratoria has concluded. It does not apply where there is a statutory requirement to delete data.How to get a copy of your personal informationYou can request y our personal information.Under the UK GDPR you also have the right to object to and ask to restrict our use of your personal information, and to ask us to rectify or delete your personal information. However, there may be a number of legal or other o?cial reasons why we need to continue to keep or use your data.If you want to exercise these rights please email us at: subjectaccessrequest@homeo?ce.gov.ukPostal applications may be made at:Subject Access Request Unit Lunar House, 40 Wellesley Road CroydonCR9 2BYHow to complainIf you are not satisfied with the service that you have received, please contact the department within the Home O?ce which has been handling your case.You also have the right to complain to the Information Commissioner’s O?ce about the way we handle your personal data or respond to your requests for access to your personal data or the exercise of your other rights under the UK GDPR or the UK Data Protection Act 2018.You can contact the Information Commissioner’s O?ce by telephone on 0303 123 1113. Website: Information Commissioner’s O?ceServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking, jobs and pensionsGet involved
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesBorders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 20092009 CHAPTER 11An Act to provide for customs functions to be exercisable by the Secretary of State, the Director of Border Revenue and officials designated by them; to make provision about the use and disclosure of customs information; to make provision for and in connection with the exercise of customs functions and functions relating to immigration, asylum or nationality; to make provision about citizenship and other nationality matters; to make further provision about immigration and asylum; and for connected purposes.	[21st July 2009]BE IT ENACTED by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:—
PART 1BORDER FUNCTIONSGeneral customs functions of the Secretary of State1 General customs functions of the Secretary of State(1) The functions of the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs that are exercisable in relation to general customs matters are exercisable by the Secretary of State concurrently with the Commissioners.(2) For the purposes of this Part, a “general customs matter” is a matter in relation to which the Commissioners, or officers of Revenue and Customs, have functions, other than—(a) a matter listed in Schedule 1 to the Commissioners for Revenue and Customs Act 2005 (c. 11),(b) any tax, duty or levy not mentioned in that Schedule,(c) a matter in respect of which functions were transferred to the Commissioners from the Paymaster General under the Transfer of Functions (Office of Her Majesty's Paymaster General) Order 2006 (S.I. 2006/607),(d) the subject matter of [F1Directive 2015/849/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20th May 2015 on the prevention of the use of the financial system for the purpose of money laundering or terrorist financing] (as amended from time to time), and(e) the subject matter of [F2Regulation (EU) 2015/847 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20th May 2015 on information accompanying transfers of funds] (as amended from time to time).(3) If a function is exercisable by the Commissioners—(a) in relation to a general customs matter, and(b) in relation to any other matter,the function is exercisable by the Secretary of State in relation to the general customs matter only.(4) So far as is appropriate for the purposes of or in connection with this section, references to the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs, or to Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs, in an enactment, instrument or document to which this section applies are to be construed as including a reference to the Secretary of State.(5) References in this section (other than in subsection (8))—(a) to functions of the Commissioners are to functions conferred by an enactment to which this section applies;(b) to functions of officers of Revenue and Customs are to functions conferred by an enactment to which section 3 (designation of general customs officials) applies.(6) This section applies to—(a) an enactment passed or made before the end of the session in which this Act is passed,[F3(aa)	sections 98 and 99 of the Energy Act 2013 (HMRC functions in relation to Office for Nuclear Regulation etc.),] and(b) an instrument or document issued before the passing of this Act.(a) 
(7) This includes—(a) section 5(2)(b) of the Commissioners for Revenue and Customs Act 2005 (c. 11) (Commissioners' initial functions),(b) section 9 of that Act (ancillary powers),(c) section 25A(2) of that Act (certificates of debt),(d) section 31 of that Act (obstruction), and(e) section 33 of that Act (power of arrest) other than in its application to an offence under section 30 of that Act (impersonation),but does not include any other enactment contained in that Act.(8) In this Part “general customs function” means—(a) a function that is exercisable—(i) by the Secretary of State by virtue of this section, or(ii) by general customs officials by virtue of section 3,(b) a function that is conferred on general customs officials or the Secretary of State by or by virtue of any of sections 22 to 24 (investigations and detention), or(c) a function under [F4[F5assimilated] law] that is exercisable by the Secretary of State or general customs officials in relation to a matter—(i) in relation to which functions under [F4[F5assimilated] law] are exercisable by the Commissioners or officers of Revenue and Customs, and(ii) that is not listed in paragraphs (a) to (e) of subsection (2).2 Power of Secretary of State to modify functions(1) The Secretary of State may by order—(a) amend section 1(2) (matters that are general customs matters) so as to add, modify or remove a matter;(b) amend that section so as to exclude its application in relation to a function of the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs or to modify or remove a reference to a function previously so excluded;(a) 
(c) make provision for that section to apply in relation to a function conferred on the Commissioners by an enactment passed or made after the end of the session in which this Act is passed;(d) modify any enactment (including an enactment passed or made after the passing of this Act) in consequence of provision made under any of paragraphs(a) to (c);(e) make provision for a function of the Secretary of State or general customs officials to be treated, or not to be treated, as a general customs function.(2) The power under subsection (1)(a) may not be exercised to add any of the following to section 1(2)—(a) a matter listed in Schedule 1 to the Commissioners for Revenue and Customs Act 2005 (c. 11),(b) value added tax,(c) a customs revenue matter (as to which, see section 7), or(d) a matter listed at section 7(2)(e).(3) The Secretary of State must consult the Treasury before exercising the power under this section.General customs officials3 Designation of general customs officials(1) The Secretary of State by whom general customs functions are exercisable may designate—(a) an immigration officer, or  (b) any other official in that Secretary of State's department, as a general customs official.(2) A general customs official—(a) has, in relation to a general customs matter, the same functions as an officer of Revenue and Customs would have, and(b) may exercise the functions conferred on the Secretary of State by section 1 (general customs functions of the Secretary of State).(3) This does not prevent the exercise of the Secretary of State's functions by any other official of the Secretary of State.(4) If a function within subsection (2) is exercisable—(a) in relation to a general customs matter, and(b) in relation to any other matter,the function is exercisable by a general customs official in relation to the general customs matter only.(5) So far as is appropriate for the purposes of or in connection with this section, references to an officer of Revenue and Customs, or to Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs, in an enactment, instrument or document to which this section applies are to be construed as including a reference to a general customs official.(6) References in this section to functions of an officer of Revenue and Customs are to functions conferred by an enactment to which this section applies.(1) 
(7) This section applies to—(a) an enactment passed or made, or an instrument or document issued, before this Act is passed, and(b) subject to express provision to the contrary, an enactment passed or made, or an instrument or document issued, after this Act is passed.(8) This includes—(a) section 2(4) of the Commissioners for Revenue and Customs Act 2005 (c. 11) (continuation of anything begun by one officer by another),(b) section 6 of that Act (officers' initial functions),(c) section 25(1) and (5) of that Act (conduct of civil proceedings in a magistrates' court or in the sheriff court),(d) section 25A(1) of that Act (certificates of debt),(e) section 31 of that Act (obstruction),(f) section 32 of that Act (assault), and(g) section 33 of that Act (power of arrest) other than in its application to an offence under section 30 of that Act (impersonation),but does not otherwise include any enactment contained in that Act.(9) This section has effect subject to—(a) any limitation specified in the official's designation under section 4 (supplementary provisions about designation), and(b) any designation of the official under section 11 (designation of customs revenue officials).4 Designation: supplementary(1) A designation under section 3 is subject to such limitations as may be specified in the designation.(2) A limitation specified under subsection (1) may, in particular, relate to—(a) the functions that are exercisable by virtue of the designation, or(b) the purposes for which those functions are exercisable.(3) A designation under section 3—(a) may be permanent or for a specified period,(b) may (in either case) be withdrawn, and(c) may be varied.(4) The power to designate, or to withdraw or vary a designation, is exercised by the Secretary of State giving notice to the official in question.(5) The Secretary of State may designate an official under section 3 only if the Secretary of State is satisfied that the official—(a) is capable of effectively carrying out the functions that are exercisable by virtue of the designation,(b) has received adequate training in respect of the exercise of those functions, and(c) is otherwise a suitable person to exercise those functions.(a) 
5 Directions by the Secretary of StateA general customs official must comply with the directions of the Secretary of State in the exercise of general customs functions.The Director of Border Revenue6 The Director of Border Revenue(1) The Secretary of State must designate an official in the department of the Secretary of State by whom general customs functions are exercisable as the Director of Border Revenue.(2) Before making a designation under this section, the Secretary of State must obtain the consent of the Treasury to the designation.7 Customs revenue functions of the Director(1) The functions of the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs that are exercisable in relation to customs revenue matters are exercisable by the Director of Border Revenue concurrently with the Commissioners.(2) For the purposes of this Part, each of the following is a “customs revenue matter”—F6(a)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(b) anti-dumping duty (within the meaning [F7it has in Union customs legislation]);(c) countervailing duty (within the meaning [F8it has in Union customs legislation]);(d) customs duties;(e) duties of excise other than—F9(i) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(ii) bingo duty,(iii) gaming duty,(iv) general betting duty,(v) lottery duty,(vi) pool betting duty, F10...(vii) remote gaming duty; [F11and(viii) machine games duty;](f) value added tax so far as relating to the export of goods from, or the import of goods into, the United Kingdom.(3) Subsection (1) does not apply to—(a) any function of making, by statutory instrument, any regulations, rules or an order;(b) any function of issuing notices, directions or conditions that relate to value added tax and that apply generally to any person falling within their terms.(4) If a function is exercisable by the Commissioners—(a) in relation to a customs revenue matter, and(b) in relation to any other matter,(a) 
the function is exercisable by the Director in relation to the customs revenue matter only.(5) So far as is appropriate for the purposes of or in connection with this section, references to the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs, or to Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs, in an enactment, instrument or document to which this section applies are to be construed as including a reference to the Director.(6) References in this section to functions of the Commissioners are to functions conferred by an enactment to which this section applies.(7) This section applies to—(a) an enactment passed or made before the end of the session in which this Act is passed,[F12(aa)	sections 98 and 99 of the Energy Act 2013 (HMRC functions in relation to Office for Nuclear Regulation etc.),]F13...[F14(ab)	Part 1 and sections 40A and 40B of the Taxation (Cross-border Trade) Act 2018, and](b) an instrument or document issued before the passing of this Act.(8) This includes—(a) section 5(1)(b) and (2)(b) of the Commissioners for Revenue and Customs Act 2005 (c. 11) (Commissioners' initial functions),(b) section 9 of that Act (ancillary powers),(c) section 24(1), (2), (3)(e) and (4) to (7) of that Act (evidence),(d) section 25(1), (1A), (5) and (6) of that Act (conduct of civil proceedings),(e) section 25A(2) of that Act (certificates of debt),(f) section 26 of that Act (rewards),(g) section 31 of that Act (obstruction), and(h) section 33 of that Act (power of arrest) other than in its application to an offence under section 30 of that Act (impersonation),but does not include any other enactment contained in that Act.(9) In this Part “customs revenue function” means—(a) a function that is exercisable—(i) by the Director by virtue of this section, or(ii) by customs revenue officials by virtue of section 11,(b) a function that is conferred on customs revenue officials or the Director by or by virtue of any of sections 22 to 24 (investigations and detention), or(c) a function under [F15[F16assimilated] law, or Union customs legislation,] that is exercisable by the Director or customs revenue officials in relation to a customs revenue matter.[F17(10) In this section “Union customs legislation” has the meaning it has in Part 1 of the Taxation (Cross-border Trade) Act 2018.]
F7	Words in s. 7(2)(b) substituted (17.12.2020 for specified purposes, 31.12.2020 in so far as not already in force) by 2018 c. 22, Sch. 7 para. 156(2)(b) (as substituted by Taxation (Post-transition Period) Act 2020 (c. 26), s. 11(1)(e), Sch. 1 para. 10(5)(a) (with Sch. 2 para. 7(7)-(9)); S.I. 2020/1642, reg. 9)F8	Words in s. 7(2)(c) substituted (17.12.2020 for specified purposes, 31.12.2020 in so far as not already in force) by 2018 c. 22, Sch. 7 para. 156(2)(a) (as substituted by Taxation (Post-transition Period) Act 2020 (c. 26), s. 11(1)(e), Sch. 1 para. 10(5)(a) (with Sch. 2 para. 7(7)-(9)); S.I. 2020/1642, reg. 9)F9	S. 7(2)(e)(i) omitted (with effect in accordance with Sch. 24 para. 66(3) of the amending Act) by virtue of Finance Act 2012 (c. 14), Sch. 24 para. 58 (with Sch. 24 para. 62)F10 Word in s. 7(2)(e)(vi) omitted (with effect in accordance with Sch. 24 para. 66(2) of the amending Act) by virtue of Finance Act 2012 (c. 14), Sch. 24 para. 49(a)F11	S. 7(2)(e)(viii) and word inserted (with effect in accordance with Sch. 24 para. 66(2) of the amending Act) by Finance Act 2012 (c. 14), Sch. 24 para. 49(b)F12  S. 7(7)(aa) inserted (1.4.2014) by Energy Act 2013 (c. 32), s. 156(1), Sch. 12 para. 101(3); S.I.2014/251, art. 4F13 Word in s. 7(7)(aa) omitted (13.9.2018 for specified purposes, 31.12.2020 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Taxation (Cross-border Trade) Act 2018 (c. 22), s. 57(1)(a), Sch. 7 para. 156(3)(a) (with savings and transitional provisions in S.I. 2020/1449, reg. 3 and 2020 c. 26, Sch. 2 para. 7(7)-(9)); S.I. 2020/1642, reg. 4(a))F14  S. 7(7)(ab) inserted (13.9.2018 for specified purposes, 31.12.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Taxation (Cross-border Trade) Act 2018 (c. 22), s. 57(1)(a), Sch. 7 para. 156(3)(b) (as amended by 2020 c. 26, s. 11(1)(e), Sch. 1 para. 10(5)(b)) (with savings and transitional provisions in S.I.2020/1449, reg. 3 and 2020 c. 26, Sch. 2 para. 7(7)-(9)); S.I. 2020/1642, reg. 4(a))F15 Words in s. 7(9)(c) substituted (17.12.2020 for specified purposes, 31.12.2020 in so far as not already in force) by 2018 c. 22, Sch. 7 para. 156(4) (as substituted by Taxation (Post-transition Period) Act 2020 (c. 26), s. 11(1)(e), Sch. 1 para. 10(5)(c) (with Sch. 2 para. 7(7)-(9)); S.I. 2020/1642, reg. 9)F16 Word in s. 7(9)(c) substituted (1.1.2024) by The Retained EU Law (Revocation and Reform) Act 2023 (Consequential Amendment) Regulations 2023 (S.I. 2023/1424), reg. 1(2), Sch. para. 69(2)(b)F17 S. 7(10) inserted by 2018 c. 22, Sch. 7 para. 156(5) (as substituted (17.12.2020 for specified purposes, 31.12.2020 in so far as not already in force) by Taxation (Post-transition Period) Act 2020 (c. 26), s.11(1)(e), Sch. 1 para. 10(5)(c) (with Sch. 2 para. 7(7)-(9)); S.I. 2020/1642, reg. 9))8 Power of Treasury to modify Director's functionsThe Treasury may by order—(a) amend section 7(2) (matters that are customs revenue matters) so as to add, modify or remove a matter;(b) amend section 7(3) (functions to which that section does not apply) so as to add, modify or remove a function;(c) make provision for that section to apply in relation to a function conferred on the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs by an enactment passed or made after the end of the session in which this Act is passed;(d) modify any enactment (including an enactment passed or made after the passing of this Act) in consequence of provision made under any of paragraphs(a) to (c).9 Delegation of Director's functions(1) The Director of Border Revenue may make arrangements to delegate a function of the Director.(2) The delegation of a function under this section—(1) 
(a) does not prevent the exercise of the function by the Director, and(b) does not prevent the exercise of the function by a customs revenue official (see section 11).(3) Where the Director delegates a function under this section—(a) the Director must monitor the exercise of the function by the person to whom it is delegated, and(b) the person must comply with the directions of the Director in exercising that function.10 Compliance with directions etc.(1) This section applies to—(a) the Director of Border Revenue in the exercise of the Director's customs revenue functions, and(b) a person to whom such functions are delegated under section 9.(2) A person to whom this section applies must comply with any directions of a general nature given by the Treasury.(3) A person to whom this section applies must apply—(a) any concession published by the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs and available generally to any person falling within its terms, and(b) any interpretation of the law issued by the Commissioners (whether or not published).(4) A person to whom this section applies must also—(a) comply with any other guidance issued by the Commissioners (whether or not published), and(b) take account of any other material published by the Commissioners.Customs revenue officials11 Designation of customs revenue officials(1) The Director of Border Revenue may designate—(a) an immigration officer, or(b) any other official in the department of the Secretary of State by whom general customs functions are exercisable,as a customs revenue official.(2) A customs revenue official—(a) has, in relation to a customs revenue matter, the same functions as an officer of Revenue and Customs would have, and(b) may exercise the functions conferred on the Director by section 7 (customs revenue functions).(3) If a function within subsection (2) is exercisable—(a) in relation to a customs revenue matter, and(b) in relation to any other matter,(a) 
the function is exercisable by a customs revenue official in relation to the customs revenue matter only.(4) So far as is appropriate for the purposes of or in connection with this section, references to an officer of Revenue and Customs, or to Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs, in an enactment, instrument or document to which this section applies are to be construed as including a reference to a customs revenue official.(5) References in this section to functions of an officer of Revenue and Customs are to functions conferred by an enactment to which this section applies.(6) This section applies to—(a) an enactment passed or made, or an instrument or document issued, before this Act is passed, and(b) subject to express provision to the contrary, an enactment passed or made, or an instrument or document issued, after this Act is passed.(7) This includes—(a) section 2(4) of the Commissioners for Revenue and Customs Act 2005 (c. 11) (continuation of anything begun by one officer by another),(b) section 6 of that Act (officers' initial functions),(c) section 25(1), (1A) and (5) of that Act (conduct of civil proceedings),(d) section 25A(1) of that Act (certificates of debt),(e) section 26 of that Act (rewards),(f) section 31 of that Act (obstruction),(g) section 32 of that Act (assault), and(h) section 33 of that Act (power of arrest) other than in its application to an offence under section 30 of that Act (impersonation),but does not otherwise include any enactment contained in that Act.(8) This section has effect subject to—(a) any limitation specified in the official's designation under section 12 (supplementary provisions about designation), and(b) any designation of the official under section 3 (designation of general customs officials).12 Designation: supplementary(1) A designation under section 11 is subject to such limitations as may be specified in the designation.(2) A limitation specified under subsection (1) may, in particular, relate to—(a) the functions that are exercisable by virtue of the designation, or(b) the purposes for which those functions are exercisable.(3) A designation under section 11—(a) may be permanent or for a specified period,(b) may (in either case) be withdrawn, and(c) may be varied.(4) The power to designate, or to withdraw or vary a designation, is exercised by the Director of Border Revenue giving notice to the official in question.(1) 
(5) The Director may designate an official under section 11 only if the Director is satisfied that the official—(a) is capable of effectively carrying out the functions that are exercisable by virtue of the designation,(b) has received adequate training in respect of the exercise of those functions, and(c) is otherwise a suitable person to exercise those functions.13 Directions by the DirectorA customs revenue official must comply with the directions of the Director of Border Revenue in the exercise of customs revenue functions.Use and disclosure of information14 Use and disclosure of customs information(1) A person to whom this section applies may—(a) use customs information acquired by that person in connection with a function exercisable by that person for the purpose of any other function exercisable by that person, and(b) disclose customs information to any other person to whom this section applies for the purpose of a function exercisable by that person.(2) The persons to whom this section applies are—(a) a designated customs official,(b) an immigration officer,(c) the Secretary of State by whom general customs functions are exercisable,(d) any other Minister of the Crown in the department of that Secretary of State,(e) the Director of Border Revenue, and(f) a person acting on behalf of a person mentioned in paragraphs (a) to (e).(3) This section is subject to any provision that restricts or prohibits the use or disclosure of information and that is contained in—(a) this Part,(b) any other enactment, or(c) an international or other agreement to which the United Kingdom or Her Majesty's Government is party.(4) In subsection (3) the reference to an enactment does not include an enactment contained in, or in an instrument made under—(a) an Act of the Scottish Parliament,(b) a Measure or Act of the National Assembly for Wales, or(c) Northern Ireland legislation.(5) This section is without prejudice to—(a) the use by a person to whom it applies of information other than customs information;(a) 
(b) the disclosure by or to a person to whom it applies of information other than customs information.(6) In this Part—  “customs function” means a general customs function or a customs revenue function;  “customs information” means information acquired or capable of being acquired as a result of the exercise of a customs function;  “customs revenue information” means information acquired or capable of being acquired as a result of the exercise of a customs revenue function;  “designated customs official” means a general customs official or a customs revenue official.(7) It is immaterial for the purposes of subsection (6)—(a) whether the information was acquired or is capable of being acquired by the person by whom it is held or another person;(b) whether the information was also acquired or is also capable of being acquired in the exercise of any other function.15 Prohibition on disclosure of personal customs information(1) A person who is or was a relevant official, the Secretary of State by whom general customs functions are exercisable or another Minister of the Crown in that Secretary of State's department may not disclose personal customs information to a person who is not—(a) a relevant official, or(b) a Minister of the Crown in that department.(2) A person who is or was a relevant official may not disclose personal customs revenue information to a Minister of the Crown.(3) In this Part “relevant official” means—(a) a designated customs official,(b) an immigration officer,(c) the Director of Border Revenue, or(d) a person acting on behalf of—(i) the Secretary of State by whom general customs functions are exercisable, or(ii) a person mentioned in paragraphs (a) to (c).(4) In this Part—  “personal customs information” means customs information relating to a person that—(a) identifies that person, or(b) enables that person to be identified (either by itself or in combination with other information);  “personal customs revenue information” means customs revenue information relating to a person that—(a) identifies that person, or(b) enables that person to be identified (either by itself or in combination with other information).(a) 
(5) A person—(a) does not breach subsection (1) by disclosing information the person knows was acquired otherwise than as the result of the exercise of a customs function;(b) does not breach subsection (2) by disclosing information the person knows was acquired otherwise than as the result of the exercise of a customs revenue function.(6) Subsections (1) and (2) are also subject to—(a) section 16 (exceptions to the prohibition in this section), and(b) any enactment (other than an enactment contained in this Part) permitting disclosure, where the disclosure in question does not contravene any restriction imposed by the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs on the disclosure of customs revenue information.(7) This section does not apply to information supplied by or on behalf of Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs [F18or to information supplied by or on behalf of the Crown Prosecution Service under section 40 or 41A of the UK Borders Act 2007].This is without prejudice to any other restriction on the disclosure of such information.(8) In subsection (6) the reference to an enactment does not include an enactment contained in, or in an instrument made under—(a) an Act of the Scottish Parliament,(b) a Measure or Act of the National Assembly for Wales, or(c) Northern Ireland legislation.16 Exceptions to section 15 prohibition(1) A person does not breach section 15(1) or (2) by making a disclosure—(a) to which any of subsections (3) to (8) applies, and(b) which, in the case of a disclosure of customs revenue information, does not contravene any restriction imposed by the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs.(2) Subsection (1)(b) does not apply if the person making the disclosure knows that the information was acquired otherwise than as the result of the exercise of a customs revenue function.(3) This subsection applies to a disclosure which is made for the purposes of—(a) a customs function,(b) a function relating to immigration, asylum or nationality,(c) a function relating to national security, or(d) a function relating to the prevention or detection of crime.(a) 
(4) This subsection applies to a disclosure which is made to a person exercising public functions (whether or not within the United Kingdom) for the purposes of any of those functions.(5) This subsection applies to a disclosure which—(a) is made for the purposes of civil proceedings (whether or not within the United Kingdom) relating to a function within subsection (3),(b) is made for the purposes of a criminal investigation or criminal proceedings (whether or not within the United Kingdom), or(c) is made in pursuance of an order of a court.(6) This subsection applies to a disclosure which is made with the consent of each person to whom the information relates.(7) This subsection applies to a disclosure which is made in order to comply with an obligation of the United Kingdom, or Her Majesty's Government, under an international or other agreement.(8) This subsection applies to a disclosure—(a) to a person specified in regulations made jointly by the Treasury and the Secretary of State, or(b) of a kind specified in such regulations.17 Prohibition on further disclosure(1) A person to whom information is disclosed in reliance on section 16 or this section may not disclose that information without the consent of a relevant official (which may be general or specific).(2) A person does not breach subsection (1) by making a disclosure—(a) to which any of subsections (3) to (8) of section 16 applies, and(b) which, in the case of a disclosure of customs revenue information, does not contravene any restriction imposed by the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs.(3) Subsection (2)(b) does not apply if the person making the disclosure knows that the information was acquired otherwise than as the result of the exercise of a customs revenue function.(4) This section is also subject to any other enactment permitting disclosure.(5) In subsection (4) the reference to an enactment does not include an enactment contained in, or in an instrument made under—(a) an Act of the Scottish Parliament,(b) a Measure or Act of the National Assembly for Wales, or(c) Northern Ireland legislation.18 Offence of wrongful disclosure(1) A person commits an offence if the person breaches section 15(1) or (2) or 17(1).(2) It is a defence for a person charged with an offence under this section to prove that the person reasonably believed—(1) 
(a) that the disclosure was lawful, or(b) that the information had already and lawfully been made available to the public.(3) A prosecution for an offence under this section—(a) may be brought in England and Wales only with the consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions F19...;(b) may be brought in Northern Ireland only with the consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland.(4) This section is without prejudice to the pursuit of any remedy or the taking of any action in relation to a breach of section 15(1) or (2) or 17(1) (whether or not this section applies to the breach).(5) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable—(a) on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years, or to a fine, or to both;(b) on summary conviction—(i) in England and Wales, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding [F20the general limit in a magistrates’ court], or to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum, or to both;(ii) in Scotland, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months, or to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum, or to both;(iii) in Northern Ireland, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months, or to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum, or to both.(6) In relation to an offence under this section committed before [F212 May 2022], the reference in subsection (5)(b)(i) to [F22the general limit in a magistrates’ court] has effect as if it were a reference to 6 months.19 Application of statutory provisions(1) Nothing in sections 14 to 17 authorises the making of a disclosure which—(a) contravenes [F23the data protection legislation], or(b) is prohibited by [F24any of Parts 1 to 7 or Chapter 1 of Part 9 of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016].(a) 
(2) Information whose disclosure is prohibited by section 15(1) or (2) or 17(1) is exempt information by virtue of section 44(1)(a) of the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (c. 36).(3) Sections 15(6), 16 and 17(2) and (4) are to be disregarded in determining for the purposes of subsection (2) whether the disclosure of personal customs information is prohibited by section 15(1) or (2) or 17(1).(4) In section 23 of the Commissioners for Revenue and Customs Act 2005 (c. 11) (freedom of information), after subsection (1) insert—“(1A) Subsections (2) and (3) of section 18 are to be disregarded in determining for the purposes of subsection (1) of this section whether the disclosure of revenue and customs information relating to a person is prohibited by subsection (1) of that section.”[F25(5) In this section, “the data protection legislation” has the same meaning as in the Data Protection Act 2018 (see section 3 of that Act).]20 Supply of Revenue and Customs information(1) After section 41 of the UK Borders Act 2007 (c. 30) insert—“41A Supply of information to UK Border Agency(1) HMRC and the RCPO may each supply a person to whom this section applies with information for use for the purpose of the customs functions exercisable by that person.(2) This section applies to—(a) a designated customs official,(b) the Secretary of State by whom general customs functions are exercisable,(c) the Director of Border Revenue, and(d) a person acting on behalf of a person mentioned in paragraphs (a) to (c).(3) This section applies to a document or article which comes into the possession of, or is discovered by, HMRC or the RCPO, or a person acting on behalf of HMRC or the RCPO, as it applies to information.(4) A person to whom this section applies—(1) 
(a) may retain for a purpose within subsection (1) a document or article supplied by virtue of subsection (3);(b) may dispose of a document or article supplied by virtue of subsection (3).(5) A power conferred by this section on HMRC or the RCPO may be exercised on behalf of HMRC or the RCPO by a person who is authorised (generally or specifically) for the purpose.(6) In this section and section 41B “customs function” and “general customs function” have the meanings given by Part 1 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.41B UK Border Agency: onward disclosure(1) A person to whom information is supplied under section 41A may not disclose that information.(2) But subsection (1) does not apply to a disclosure—(a) which is made for the purpose of a customs function, where the disclosure does not contravene any restriction imposed by the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs;(b) which is made for the purposes of civil proceedings (whether or not within the United Kingdom) relating to a customs function;(c) which is made for the purpose of a criminal investigation or criminal proceedings (whether or not within the United Kingdom);(d) which is made in pursuance of an order of a court;(e) which is made with the consent (which may be general or specific) of HMRC or the RCPO, depending on by whom or on whose behalf the information was supplied;(f) which is made with the consent of each person to whom the information relates.(3) Subsection (1) is subject to any other enactment permitting disclosure.(4) The reference in subsection (1) to information supplied under section 41A includes a reference to documents or articles supplied by virtue of subsection (3) of that section.(5) The reference in that subsection to a person to whom information is supplied includes a reference to a person who is or was acting on behalf of that person.(6) In subsection (3) “enactment” does not include—(a) an Act of the Scottish Parliament,(b) an Act of the Northern Ireland Assembly, or(c) an instrument made under an Act within paragraph (a) or (b).”(2) In section 42(1) of that Act (wrongful disclosure) after “section 41” insert “ or 41B ”.21 Duty to share information(1) In section 36 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 (c. 13) (duty to share information), in subsection (1), for paragraph (a) substitute—(1) 
“(a)	designated customs officials, (aa)	immigration officers,(ab)	the Secretary of State in so far as the Secretary of State has general customs functions,(ac)	the Secretary of State in so far as the Secretary of State has functions relating to immigration, asylum or nationality,(ad)	the Director of Border Revenue and any person exercising functions of the Director,”.(2) In subsection (6)(a) of that section, after “persons” insert “ or descriptions of persons ”.(3) In subsection (9) of that section, at the appropriate place insert—““designated customs official” and “general customs function” have the meanings given by Part 1 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009,”.Investigations and detention22 Application of the PACE orders(1) Subject as follows, the PACE orders—(a) apply to criminal investigations conducted by designated customs officials and relating to a general customs matter or customs revenue matter as they apply to relevant investigations conducted by officers of Revenue and Customs, and(b) apply to persons detained by designated customs officials as they apply to persons detained by officers of Revenue and Customs.(2) Each of the following is a PACE order for the purposes of this section—F26(a)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(b)	the Police and Criminal Evidence (Application to Revenue and Customs) Order (Northern Ireland) 2007 (S.R. 2007/464).(3) In the application of the PACE orders by virtue of this section—(a) subject to the following provisions of this subsection, references in those orders to an officer of Revenue and Customs are to be read as references to a designated customs official;(b) references in those orders to the Commissioners are to be read as references to—(i) the Secretary of State in relation to general customs matters, or(ii) the Director of Border Revenue in relation to customs revenue matters;(c) references in those orders to Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs or to Revenue and Customs are to be read as references to—(i) the Secretary of State in so far as the Secretary of State has general customs functions,(ii) the Director of Border Revenue, and(iii) designated customs officials;(d) references in those orders to an office of Revenue and Customs are to be read as references to an office of the UK Border Agency;(a) 
(e) references in those orders to a designated office of Revenue and Customs are to be read as references to a designated office of the UK Border Agency;(f) references in those orders to a relevant indictable offence are to be read as references to an indictable offence that relates to a general customs matter or a customs revenue matter;(g) references in those orders to a relevant investigation are to be read as references to a criminal investigation conducted by a designated customs official that relates to a general customs matter or a customs revenue matter;(h) references in those orders to a person being in Revenue and Customs detention are to be read as references to a person being in UK Border Agency detention;(i) references in those orders to an officer of Revenue and Customs of at least the grade of officer are to be read as references to a designated customs official of at least the grade of immigration officer or executive officer;(j) references in those orders to an officer of Revenue and Customs of at least the grade of higher officer are to be read as references to a designated customs official of at least the grade of chief immigration officer or higher executive officer;(k) references in those orders to an officer of Revenue and Customs of at least the grade of senior officer are to be read as references to a designated customs official of at least the grade of immigration inspector or senior executive officer;(l) any other references in those orders to an officer of Revenue and Customs occupying a specified post or grade are to be read as references to the Secretary of State.(4) For the purposes of this section—(a) a person is in UK Border Agency detention if—(i) the person has been taken to an office of the UK Border Agency after being arrested for an offence, or(ii) the person is arrested at an office of the UK Border Agency after attending voluntarily at the office or accompanying a designated customs official to it,and is detained there or is detained elsewhere in the charge of a designated customs official, and(b) “office of the UK Border Agency” means premises wholly or partly occupied by designated customs officials.(5) This section does not apply to the following provisions of the PACE orders—F27(a)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F27(b)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F27(c)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F27(d)	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(e) in article 2(1) of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Application to Revenue and Customs) Order (Northern Ireland) 2007 (S.R. 2007/464), the definitions of “the Commissioners”, “office of Revenue and Customs”, “relevant indictable offence” and “relevant investigation”;(f) article 2(2) of that order (Revenue and Customs detention);(g) article 7 of that order (restriction on other powers to apply for production of documents);(h) article 15 of that order (authorisation).(e) 
(6) A person may be transferred—(a) between UK Border Agency detention and Revenue and Customs detention;(b) between Revenue and Customs detention and UK Border Agency detention;(c) between UK Border Agency detention and police detention;(d) between police detention and UK Border Agency detention.[F28(6A) Subsection (6) has effect only in relation to Northern Ireland.](7) The references to police detention in subsection (6)—F29(a)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(b) in relation to Northern Ireland, are to be construed in accordance with the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989/1341 (N.I. 12)).(8) Expressions used in this section that are defined in a PACE order have the same meaning as in that PACE order.(9) This section does not affect the generality of sections 1(4), 3(5), 7(5) and 11(4) (construction of statutory etc. references to the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs, officers of Revenue and Customs and Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs).23 Investigations and detention: England and Wales and Northern Ireland(1) The Secretary of State may by order provide for any provision of an enactment listed in subsection (2) that relates to investigations of offences conducted by police officers or to persons detained by the police to apply, subject to such modifications as the order may specify, in relation to—(a) investigations conducted by designated customs officials,(b) persons detained by designated customs officials,(c) investigations conducted by immigration officers, or(d) persons detained by immigration officers.(2) Those enactments are—(a) the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60), and(a) 
(b) the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989/1341 (N.I. 12)).(3) An order under this section may make, in relation to designated customs officials, immigration officers, the Secretary of State or the Director of Border Revenue, provision similar to that which may be made in relation to officers of Revenue and Customs or the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs under—(a) section 114 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, or(b) article 85 of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989.(4) If an order under this section provides that a function may be exercised only by a person acting with the authority of the Secretary of State or the Director of Border Revenue, a certificate of the Secretary of State or (as the case may be) the Director that the person had authority to exercise the function is conclusive evidence of that fact.(5) An order under this section may amend or repeal section 22 (application of the PACE orders).24 Investigations and detention: Scotland(1) After section 26B of the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995 (c. 39) insert—“26C Investigations by designated customs officials(1) In the application of this Part of this Act to investigations conducted by designated customs officials—(a) references to an officer are to a designated customs official;(b) references to an authorised officer are to a designated customs official acting with the authority (which may be general or specific) of—(i) the Secretary of State in relation to investigations relating to general customs matters, or(ii) the Director of Border Revenue in relation to investigations relating to customs revenue matters;(c) references to the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs are to—(i) the Secretary of State in relation to investigations relating to general customs matters, or(ii) the Director of Border Revenue in relation to investigations relating to customs revenue matters;(d) references to an office of Revenue and Customs are to premises wholly or partly occupied by designated customs officials;(e) references to a superior officer are to—(i) an immigration officer not below the grade of Inspector,(ii) a person of the grade of Senior Executive Officer, or(iii) a person of a grade equivalent to that within sub-paragraph (i) or (ii).(2) In this section “customs revenue matter”, “designated customs official” and “general customs matter” have the meanings given by Part 1 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.”(1) 
(2) The amendment made by this section does not affect the generality of sections 1(4), 3(5), 7(5) and 11(4) (construction of statutory etc. references to the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs, officers of Revenue and Customs and Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs).25 Short-term holding facilitiesIn section 147 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (c. 33) (removal centres and detained persons: interpretation), in the definition of “short-term holding facility”—(a) after “used” insert “ —(a) ”, and(b) at the end insert “, or(b) for the detention of—(i) detained persons for a period of not more than seven days or for such other period as may be prescribed, and(ii) persons other than detained persons for any period.”Transfer of property etc.26 Transfer schemes(1) The Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs may make one or more schemes for the transfer of specified property, rights or liabilities or property, rights or liabilities of a specified description between—(a) the Commissioners or officers of Revenue and Customs, and(b) the Secretary of State, the Director of Border Revenue or designated customs officials.(2) A scheme under subsection (1) may, in particular—(a) create interests or rights, or impose liabilities, in relation to property, rights or liabilities transferred by virtue of the scheme or retained by a transferor;(b) apportion property, rights or liabilities between a transferor and a transferee.(3) A scheme under subsection (1) may—(a) provide for anything done by or in relation to a transferor in connection with anything transferred to have effect as if done by or in relation to a transferee;(b) permit anything (including any legal proceedings) relating to anything transferred by the scheme which is in the process of being done by or in relation to a transferor when the transfer takes effect to be continued by or in relation to a transferee;(c) provide for references to a transferor in an agreement (whether written or not), instrument or other document relating to anything transferred by the scheme to be treated as references to a transferee;(d) include other incidental, supplementary, consequential, transitional or transitory provision or savings.(4) A scheme under subsection (1) may provide for a transfer of property, rights or liabilities—(a) whether or not they would otherwise be capable of being transferred,(b) without any instrument or other formality being required, and(a) 
(c) irrespective of any requirement for consent that would otherwise apply.(5) The Commissioners may make one or more schemes providing for—(a) any specified thing or anything of a specified description done by or in relation to the Commissioners or an officer of Revenue and Customs in connection with a relevant function to have effect as if done by or in relation to the Secretary of State, the Director or a designated customs official;(b) any specified thing or anything of a specified description (including any legal proceedings) relating to a relevant function done by or in relation to the Commissioners or an officer of Revenue and Customs to be continued by or in relation to the Secretary of State, the Director or a designated customs official.(6) A scheme under this section—(a) comes into force in accordance with its terms;(b) may be amended or revoked.(7) In this section—  “relevant function” means a function which before the passing of this Act was exercisable by the Commissioners or officers of Revenue and Customs (whether or not it remains so exercisable) and that—(a) is conferred by or by virtue of this Part on the Secretary of State, the Director or a designated customs official, or(b) is a function under [F30[F31assimilated] law] that is exercisable by the Secretary of State, the Director or a designated customs official;“specified” means specified in the scheme.27 Facilities and services(1) Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs may make facilities and services available to any person by whom functions relating to immigration, asylum or nationality, or customs functions, are exercisable for the purposes of the exercise of any of those functions.(2) A person by whom functions relating to immigration, asylum or nationality, or customs functions, are exercisable may make facilities and services available to Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs for the purposes of the exercise of a function of Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs.Inspection and oversight28 Inspections by the Chief Inspector of the UK Border Agency(1) In section 48 of the UK Borders Act 2007 (c. 30) (establishment of the Border and Immigration Inspectorate), in subsection (1) for “the Border and Immigration Agency” substitute “ the UK Border Agency ”.(1) 
(2) After that subsection insert—“(1A) The Chief Inspector shall monitor and report on the efficiency and effectiveness of the performance of functions by the following—(a) designated customs officials, and officials of the Secretary of State exercising customs functions;(b) immigration officers, and officials of the Secretary of State exercising functions relating to immigration, asylum or nationality;(c) the Secretary of State in so far as the Secretary of State has general customs functions;(d) the Secretary of State in so far as the Secretary of State has functions relating to immigration, asylum or nationality;(e) the Director of Border Revenue and any person exercising functions of the Director.(1B) The Chief Inspector shall monitor and report on the efficiency and effectiveness of the services provided by a person acting pursuant to arrangements relating to the discharge of a function within subsection (1A).”(3) In subsection (2) of that section—(a) omit the words from the beginning to “Agency;”,(b) in paragraph (a), for “within the Border and Immigration Agency” substitute “ among the persons listed in subsections (1A) and (1B) (the “listed persons”) ”,(c) in paragraph (b), for “the Border and Immigration Agency” substitute “ the listed persons ”, and(d) after paragraph (g) insert—“(ga) practice and procedure in relation to the prevention, detection and investigation of offences,(gb) practice and procedure in relation to the conduct of criminal proceedings,(gc) whether customs functions have been appropriately exercised by the Secretary of State and the Director of Border Revenue,”.(4) After that subsection insert—“(2A) Unless directed to do so by the Secretary of State, the Chief Inspector shall not monitor and report on the exercise by the listed persons of—(a) functions at removal centres and short term holding facilities, and under escort arrangements, in so far as Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Prisons has functions under section 5A of the Prison Act 1952 in relation to such functions, and(b) functions at detention facilities, in so far as Her Majesty's Inspectors of Constabulary, the Scottish inspectors or the Northern Ireland inspectors have functions by virtue of section 29 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 in relation to such functions.”(5) Omit subsection (3) of that section.(6) After that subsection insert—(1) 
“(3A) In this section “customs function”, “designated customs official” and “general customs function” have the meanings given by Part 1 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.”(7) In section 53 of that Act (relationship with other bodies), in subsection (1)—(a) in paragraph (a), for “the Border and Immigration Agency” substitute “ a person listed in section 48(1A) or (1B) ”, and(b) in paragraph (b), for “the Agency” substitute “ such a person ”.(8) In subsection (3) of that section, for “the Agency” insert “ a person listed in section 48(1A) or (1B) ”.(9) In section 56(2)(a) of that Act (Senior President of Tribunals), for “the Border and Immigration Agency” substitute “ the UK Border Agency ”.(10) The person holding the office of the Chief Inspector of the Border and Immigration Agency immediately before the day on which this section comes into force is to be treated, on and after that day, as if appointed as the Chief Inspector of the UK Border Agency under section 48(1) of the UK Borders Act 2007 (c. 30).29 Inspections by Her Majesty's Inspectors of Constabulary etc.(1) The Secretary of State may make regulations conferring functions on Her Majesty's Inspectors of Constabulary, the Scottish inspectors or the Northern Ireland inspectors in relation to—(a) designated customs officials, and officials of the Secretary of State exercising customs functions;(b) immigration officers, and officials of the Secretary of State exercising functions relating to immigration, asylum or nationality;(c) the Secretary of State in so far as the Secretary of State has general customs functions;(d) the Secretary of State in so far as the Secretary of State has functions relating to immigration, asylum or nationality;(e) the Director of Border Revenue and any person exercising functions of the Director;(f) persons providing services pursuant to arrangements relating to the discharge of a function of a person mentioned in paragraphs (a) to (e).(2) Regulations under subsection (1) may—(a) in relation to Her Majesty's Inspectors of Constabulary, apply (with or without modification) or make provision similar to any provision of sections 54 to 56 of the Police Act 1996 (c. 16) (inspection);(b) in relation to the Scottish inspectors, apply (with or without modification) or make provision similar to any provision of [F32Chapter 11 of Part 1 of the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012 (Her Majesty’s inspectors of constabulary)];(c) in relation to the Northern Ireland inspectors, apply (without or without modification) or make provision similar to any provision of section 41 or 42 of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (c. 32) (inspection).(3) Regulations under subsection (1)—(a) may enable a Minister of the Crown to require an inspection to be carried out;(a) 
(b) must provide for a report of an inspection to be made and, subject to any exceptions required or permitted by the regulations, published;(c) must provide for an annual report by Her Majesty's Inspectors of Constabulary;(d) may make provision for payment to or in respect of Her Majesty's Inspectors of Constabulary, the Scottish inspectors or the Northern Ireland inspectors.(4) An inspection carried out by virtue of this section may not address a matter of a kind which the Comptroller and Auditor General may examine under section 6 of the National Audit Act 1983 (c. 44).(5) An inspection carried out by virtue of this section must be carried out jointly by Her Majesty's Inspectors of Constabulary and the Scottish inspectors—(a) if it is carried out wholly in Scotland, or(b) in a case where it is carried out partly in Scotland, to the extent that it is carried out there.(6) In this section—(a) “the Scottish inspectors” means the inspectors of constabulary appointed under [F33section 71(2) of the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012];(b) “the Northern Ireland inspectors” means the inspectors of constabulary appointed under section 41(1) of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998.30 Complaints and misconduct(1) In section 41 of the Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48) (power to confer functions on the Independent Police Complaints Commission in respect of the exercise of immigration functions)—(a) after subsection (1)(b) insert—“(c) the provision of services pursuant to arrangements relating to the discharge of a function within paragraph (a) or (b).”, and(b) after subsection (2) insert—“(2A) The Secretary of State may make regulations conferring functions on the Independent Police Complaints Commission in relation to—(a) the exercise by designated customs officials, and officials of the Secretary of State, of customs functions within the meaning of Part 1 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009;(b) the exercise by the Director of Border Revenue, and any person exercising functions of the Director, of customs revenue functions within the meaning of that Part of that Act;(c) the provision of services pursuant to arrangements relating to the discharge of a function within paragraph (a) or (b).”(a) 
(2) In each of subsections (4) and (7) of that section, after “subsection (1)” insert “ or (2A) ”.(3) In the title to that section, after “functions” insert “ and customs functions ”.Other provisionsF3431	Prosecution of offences. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .32 Payment of revenue to the Commissioners(1) The Director of Border Revenue must pay money received by way of revenue or security for revenue in the exercise of the Director's customs revenue functions to the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs.(2) The Secretary of State must pay money received by way of revenue in the exercise of the Secretary of State's general customs functions to the Commissioners.(3) A payment under subsection (1) or (2) must be made—(a) at such times and in such manner as the Treasury directs, and(b) after deduction of payments in connection with drawback and repayments.(4) If the Commissioners think that the funds available to the Director or the Secretary of State may be insufficient to make a payment in connection with drawback or a repayment, the Commissioners may—(a) pay money to the Director or the Secretary of State (as the case may be) to enable the payment or repayment to be made, or(b) make the payment or repayment on behalf of the Director or the Secretary of State (as the case may be).(5) Subsection (4) applies whether or not the reason for a deficiency is or may be that an amount has been paid or retained on the basis of an estimate that has proved or may prove to be inaccurate.(6) A payment by the Commissioners under that subsection is to be treated for the purposes of the Commissioners for Revenue and Customs Act 2005 (c. 11) as a disbursement of a kind specified in section 44(3) of that Act.(7) In this section—“repayments” includes—(a) payments in respect of actual or deemed credits relating to any tax, duty or levy, and(b) payments of interest (or repayment supplement) on—(a) 
(i) repayments, or     (ii) payments treated as repayments; “revenue” means—(a) taxes, duties and levies,(b) the proceeds of forfeitures made and penalties imposed under the customs and excise Acts (within the meaning of section 1 of the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979 (c. 2)),(c) a sum paid, or the proceeds of sale, under paragraph 16 of Schedule 3 to that Act, and(d) the proceeds of penalties imposed in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1889/2005 on controls of cash entering or leaving the [F35European Union] (including penalties imposed under that Regulation as amended from time to time);“security for revenue” means any sum paid as security for a tax or duty.33 Power to require payment into the Consolidated Fund(1) The Treasury may by order make provision for—(a) requiring the payment of sums received by the Secretary of State or the Director in the exercise of their functions into the Consolidated Fund;(b) permitting the deduction of disbursements before such payments are made;(c) requiring the Secretary of State or the Director to provide accounts of the receipt and disposal of revenue;(d) permitting the Treasury to make payments to the Secretary of State or the Director out of the Consolidated Fund to enable them to make disbursements.(2) An order under this section may amend or repeal section 32 (payment of revenue to the Commissioners).34 Children(1) In section 21 of the UK Borders Act 2007 (c. 30) (code of practice relating to children), in subsection (1), for “the Border and Immigration Agency takes” substitute “ the persons listed in subsection (4A) take ”.(2) In subsection (2) of that section—(a) for “The Agency” substitute “ Those persons ”,(b) in paragraph (a), for “its” substitute “ their ”, and(c) in paragraph (b), for “it makes” substitute “ they make ”.(3) After subsection (4) of that section insert— “(4A) The persons are—(a) designated customs officials, and officials of the Secretary of State exercising customs functions,(a) 
(b) immigration officers, and officials of the Secretary of State exercising functions relating to immigration, asylum or nationality,(c) the Secretary of State in so far as the Secretary of State has general customs functions,(d) the Secretary of State in so far as the Secretary of State has functions relating to immigration, asylum or nationality, and(e) the Director of Border Revenue and any person exercising functions of the Director.”(4) In subsection (5) of that section omit paragraph (a).(5) After that subsection insert—“(5A) In this section “customs function”, “designated customs official” and “general customs function” have the meanings given by Part 1 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.”(6) This section ceases to have effect on the coming into force of section 55 (duty regarding welfare of children).Supplementary35 Power to modify enactments(1) The Secretary of State may by order provide for an enactment (or a description of enactments) to apply in relation to—(a) relevant persons, or(b) the exercise of functions by relevant persons,with such modifications as the Secretary of State considers necessary or expedient.(2) In this section—(a) “relevant persons” means—(i) the Secretary of State by whom general customs functions are exercisable,(ii) the Director of Border Revenue, and(iii) designated customs officials, immigration officers and officials in the department of that Secretary of State, and(b) a reference to relevant persons includes a reference to any description of relevant persons.(3) An order under this section may, in particular, include provision for or in connection with—(a) extending to relevant persons an exemption or protection afforded by an enactment to any other description of persons;(b) providing for the disclosure of information to, or the doing of other things in relation to, relevant persons.(4) The Secretary of State must consult the Commissioners for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs before making an order under this section that—(a) makes provision in relation to a general customs matter or a customs revenue matter, or(b) makes provision in relation to the exercise of a customs function.(a) 
36 Power to make supplementary etc. provision(1) The Secretary of State may by order make—(a) such incidental, supplementary or consequential provision, or(b) such transitional or transitory provision or savings,as the Secretary of State considers appropriate for the general purposes, or any particular purpose, of this Part, or in consequence of, or for giving full effect to, any provision made by or under this Part.(2) An order under subsection (1) may amend, repeal, revoke or otherwise modify any enactment (including this Act).(3) The power to make an order under subsection (1) includes power to repeal or revoke an enactment which is spent.(4) Nothing in this Part affects the generality of the power conferred by this section.37 Subordinate legislation(1) Orders and regulations under this Part must be made by statutory instrument.(2) An order or regulations under this Part may—(a) include incidental, supplementary and consequential provision;(b) make transitional or transitory provision or savings;(c) make different provision for different cases or circumstances.(3) A statutory instrument containing an order or regulations to which subsection (4) applies may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.(4) This subsection applies to—(a) an order under section 2 (power of Secretary of State to modify functions);(b) an order under section 8 (power of Treasury to modify Director's functions);(c) regulations under section 16(8) (power to permit disclosure);(d) an order under section 23 (application of provisions about investigations and detention: England and Wales and Northern Ireland);(e) an order under section 35 (power to modify enactments);(f) an order under section 36 (power to make supplementary etc. provision) that amends or repeals primary legislation.(5) A statutory instrument containing only—(a) regulations under section 29 (inspections by Her Majesty's Inspectors of Constabulary etc.), or  (b) an order under section 36 that does not amend or repeal primary legislation, is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.(6) A statutory instrument containing an order under section 33 (power to require payment into the Consolidated Fund) is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of the House of Commons.(7) In this section “primary legislation” means—(a) an Act of Parliament,(b) an Act of the Scottish Parliament,(a) 
(c) a Measure or Act of the National Assembly for Wales, or(d) Northern Ireland legislation.F36(8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .38 InterpretationIn this Part—F37...“customs function” has the meaning given by section 14(6); “customs information” has the meaning given by section 14(6); “customs revenue function” has the meaning given by section 7(9);“customs revenue information” has the meaning given by section 14(6); “customs revenue matter” has the meaning given by section 7(2);  “customs revenue official” means a customs revenue official designated under section 11(1);“designated customs official” has the meaning given by section 14(6); “enactment” includes—(a) an enactment contained in subordinate legislation within the meaning of the Interpretation Act 1978 (c. 30);(b) an enactment contained in, or in an instrument made under, an Act of the Scottish Parliament;(c) an enactment contained in, or in instrument made under, Northern Ireland legislation;(d) an enactment contained in, or in an instrument made under, a Measure or Act of the National Assembly for Wales;  “function” means any power or duty (including a power or duty that is ancillary to another power or duty);“general customs function” has the meaning given by section 1(8); “general customs matter” has the meaning given by section 1(2);  “general customs official” means a general customs official designated under section 3(1);“personal customs information” has the meaning given by section 15(4); “personal customs revenue information” has the meaning given bysection 15(4);“relevant official” has the meaning given by section 15(3).
Part 2 – CitizenshipDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in forceon or before 18 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been madeappear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 2CITIZENSHIPAcquisition of British citizenship by naturalisation41 The qualifying periodF40(1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F40(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F40(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(4) In subsection (7) of [F41section 41 of the British Nationality Act 1981 (regulations)], after “this section” insert “ (other than regulations referred to in subsection (8)) ”.(5) After subsection (7) of that section insert—“(8) Any regulations (whether alone or with other provision)—(a) under subsection (1)(a) for prescribing activities for the purposes of paragraph 4B(5)(a) of Schedule 1; or(b) under subsection (1)(bc), (bd) or (be),may not be made unless a draft has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.”
Part 2 – CitizenshipDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in forceon or before 18 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been madeappear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesAcquisition of British citizenship by birth42 Children born in UK etc. to members of the armed forces(1) Section 1 of the British Nationality Act 1981 (c. 61) (acquisition of British citizenship by birth or adoption) is amended as follows.(2) After subsection (1) insert—“(1A) A person born in the United Kingdom or a qualifying territory on or after the relevant day shall be a British citizen if at the time of the birth his father or mother is a member of the armed forces.”(3) In subsection (3), after “subsection (1)” insert “ , (1A) ”.(4) After subsection (3) insert—“(3A) A person born in the United Kingdom on or after the relevant day who is not a British citizen by virtue of subsection (1), (1A) or (2) shall be entitled to be registered as a British citizen if, while he is a minor—(a) his father or mother becomes a member of the armed forces; and(b) an application is made for his registration as a British citizen”.(5) In subsection (4), after “subsection (1)” insert “ , (1A) ”.(6) After subsection (8) insert—“(9) The relevant day for the purposes of subsection (1A) or (3A) is the day appointed for the commencement of section 42 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 (which inserted those subsections).”Acquisition of British citizenship etc. by registration43 Minors(1) Section 3 of the British Nationality Act 1981 (c. 61) (acquisition by registration: minors) is amended as follows.(1) 
Part 2 – CitizenshipDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in forceon or before 18 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been madeappear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) In subsection (2), for “within the period of twelve months from the date of the birth” substitute “ while he is a minor ”.(3) Omit subsection (4).44 British Nationals (Overseas) without other citizenship(1) Section 4B of the British Nationality Act 1981 (acquisition by registration: certainpersons without other citizenship) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)—(a) omit “or” immediately before paragraph (c), and(b) after that paragraph insert “, or(d)	British National (Overseas)”.(3) In subsection (2)(c), for “4th July 2002” substitute “ the relevant day ”.(4) After subsection (2), insert—“(3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(c), the “relevant day” means—(a) in the case of a person to whom this section applies by virtue of subsection (1)(d) only, 19th March 2009, and(b) in any other case, 4th July 2002.”45 Descent through the female line(1) Section 4C of the British Nationality Act 1981 (the title to which becomes “Acquisition by registration: certain persons born before 1983”) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2), omit “after 7th February 1961 and”.(3) For subsection (3) substitute—“(3) The second condition is that the applicant would at some time before 1st January 1983 have become a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies—(a) under section 5 of, or paragraph 3 of Schedule 3 to, the 1948 Act if assumption A had applied,(b) under section 12(3), (4) or (5) of that Act if assumption B had applied and as a result of its application the applicant would have been a British subject immediately before 1st January 1949, or(c) under section 12(2) of that Act if one or both of the following had applied—(a) 
Part 2 – CitizenshipDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in forceon or before 18 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been madeappear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(i) assumption A had applied;(ii) assumption B had applied and as a result of its application the applicant would have been a British subject immediately before 1st January 1949.(3A) Assumption A is that—(a) section 5 or 12(2) of, or paragraph 3 of Schedule 3 to, the 1948 Act (as the case may be) provided for citizenship by descent from a mother in the same terms as it provided for citizenship by descent from a father, and(b) references in that provision to a father were references to the applicant's mother.(3B) Assumption B is that—(a) a provision of the law at some time before 1st January 1949 which provided for a nationality status to be acquired by descent from a father provided in the same terms for its acquisition by descent from a mother, and(b) references in that provision to a father were references to the applicant's mother.(3C) For the purposes of subsection (3B), a nationality status is acquired by a person (“P”) by descent where its acquisition—(a) depends, amongst other things, on the nationality status of one or both of P's parents, and(b) does not depend upon an application being made for P's registration as a person who has the status in question.(3D) For the purposes of subsection (3), it is not to be assumed that any registration or other requirements of the provisions mentioned in that subsection or in subsection (3B) were met.”(4) After subsection (4) insert—“(5) For the purposes of the interpretation of section 5 of the 1948 Act in its application in the case of assumption A to a case of descent from a mother, the reference in the proviso to subsection (1) of that section to “a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies by descent only” includes a reference to a female person who became a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies by virtue of—(a) section 12(2), (4) or (6) only of the 1948 Act,(b) section 13(2) of that Act,(c) paragraph 3 of Schedule 3 to that Act, or(d) section 1(1)(a) or (c) of the British Nationality (No. 2) Act 1964.”46 Children born outside UK etc. to members of the armed forcesAfter section 4C of the British Nationality Act 1981 (c. 61) insert—
Part 2 – CitizenshipDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in forceon or before 18 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been madeappear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“4D Acquisition by registration: children of members of the armed forces(1) A person (“P”) born outside the United Kingdom and the qualifying territories on or after the relevant day is entitled to be registered as a British citizen if—(a) an application is made for P's registration under this section; and(b) each of the following conditions is satisfied.(2) The first condition is that, at the time of P's birth, P's father or mother was—(a) a member of the armed forces; and(b) serving outside the United Kingdom and the qualifying territories.(3) The second condition is that, if P is a minor on the date of the application, the consent of P's father and mother to P's registration as a British citizen has been signified in the prescribed manner.(4) But if P's father or mother has died on or before the date of the application, the reference in subsection (3) to P's father and mother is to be read as a reference to either of them.(5) The Secretary of State may, in the special circumstances of a particular case, waive the need for the second condition to be satisfied.(6) The relevant day for the purposes of this section is the day appointed for the commencement of section 46 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 (which inserted this section).”47 Good character requirement(1) After section 41 of the British Nationality Act 1981 insert—“41A Registration: requirement to be of good character(1) An application for registration of an adult or young person as a British citizen under section 1(3), (3A) or (4), 3(1), (2) or (5), 4(2) or (5), 4A, 4C, 4D, 5,10(1) or (2) or 13(1) or (3) must not be granted unless the Secretary of State is satisfied that the adult or young person is of good character.(2) An application for registration of an adult or young person as a British overseas territories citizen under section 15(3) or (4), 17(1) or (5), 22(1) or(2) or 24 must not be granted unless the Secretary of State is satisfied that the adult or young person is of good character.(3) An application for registration of an adult or young person as a British Overseas citizen under section 27(1) must not be granted unless the Secretary of State is satisfied that the adult or young person is of good character.(1) 
Part 2 – CitizenshipDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in forceon or before 18 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been madeappear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4) An application for registration of an adult or young person as a British subject under section 32 must not be granted unless the Secretary of State is satisfied that the adult or young person is of good character.(5) In this section, “adult or young person” means a person who has attained the age of 10 years at the time when the application is made.”(2) In section 1 of the Hong Kong (War Wives and Widows) Act 1996 (c. 41) (acquisition of British citizenship), in subsection (1)—(a) omit “and” immediately before paragraph (b), and(b) after that paragraph insert “; and(c) the Secretary of State is satisfied that she is of good character”.(3) In section 1 of the British Nationality (Hong Kong) Act 1997 (c. 20) (acquisition of British citizenship), after subsection (5) insert—“(5A) An adult or young person shall not be registered under subsection (1) unless the Secretary of State is satisfied that the adult or young person is of good character.(5B) In subsection (5A), “adult or young person” means a person who has attained the age of 10 years at the time when the application for registration is made.”(4) In section 131 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (c. 41) (supply of police information), for paragraph (b) substitute—“(b) determining whether, for the purposes of an application referred to in section 41A of the British Nationality Act 1981, the person for whose registration the application is made is of good character;(ba) determining whether, for the purposes of an application under section 1 of the Hong Kong (War Wives and Widows) Act 1996, the woman for whose registration the application is made is of good character;(bb) determining whether, for the purposes of an application under section 1 of the British Nationality (Hong Kong) Act 1997 for the registration of an adult or young person within the meaning of subsection (5A) of that section, the person is of good character;”.(5) In section 40 of the UK Borders Act 2007 (c. 30) (supply of Revenue and Customs information), in subsection (1), for paragraph (h) substitute—“(h) determining whether, for the purposes of an application referred to in section 41A of the British Nationality Act 1981, the person for whose registration the application is made is of good character;(ha) determining whether, for the purposes of an application under section 1 of the Hong Kong (War Wives and Widows) Act 1996, the woman for whose registration the application is made is of good character;(hb) determining whether, for the purposes of an application under section 1 of the British Nationality (Hong Kong) Act 1997 for the registration of an adult or young person within the meaning of subsection (5A) of that section, the person is of good character;”.
Part 2 – CitizenshipDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in forceon or before 18 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been madeappear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesInterpretation etc.48 Meaning of references to being in breach of immigration laws(1) After section 50 of the British Nationality Act 1981 (c. 61) insert—“50A Meaning of references to being in breach of immigration laws(1) This section applies for the construction of a reference to being in the United Kingdom “in breach of the immigration laws” in—(a) section 4(2) or (4);(b) section 50(5); or(c) Schedule 1.(2) It applies only for the purpose of determining on or after the relevant day—(a) whether a person born on or after the relevant day is a British citizen under section 1(1),(b) whether, on an application under section 1(3) or 4(2) made on or after the relevant day, a person is entitled to be registered as a British citizen, or(c) whether, on an application under section 6(1) or (2) made on or after the relevant day, the applicant fulfils the requirements of Schedule 1 for naturalisation as a British citizen under section 6(1) or (2).(3) But that is subject to section 48(3)(d) and (4) of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 (saving in relation to section 11 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).(4) A person is in the United Kingdom in breach of the immigration laws if (and only if) the person—(a) is in the United Kingdom;(b) does not have the right of abode in the United Kingdom within the meaning of section 2 of the Immigration Act 1971;(c) does not have leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom (whether or not the person previously had leave);(d) does not have a qualifying CTA entitlement;(e) is not entitled to reside in the United Kingdom by virtue of any provision made under section 2(2) of the European Communities Act 1972 (whether or not the person was previously entitled);(f) is not entitled to enter and remain in the United Kingdom by virtue of section 8(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 (crew) (whether or not the person was previously entitled); and(g) does not have the benefit of an exemption under section 8(2) to (4) of that Act (diplomats, soldiers and other special cases) (whether or not the person previously had the benefit of an exemption).(a) 
Part 2 – CitizenshipDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in forceon or before 18 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been madeappear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) For the purposes of subsection (4)(d), a person has a qualifying CTA entitlement if the person—(a) is a citizen of the Republic of Ireland,(b) last arrived in the United Kingdom on a local journey (within the meaning of the Immigration Act 1971) from the Republic of Ireland, and(c) on that arrival, was a citizen of the Republic of Ireland and was entitled to enter without leave by virtue of section 1(3) of the Immigration Act 1971 (entry from the common travel area).(6) Section 11(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 (person deemed not to be in the United Kingdom before disembarkation, while in controlled area or while under immigration control) applies for the purposes of this section as it applies for the purposes of that Act.(7) This section is without prejudice to the generality of—(a) a reference to being in a place outside the United Kingdom in breach of immigration laws, and(b) a reference in a provision other than one specified in subsection (1) to being in the United Kingdom in breach of immigration laws.(8) The relevant day for the purposes of subsection (2) is the day appointed for the commencement of section 48 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 (which inserted this section).”(2) Section 11 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (c. 41) (“the 2002 Act”) (unlawful presence in the United Kingdom) ceases to have effect.(3) Notwithstanding its repeal, section 11 of the 2002 Act is to continue to have effect for the purpose of determining on or after the relevant day—(a) whether a person born before the relevant day is a British citizen under section 1(1) of the British Nationality Act 1981 (c. 61),(b) whether, on an application under section 1(3) or 4(2) of that Act made but not determined before the relevant day, a person is entitled to be registered as a British citizen,(c) whether, on an application under section 6(1) or (2) of that Act made but not determined before the relevant day, the applicant fulfils the requirements of Schedule 1 for naturalisation as a British citizen under section 6(1) or (2) of that Act, or(d) whether, in relation to an application under section 1(3) or 6(1) or (2) of that Act made on or after the relevant day, a person was in the United Kingdom “in breach of the immigration laws” at a time before 7 November 2002 (the date of commencement of section 11 of the 2002 Act).(4) Where section 11 of the 2002 Act continues to have effect by virtue of paragraph (d) of subsection (3) for the purpose of determining on or after the relevant day the matter mentioned in that paragraph, section 50A of the British Nationality Act 1981 is not to apply for the purpose of determining that matter.(5) The relevant day for the purposes of subsection (3) is the day appointed for the commencement of this section.(1) 
Part 2 – CitizenshipDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in forceon or before 18 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been madeappear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(6) In paragraph 7(a) of Schedule 3 to the 2002 Act (definition of persons unlawfully in the UK who are ineligible for support), for “section 11” substitute “ section 50A of the British Nationality Act 1981 ”.49 Other interpretation etc.(1) In section 50 of the British Nationality Act 1981 (c. 61) (interpretation), aftersubsection (1), insert—“(1A) Subject to subsection (1B), references in this Act to being a member of thearmed forces are references to being—(a) a member of the regular forces within the meaning of the Armed Forces Act 2006, or(b) a member of the reserve forces within the meaning of that Act subject to service law by virtue of paragraph (a), (b) or (c) of section 367(2) of that Act.(1B) A person is not to be regarded as a member of the armed forces by virtue of subsection (1A) if the person is treated as a member of a regular or reserve force by virtue of—(a) section 369 of the Armed Forces Act 2006, or(b) section 4(3) of the Visiting Forces (British Commonwealth) Act 1933.”F42(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F43(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Part 3 – ImmigrationDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 3IMMIGRATIONStudies50 Restriction on studies(1) In section 3(1)(c) of the Immigration Act 1971 (c. 77) (conditions that may be imposed on limited leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom), after sub-paragraph (i) insert—“(ia) a condition restricting his studies in the United Kingdom;”.(2) A condition under section 3(1)(c)(ia) of that Act may be added as a condition to leave given before the passing of this Act (as well as to leave given on or after its passing).Fingerprinting51 Fingerprinting of foreign criminals liable to automatic deportation(1) Section 141 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (c. 33) (persons from whom fingerprints may be taken) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (7)(f), after “persons” insert “ , other than a dependant of a person who falls within paragraph (c) by reason of a relevant immigration decision within subsection (16)(b) having been made in respect of that person ”.F44(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Detention at ports in Scotland52 Extension of sections 1 to 4 of the UK Borders Act 2007 to Scotland(1) In section 2 of the UK Borders Act 2007 (c. 30) (detention at ports), after subsection (1), insert—“(1A) A designated immigration officer at a port in Scotland may detain an individual if the immigration officer thinks that the individual is subject to a warrant for arrest.”
Part 4 – Miscellaneous and generalDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in forceon or before 18 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been madeappear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) In section 3 of that Act (enforcement of detention at ports), after subsection (4), insert—“(4A) In the application of this section to Scotland, the references in subsections (2)(a) and (3)(a) to 51 weeks shall be treated as references to 12 months.”(3) In section 60(1) of that Act (provisions which do not extend to Scotland), omit “1 to 4,”.PART 4MISCELLANEOUS AND GENERALJudicial reviewF4553	Transfer of certain immigration judicial review applications. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Trafficking people for exploitation54 Trafficking people for exploitation[F46In section 4(4) of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 (c. 19) (trafficking people for exploitation: meaning of exploitation), for paragraph (d) substitute—“(d) a person uses or attempts to use him for any purpose within sub- paragraph (i), (ii) or (iii) of paragraph (c), having chosen him for that purpose on the grounds that—(i) he is mentally or physically ill or disabled, he is young or he has a family relationship with a person, and(ii) a person without the illness, disability, youth or family relationship would be likely to refuse to be used for that purpose.”]
Part 4 – Miscellaneous and generalDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in forceon or before 18 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been madeappear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesChildren[F4754A Independent Family Returns Panel(1) The Independent Family Returns Panel is established.(2) The Secretary of State must consult the Independent Family Returns Panel—(a) in each family returns case, on how best to safeguard and promote the welfare of the children of the family, and(b) in each case where the Secretary of State proposes to detain a family in pre- departure accommodation, on the suitability of so doing, having particular regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of the children of the family.(3) A family returns case is a case where—(a) a child who is living in the United Kingdom is to be removed from or required to leave the United Kingdom, and(b) an individual who—(i) is a parent of the child or has care of the child, and    (ii) is living in a household in the United Kingdom with the child, is also to be removed from or required to leave the United Kingdom.(4) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision about—(a) additional functions of the Independent Family Returns Panel,(b) its status and constitution,(c) the appointment of its members,(d) the payment of remuneration and allowances to its members, and(e) any other matters in connection with its establishment and operation.(5) Regulations under this section must be made by statutory instrument.(6) An instrument containing regulations under this section is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.(7) In this section—“child” means a person who is under the age of 18;  “pre-departure accommodation” has the same meaning as in Part 8 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999;  references to a person being removed from or required to leave the United Kingdom are to the person being removed or required to leave in accordance with a provision of the Immigration Acts.]  
Part 4 – Miscellaneous and generalDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in forceon or before 18 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been madeappear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes55 Duty regarding the welfare of children(1) The Secretary of State must make arrangements for ensuring that—(a) the functions mentioned in subsection (2) are discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom, and(b) any services provided by another person pursuant to arrangements which are made by the Secretary of State and relate to the discharge of a function mentioned in subsection (2) are provided having regard to that need.(2) The functions referred to in subsection (1) are—(a) any function of the Secretary of State in relation to immigration, asylum or nationality;(b) any function conferred by or by virtue of the Immigration Acts on an immigration officer;(c) any general customs function of the Secretary of State;(d) any customs function conferred on a designated customs official.(3) A person exercising any of those functions must, in exercising the function, have regard to any guidance given to the person by the Secretary of State for the purpose of subsection (1).(4) The Director of Border Revenue must make arrangements for ensuring that—(a) the Director's functions are discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom, and(b) any services provided by another person pursuant to arrangements made by the Director in the discharge of such a function are provided having regard to that need.(5) A person exercising a function of the Director of Border Revenue must, in exercising the function, have regard to any guidance given to the person by the Secretary of State for the purpose of subsection (4).(6) In this section—“children” means persons who are under the age of 18;  “customs function”, “designated customs official” and “general customs function” have the meanings given by Part 1.(7) A reference in an enactment (other than this Act) to the Immigration Acts includes a reference to this section.(8) Section 21 of the UK Borders Act 2007 (c. 30) (children) ceases to have effect.General56 RepealsThe Schedule contains repeals.
Part 4 – Miscellaneous and generalDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in forceon or before 18 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been madeappear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes57 Extent(1) Subject to the following provisions of this section, this Act extends to—(a) England and Wales,(b) Scotland, and(c) Northern Ireland.(2) Sections 22 (application of the PACE orders) and 23 (investigations and detention: England and Wales and Northern Ireland) extend to England and Wales and Northern Ireland only.(3) An amendment, modification or repeal by this Act has the same extent as the enactment or relevant part of the enactment to which it relates (ignoring extent by virtue of an Order in Council under any of the Immigration Acts).(4) Subsection (3) does not apply to—(a) the amendments made by section 52 (detention at ports in Scotland);(b) the amendment made by section 54 (trafficking people for exploitation), which extends to England and Wales and Northern Ireland only.(5) Her Majesty may by Order in Council provide for any of the provisions of this Act, other than any provision of Part 1 (border functions) or section 53 (transfer of certain immigration judicial review applications), to extend, with or without modifications, to any of the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man.(6) Subsection (5) does not apply in relation to the extension to a place of a provision which extends there by virtue of subsection (3).58 Commencement(1) Part 1 (border functions) comes into force on the day this Act is passed.(2) The provisions of Part 2 (citizenship) come into force on such day as the Secretary of State may by order appoint.(3) In Part 3 (immigration)—(a) section 50 (restriction on studies) comes into force on the day this Act is passed;(b) sections 51 (fingerprinting of foreign criminals) and 52 (detention at ports in Scotland) come into force on such day as the Secretary of State may by order appoint.(a) 
Part 4 – Miscellaneous and generalDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in forceon or before 18 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been madeappear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4) In this Part—(a) section 53 (transfer of certain immigration judicial review applications) comes into force on such day as the Lord Chancellor may by order appoint;(b) sections 54 (trafficking people for exploitation) and 55 (duty regarding the welfare of children) come into force on such day as the Secretary of State may by order appoint.(5) Any repeal in the Schedule (and section 56 so far as relating to the repeal) comes into force in the same way as the provisions of this Act to which the repeal relates.(6) The other provisions of this Part come into force on the day this Act is passed.(7) An order under this section must be made by statutory instrument.(8) An order under this section—(a) may appoint different days for different purposes;(b) may include transitional or incidental provision or savings.(9) An order commencing sections 39 to 41 (acquisition of British citizenship by naturalisation) must include provision that the amendments made by those sections do not have effect in relation to an application for naturalisation as a British citizen if—(a) the date of the application is before the date on which those sections come into force in accordance with the order (“the date of commencement”), or(b) the date of the application is before the end of the period of 24 months beginning with the date of commencement and the application is made by a person who falls within subsection (10) or (11).(10) A person falls within this subsection if on the date of commencement the person has indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom.(11) A person falls within this subsection if the person is given indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom on an application—(a) the date of which is before the date of commencement, and(b) which is decided after the date of commencement.(12) The reference in subsection (9) to an order commencing sections 39 to 41 does not include an order commencing those sections for the purpose only of enabling regulations to be made under the British Nationality Act 1981 (c. 61).(13) In the case of an order commencing sections 39 to 41, transitional provision may, in particular—(a) provide that the qualifying period for the purposes of paragraph 1 or 3 of Schedule 1 to the British Nationality Act 1981 includes time before that commencement;(b) provide for leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom granted before that commencement to be treated as qualifying temporary residence leave or probationary citizenship leave for the purposes of that Schedule.(14) In the case of an order commencing section 45 (acquisition of British citizenship through the female line), transitional provision may, in particular, provide that section 45 is to apply to an application made, but not determined, under section 4C of the British Nationality Act 1981 before that commencement.(1) 
Part 4 – Miscellaneous and generalDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in forceon or before 18 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been madeappear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(15) No order may be made commencing section 52 (detention at ports in Scotland) unless the Secretary of State has consulted the Scottish Ministers.(16) No order may be made commencing section 53 (transfer of certain immigration judicial review applications) unless the functions of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal in relation to appeals under Part 5 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (c. 41) have been transferred under section 30(1) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (c. 15).59 Short titleThis Act may be cited as the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.
      SCHEDULE – Repeals Document Generated: 2024-05-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesSCHEDULE	Section 56REPEALSPART 1BORDER FUNCTIONSReference	Extent of repealUK Borders Act 2007 (c. 30)	Section 21(5)(a). In section 48—(a) in subsection (2), the words from the beginning to “Agency;”, and(b) subsection (3).PART 2CITIZENSHIPReference	Extent of repealBritish Nationality Act 1981 (c. 61)	Section 3(4).In section 4B(1), the word “or” immediately before paragraph (c).In section 4C(2), the words “after 7th February 1961 and”.In Schedule 1—(a) in paragraph 1(1)(a), the words from “, or the” to “this paragraph”,(b) paragraph 1(3), and(c) paragraph 2(1)(c).(a) 
Hong Kong (War Wives and Widows) Act 1996 (c. 41)Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (c. 41)Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 (c. 13)
In section 1(1), the word “and” immediately before paragraph (b).Section 11.Section 58.

SCHEDULE – RepealsDocument Generated: 2024-05-18Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 18 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 3IMMIGRATIONReference	Extent of repealUK Borders Act 2007 (c. 30)	In section 60(1), the words “1 to 4,”.PART 4MISCELLANEOUSReference	Extent of repealUK Borders Act 2007 (c. 30)	Section 21.
Document Generated: 2024-05-18
Central Lancashire Online Knowledge (CLoK)TitleCalls for Police Service: Understanding the demand profile and the UK policeresponseTypeArticleURLhttps://clok.uclan.ac.uk/15638/DOIhttps://doi.org/10.1177/0032258X16671032Date2016CitationBoulton, Laura, McManus, Michelle Ann, Metcalfe, L., Brian, David John and Dawson, I (2016) Calls for Police Service: Understanding the demand profile and the UK police response. The Police Journal: Theory, Practice andPrinciples. ISSN 0032-258XCreatorsBoulton, Laura, McManus, Michelle Ann, Metcalfe, L., Brian, David John andDawson, IIt is advisable to refer to the publisher’s version if you intend to cite from the work. https://doi.org/10.1177/0032258X16671032For information about Research at UCLan please go to http://www.uclan.ac.uk/research/All outputs in CLoK are protected by Intellectual Property Rights law, including Copyright law. Copyright, IPR and Moral Rights for the works on this site are retained by the individual authors and/or other copyright owners. Terms and conditions for use of this material are defined in the http://clok.uclan.ac.uk/policies/
Calls for Police Service: Understanding the demand profile and the UK police response.Dr. Laura BoultonPolicing and Criminal Investigation, School of Forensic and Applied Science, University of Central Lancashire, Preston, PR1 2HE, email: lboulton1@uclan.ac.uk, tel: 00 44 (0)1772 894386Dr. Michelle McManus1Policing and Criminal Investigation, School of Forensic and Applied Science, University of Central Lancashire, Preston, PR1 2HE, email: mamcmanus@uclan.ac.uk, tel: 00 44 (0)1772 894154Lauren MetcalfePolicing and Criminal Investigation, School of Forensic and Applied Science, University of Central Lancashire, Preston, PR1 2HE, email: LMetcalfe@uclan.ac.ukDavid BrianPolicing and Criminal Investigation, School of Forensic and Applied Science, University of Central Lancashire, Preston, PR1 2HE, email : djbrian@uclan.ac.uk, tel: 00 44 (0) 1772893539Ian DawsonT/Superintendent – Head of Corporate Development & Futures, HQ Operations, Lancashire Constabulary | Preston PR4 5SB, email: ian.dawson@lancashire.pnn.police.ukTel: 00 44 (0) 1772 4126131 Corresponding author
Author BiographiesDr. Laura BoultonLaura is a Lecturer in Policing at University of Central Lancashire (UCLan). She completed her PhD in 2014 exploring how expertise, cognitive executive functioning, neuropsychology and human factors influence the decision making of Authorised Firearms Officers in order to develop a model of decision making during armed confrontations. Providing an evidence base that can be practically utilised by Police practitioners to impact change in practice was the underlying motivation for this research. Throughout her PhD she worked in collaboration with Merseyside Police, North West Ambulance Service and Merseyside Fire and Rescue Service. She now lectures on Master’s Degree programmes at UCLAN.Dr. Michelle McManusSenior Lecturer at University of Central Lancashire (UCLan). Completed her PhD in 2012 exploring risk factors for child sexual abuse within indecent image of children offending. Her doctoral research assisted with the creation of KIRAT (Kent Internet Risk Assessment Tool), a risk management tool for use by the police to assess the risk of contact abuse in those individuals accessing indecent images of children. This was rolled out for national use by CEOP in 2012. Due to the number of domestic abuse research projects completed with various constabularies across the UK, Dr. McManus sits on various groups such as: College of Policing Domestic Abuse Risk Assessment Task Force Group, Homicide Working Group Child Death Subgroup and Lancashire Evidenced Based Research Group. She is also Director of Studies for 3 PhD students exploring various aspects of Domestic Abuse.Lauren MetcalfeHaving studied in the field of policing for the past 7 years, Lauren has enthusiastically worked to undertake and promote Evidence Based Policing research. Lauren is currently submitting her PhD thesis surrounding the nature of gang related gun crime in Preston, Lancashire; assessing the complexities of the issue, profiling the individuals involved and working towards more effective preventative measures for the future. With the intention for the project having real world impact, she has collaborated with various organisations throughout the PhD, including Lancashire Constabulary and Lancashire Probation Service, to implement projects designed to assist in deterring such types of crime.
David BrianDave is a Lecturer at the University of Central Lancashire (UCLan). Dave was a police officer for 30years reaching the Rank of Detective Superintendent. He now lectures on Master’s Degree programmes at UCLAN and as an invited speaker at other universities. Dave is currently studying for a Professional Doctorate in Elite Performance and is a researcher in the field of policing and acts a supervisor to a number of Phd students undertaking research into multi agency working, domestic abuse, the protection of vulnerable people and early action, sexual consent and public engagement with police services.Ian DawsonIan is a Temporary Superintendent in Lancashire Constabulary. He has been a Police Officer for 23 years and developed the Constabulary’s approach to Evidence Based Policing which over the last 5 years has developed and delivered over 40 research projects, the majority of which have been in partnership with UCLan. As Head of Corporate Development and Futures Ian now leads on Evidence Based Policing for the Constabulary. The Constabulary also collaborates as part of Consortiums with Liverpool University, the N8 group of Universities and the Open University and has supported funding awards in excess of £6 million for Policing research. Ian has also acquired European Union funding for Domestic Abuse victim research. He is currently studying for a M.St. in Criminology and Police Management at Cambridge University
AbstractPurpose – The purpose of this research paper is to identify and understand the demand profile of a division of Lancashire Police Constabulary in order to assist Police administrators in the evaluation of demand and understanding of Policing response.Design/methodology/approach – Police data records regarding all offences within the Central Division of Lancashire Police Constabulary over the year of 2013 were examined. Descriptive statistics were used to identify the top ten demand addresses in five categories (residential, statutory bodies, retail, nightlife, and young people’s services), and the incident classifications, time frames and response codes that were most associated with these addresses. Further content analysis was conducted on the top ten residential addresses in order to identify specific characteristics of residential demand.Findings - The majority of Lancashire Constabulary resources are being spent dealing with non-traditional police demand. The most demanding residents were found to have one or more of the following properties; (i) to be of white – Northern European origin, (ii) to be unemployed, (iii) to be associated with mental health issues, domestic violence incidents or substance abuse, and (iv) to have previously had other agency involvement.Practical Implications - These results indicate that the police could potentially reduce the demand for service by enhancing work within two key areas; partnership working and early intervention.Originality/value – In this time of austerity and police budget cuts, it is important to understand the demand on the UK police service in an attempt to reduce it.Keywords – UK; police; mixed methods; demand; resource management; partnership working; early intervention.Paper type – Research paper
IntroductionAs a result of cuts to the police funding budget (HMIC, 2013), police administrators need to achieve a balance between reducing cost and maintenance of service quality whilst meeting service demands (Taylor Griffiths et al., 2014). Achieving such a balance is challenged by the polices expanding responsibilities, i.e. new roles in community policing, security, and emerging crimes such as cyber enabled crime, (College of Policing, 2015). Therefore, in order to strike an appropriate balance between competing priorities and tight budget constraints, police forces are seeking to identify major resource consumers in order to understand how they can be addressed to reduce the strain on the service.      Traditionally, reported crime statistics have served as a basis for police resource management analyses as a measure of workload (Wilson, 2012). However recently, the College of Policing (2015) have reported that forces feel that the use of reported crime statistics in this way is inadequate: such statistics only reflect what is commonly referred to as ‘traditional police business’ (typically associated with criminal offences and could rarely be solved by other agencies) and fail to consider that the ever increasing level of ‘non-traditional police business’ being dealt with by officers on a daily basis is also likely affect demand (Wilson, 2012). Despite evidence to suggest that crime has been decreasing since 1995 and that calls for police service received through the emergency ‘999’ number has decreased by 23% since their peak in 2006/7, there is a widespread perception across UK forces that the demand on officers and staff has been, at least, maintained (College of Policing, 2015). This effect may reflect a combination of the increase in certain serious and complex crime types (i.e. violence against the person, shoplifting, sexual offense, fraud and public order), the high number of convictions (nearly 1 million) and penalty notices (34,000) issued for non-notifiable offences, and the 14% (35,000) reduction in Police officers and staff in 2014 (College of Policing, 2015). Nonetheless, there have been few empirical studies that can fully account for and describe the current public demand profile on the UK police service.      Previous research that has examined citizen demand for police services has typically found that the majority of police calls (between 80% - 90%) were not directly related to crime prevention or control, but instead involved resolving disputes, noncriminal behaviour complaints and requesting public service assistance (Hill and Paynich, 2014; Johnson and Rhodes, 2009). However, whilst this statistic is strongly supported, it is important to consider the context of these calls. Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of the Constabulary (2012) state that      
despite not currently being classed as crime fighting activity, at least 80% of the officers time is spent dealing with incidents that involve protecting people from becoming victims of crime or to prevent crimes occurring.      Supporting this, the College of Policing (2015) have recently reported that the demand generated by public safety and welfare incidents is increasing, and within some forces represents the largest number of reported incidents. This suggests that there have been significant changes in the basic focus of policing from conventional reactive policing (i.e. crime detection and control, order maintenance, registering and investigating crime, patrolling and responding to emergency calls) to proactive community policing (HMIC, 2012; Vinod Kumar, 2014). Based on the theoretical framework of the Broken Windows theory (Wilson and Kelling, 1982), community policing seeks to address minor offences in order to prevent more serious offences and violent crime occurring (Srinivasan et al., 2013).      A preventative community policing approach is said to be critical because it reduces crime and the demands that go with it (HMIC, 2012). However, whilst reduced rates of property crime (Caudill et al., 2013) and violent crime (Ratcliffe et al., 2011) provides evidence to support the prioritisation of proactive community policing (Worrall and Kovandzic, 2010), doing so also requires additional police resources at a greater cost (College of Policing, 2015Vinod Kumar, 2014).Repeat and/or demanding callersThe ‘iron law of troublesome places’ claims that a small proportion of locations are likely to account for the majority of reported incidents of crime and disorder (Bichler et al., 2013; Wilcox and Eck, 2011). For instance, a minority of patients have been found to account for the majority of calls for the ambulance service (Edwards et al., 2014). Similarly, some ‘troubled families’ who often have many generations displaying the same problems, may require more resources than others (Home Office, n.d). Repeat and/or demanding callers can place a significant burden on emergency services in general; both in terms of time and financial resources, and many factors can influence how people interact with the police in particular. For example, community differences can strongly impact police resource requirements with urban settings associated with more public demand that rural policing (Johnson and Rhodes, 2009; Taylor Griffiths et al., 2014), with this further linked to social deprivation, low collective efficacy and cohesion (Sampson et al., 1997)      Personal characteristics may also influence whether a person is likely to be a repeat caller. Key areas have been found to be those associated with alcohol/drugs and those with      
mental health issues. A recent UK report made by the College of Policing (2015) estimates that that mental health issues account for at least 20% of police time. This pattern suggests that dealing with individuals with mental health issues could be posing a considerable and increasing demand on police resources internationally (College of Policing, 2015; Health and Social Care Information Centre, 2014).Demand ManagementAs the police strive to meet the demands of their expanding roles and an increasingly expectant public (Fleming and Grabosky, 2009), there are a few ways in which the police aim to manage the demand on their service, including grading incidents appropriately to prioritise tasks, and using reviews to identify high demand areas in order to implement preventative measures to reduce reoccurring problems. The ‘troubled families’ programme, which involves intensive work with particularly resource demanding families, is a prime example of this. The government’s ‘troubled families’ programme has been found to reduce offending and antisocial behaviour and thus, reduce the demand on the police (Home Office, n.d).      Targeted policing can be seen as an effective tool for curbing demand by concentrating resources on specific crimes, criminals, victims and areas that are prone to cause high demand before calls for assistance occur (Karn, 2013). ‘Hot spot’ policing involves deploying more patrol resources at ‘hot spots’ defined as “small clusters of addresses with frequent hard crime calls as well as substantial soft crime calls for service” (Sherman and Weisburd, 1995, p. 630;). Similarly, problem orientated policing focusses on targeting strategies to specifically identified problems (Weisburd and Eck, 2004). Generally, studies show that increases of police presence in places where crime is more concentrated results in significant reductions in crime calls (Weisburd and Braga, 2006). In addition, this effect has been found to have a wider impact, as evidence indicates spatial diffusion benefits to the areas surrounding the policing intervention (Clark and Weisburd, 1994).Aims and Objectives of the Current StudyAs a result of police budget cuts and reduced staffing, it is important to take an evidence based approach to understand the demand on the police service in an attempt to optimise the use of resources (Srinivasan, 2013; Taylor Griffiths et al., 2014). It appears that the majority of calls to the police involve issues that are not inherently traditional police business (Hill and Paynich, 2014). However, this is based on results from dated or non-British based studies. Furthermore,
although it appears that some repeat callers hold specific traits, these are only loosely speculated at this stage. There are two key objectives to this research;(i) To give an overview of where the highest public demand for police resources in Lancashire Constabulary’s Central Division has come from; and(ii) To profile the most demanding addresses in this area in order to understand why these particular households/families have such a high demand for police services.Through increased understanding of who constitutes the main consumers of police resources and the reasons behind why there is such a demand from certain addresses, the police and their partner agencies will be more informed to better manage these high resource consumers, thus reducing the demand on the force (College of Policing, 2015).MethodologyData and Research ApproachLancashire Constabulary commissioned this research to identify and understand the demand profile across their Central Division. Lancashire County has an estimated population of nearly1.5 million with a rich diversity of communities, and Lancashire Constabulary covers 2,000 square miles and has 2889 Police officers and 1920 Police staff (Lancashire Constabulary, 2016). For this purpose, data was obtained from Lancashire Constabulary data warehouses. Raw data was extracted from Command and Control using a search criteria of all calls for service within the Central Division over the year of 2013 (01/01/13 – 31/12/13). This search resulted in 63,430 records being attained. These were then compiled into addresses and ordered according to the number of records for each address so that the top users could be identified. The top ten addresses for residential properties were compiled as were non-residential addresses within the following categories (see Table I). The second stage of data collection involved obtaining the details of those who were associated with the top ten residential addresses.[Table I. Property categories]AnalysisDescriptive results were calculated and analysed using total counts (n), percentages and appropriate measures of central tendency. Firstly, the top ten consumers within each of the five categories (see Table I) were examined in terms of; (i) incident classifications (see Table II),
(ii) the time frames these are occurring, and (iii) the response codes that were allocated to these incidents (see Table III).[Table II. Incident classifications and descriptions] [Table III. Response code grades and descriptions]Lastly, a content analysis was conducted on residential household and family characteristics. The profiling of residential addresses considered their local profiles to obtain key characteristics and warning markers. Individual incident logs were also examined to gain an understanding about the reasons why there was such demand from each address during the year.Results / FindingsThe top ten statutory bodies have the most incidents calling for police service (30%) compared with the top ten in the other address categories. This is followed by those in the retail category (24%) and nightlife (18%), with young people’s services and residential requiring the least resources (14% of the total each).Incident ClassificationThe majority of all reported incidents fell under the classification of ‘other’ (n = 1136, 28.35%) (see Table IV). For the coded classifications, the biggest demand was from welfare (n = 756, 18.87%), nuisance (n = 734, 18.32%), and acquisitive person crime (n = 667, 16.65%).[Table IV. Incident classification for all categories profiled]Most of the top ten residential addresses were found to associate with one specific incident classification. When exploring the residential demand (see Table V), welfare incidents accounted for the highest number of the reported incidents (n = 210, 37.91%). However, this was skewed by four addresses that accounted for 89.5% of the incidents. This suggests that welfare is a distinct problem area for some particular households, but that nuisance is causing problems across a wider amount of addresses.[Table V. Incident classification for individual address categories]
Incidents classified as ‘other’ were found to be the biggest call for services in statutory bodies (n = 565, 47.28%), and the largest coded incident classifications were welfare (n = 245, 20.5%) and nuisance (n = 178, 14.9%) (see Table V). However, this is skewed by the inclusion of a central hospital which generated a large number of welfare incidents. If this address is removed, statutory bodies accrue a larger amount nuisance incidents (n = 104, 20.47%) and ‘other’ incidents (n = 234, 46.06%). Despite this, welfare is still the third highest demand intensive classification accounting for 11.61% of the incidents (n = 59). For the top ten retail addresses, the most demand is focused on the acquisitive personal crime (n = 475, 49.63%). Again, ‘other’ (n = 192) and nuisance (n = 166) incidents were also highly demanding for retail addresses accounting for 20.06% and 17.35% respectively.      Within the top ten nightlife addresses, nuisance incidents required the highest demand (n = 208, 28.3%), accounting for an average of 21 incidents per address (see Table V). ‘Other’ incidents also account for a high volume of police resources (n = 200, 27.21%), followed by acquisitive (person) crime (n = 105, 14.29%) and violence against a person (n = 101, 13.74%).      The highest demand within the top ten young people’s services addresses was found to be welfare incidents (n = 231, 40.81%) (see Table V). In particular the top two addresses accounted for 176 of the 231 welfare incidents (76%). Both these addresses are children’s homes which indicated a potential need for a more robust partnership plan for dealing with such addresses      When comparing incident classifications across the five address categories it can be seen that welfare and nuisance incidents account for the highest number of coded incidents. In contrast, across all address categories, acquisitive (household) crime and sexual offences accounted for the least number of incidents, both of which are typically considered as traditional police business. When looking at the incident classifications collectively in terms of ‘traditional police business’ and ‘non-traditional police business’ (removing the ‘other’ classification) traditional police incidents (acquisitive person and household crime, conditions, vandalism/criminal damage, violence against the person and sexual offences) accounted for 26.89% of incidents whereas non-traditional police incidents (disputes, nuisance, domestic incidents, and welfare) make up 44.78% of incidents.Time Frame
Three time frames encompassed the largest demand: 11:01-14:00, 14:01-17:00 and 17:01- 20:00, therefore, with the exception of vandalism/criminal damage incidents, the period between 11:01 and 20:00 was found to be the most resource intensive (see Figure 1).[Figure 1: A chart showing the time frames for incident classifications across the top ten addresses for all categories]When looking at the five categories individually, a similar pattern can be seen. For residential addresses 17:01-20:00 and 20:01-23:00 were the most demanding time frames, for statutory bodies 11:01-14:00 and 14:01-17:00 required the most resources, for retail addresses 14:01- 17:00 and 17:01 – 20:00 required the most resources, and young people’s services had a high demand within the time frame 11:01-14:00. Across these four address categories, the majority of incidents fall within one of the three resource intensive periods, with the only exception being the nightlife addresses which held its peak demand at 02:01-05:00 (see Figure 2).[Figure 2: A chart showing the mode time frames for incidents occurring for the 5 categories]Response CodingAcross all address categories, the response code (see Table III) given the most was response code 3 (n = 1173, 29.27%) and the response code that was given the least was response code 1 (n = 276, 6.89%). This suggests that the majority of police resources are being used on planned response operations (code 3), and the least demand comes from the need for emergency response (code 1).      Response codes given for each of the address category were also examined. Response code 2 was the most frequently used code for responding to incidents at residential addresses (n = 208, 37.55%), whilst response code 5 was the least used (n = 21, 3.79%). For statutory bodies, response code 4 was found to be the most widely used (n = 406, 33.97%) and response code 1 was the least used (n = 59, 4.94%). Overall this indicates that for statutory services, there is little demand for emergency responses and most issues are resolved through a telephone resolution. For the retail category, response code 3 was the most used (n = 355, 37.1%), closely followed by response code 2 (n = 34.38%), whilst response codes 1 (n = 49, 7.94%) and 5 (n = 47, 7.04%) were the least used. Response code 5 was found to be the most widely used to answer nightlife calls for service (n = 208, 28.3%), whilst response code 1 is again the least (n= 40, 5.44%). Response code 3 was used the most to address issues at the top ten young
people’s services addresses (n = 237, 41.87%) and response code 1 used the least (n = 25, 4.95%). Therefore, there is rarely need for immediate response for incidents occurring at young people’s services addresses, with five addresses not requiring any emergency responses within the year. The residential addresses had a greater amount of code 1 emergency responses allocated to incidents (n = 103, 41.8%) than any of the other categories, suggesting that the incidents occurring at residential properties require a more rapid response.Residential ProfilingOut of the top ten demanding residential addresses, one was located within an area of high deprivation, seven were located in areas of medium deprivation, and two were located in areas of low deprivation. All addresses were located in urban residential areas; however they were spread out across the city. Four properties were flats, three were semi-detached housing and three were terrace houses. The number of residents in these properties ranged between 1- 8 people.      On analysing the socio-demographic qualities of the families, it was found that 100% of the family members across all ten households were of ‘White – Northern European’ ethnicity. The age range of those who were connected to the top ten addresses was between 0- 84 years old with an average 38 years old. Three of the ten addresses had under 18 year olds in the family. Regarding employment status, twenty people (43%) were listed as being unemployed and four people (9%) were employed. Four people (9%) were retired, six (13%) were school students and the occupation of thirteen people (28%) was unknown. Although there were an equal number of males and females across the sample, in 75% of cases the person calling for service was a female.      All of the ten addresses included at least one family member that had been involved domestic violence incidents, alcohol or substance abuse, or had experienced mental health issues. Eight out of ten addresses include someone in the family with mental health issues, six addresses included someone with alcohol addictions or who regularly partakes in alcohol abuse, five of the ten addresses were associated with cases of domestic violence, and four addresses included someone with substance abuse issues.The average number of referrals across the addresses was 90, with an average of31 referrals per family, and an average of 20 referrals per person. Seven out of the ten addresses had been involved with other agencies (e.g. Ambulance Service, Lancashire NHS Trust, Social Services). From these 90 addresses only five had utilised an intervention (i.e. crisis team, child1 
protection conferences, Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conference referrals, Multi Agency Safeguarding Hub referrals, etc.).DiscussionThe current study took an evidence based approach to understand the demand on the police service in Lancashire Constabulary’s Central Division in order to inform Police decision making regarding allocation of police resources (Srinivasan, 2013). Whilst recorded crime has been found to be decreasing on a national scale over the past decade, demand on the police service has been maintained in other ways (College of Policing, 2015).      Overall, the majority of incidents that the police are being requested to deal with are non-traditional police business, and therefore require the use of skills such as mediation and social service, rather than police statutory powers. In support of previous literature, only 26.89% of the reported incidents from highly demanding addresses were traditional police business (Scott, 1981). In particular, welfare and nuisance incidents were found to demand the majority of police resources. This supports reports of an 11.5% increase of demand generated by public safety and welfare incidents in Lancashire, West Yorkshire and South Yorkshire (College of Policing, 2015). As these types of incidents are often not seen as traditional police work, this is a contraction of the Home Secretary and Home Office’s (n.d) view that the police should be used largely in a law enforcement capacity, and therefore the police may not be the most appropriate service to deal with them. However, it cannot be contested from the findings in this report that the role of the police service in England andWales is changing due to the shift in requirements and expectations (Srinivasan et al., 2013). If police officers are trained to become better equipped to deal with these high frequency, but low-level problems or offenses, potential benefits could include the reduction of further crime and increased officer environmental knowledge to improve future problem solving (Walker and Katz, 2005).      Furthermore, included in the majority of calls for service that were grouped as non- traditional police incidents were calls concerning disputes and domestic incidents and as such, could potentially escalate into a criminal offence and/or pose risk to the people involved without the presence of a police officer. Therefore, the extent to which a tiered policing arrangement could respond to these calls should be considered in light of the potential risk involved and threat of incident escalation as a result of the absence of sworn Police officers.      Supporting previous research, the geographical profiling of demanding residential properties found that people in areas of medium deprivation are most likely to be repeat callers      
for police assistance (Johnson and Rhodes, 2009). Those living in areas of low deprivation have less need for the police as, generally, less crime and disorder occurs within these areas. Those living in areas with high deprivation may be more likely to experience crime and disorder, but may be less likely to call the police. This effect may reflect the commonality of these events, reduced collective efficacy, or may reflect the distrust of the police and strained police-community relations in these neighbourhoods (Weisburd and Eck, 2004). Therefore, those living in areas of medium deprivation tend to experience a moderate level of crime and disorder but still need the problems to be addressed by authorities, so are the most likely to call for service. The type of housing of the top ten addresses fell within three categories: flat, semi- detached and terrace. Whilst this could indicate relationships between housing types and cause to call the police, this effect may more simply reflect the area in which the addresses are situated.      Despite a void of cited links between employment status and service demand in previous literature, the current study found that 43% of family members within the top ten demanding residential addresses were unemployed, making unemployed people the single largest group likely to demand resources. All ten of these households were associated with previous issues (i.e. mental health issues, incidents of domestic violence, or alcohol and/or substance abuse); however, only seven had previously received other agency involvement and five had received interventions aimed to improve their family situation. This indicates that there is potential for agencies to work together more effectively with certain families at an earlier stage, when problems are first visible in order to attempt to prevent future high demand.Practical ImplicationsThese results indicate that the police could potentially reduce the demand for service by enhancing work within two key areas; (i) early intervention and, (ii)partnership working . Firstly, the majority of the residential repeat callers within this study were identified to have been struggling with a range of problems for some time. This highlights an area for early intervention to take place with children who show signs of behavioural problems and with those who start to display mental health issues, alcoholic dependencies or substance abuse before they reach crisis point and become high resource consumers. This has become a key aim of Lancashire’s Early Action Team. Early Action is a multi-agency intervention at the earliest opportunity, delivering sustained solutions to individual and family problems, which is hoped to ultimately build social resilience and create thriving communities. Early Action applies to both children and adults and aims to reduce vulnerability, improve health and wellbeing,
prevent crime and reduce demand across all public services, preventing problems rather than responding to them.      Secondly, as the majority incidents were not traditional police business, a large portion of the current workload could be more appropriately dealt with by other agencies or in partnership with other agencies. Not only could this improve incident resolution time, service and care for the caller, the demand on the police would be significantly reduced and resources could be more appropriately deployed to address traditional police business. For instance, co- responding police-mental health programs that are used to respond to ‘emotionally disturbed persons in the community’ have been found to facilitate strong community services partnerships and reduced justice system demands (Shapiro et al., 2014). In addition, police and mental-health clinician emergency response partnerships have been found to generate service improvements such as more efficient service transition, reduced police officer ‘down time’, and improved interagency knowledge transfer (McKenna, Furness, Oaks and Brown, 2015).      Furthermore, early interventions and partnerships should focus on promoting co- production. Co-production involves the development of an equal and reciprocal relationship between the service provider and service user in recognition that the experiences of those who use the services can be utilised to improve it (Clark, 2015). Co-production initiatives have been utilised successfully within the mental healthcare system, i.e. the Lambeth Living Well Collaborative (Innovation Unit, n.d). In order to promote co-production within Lancashire Constabulary, a new Early Action Support Volunteer role has been created for members of the public in which volunteers will provide support and mentoring services for individuals and families who have low to moderate needs and no longer require or receive support from agencies.Limitations and future researchOne limitation of this research is that the initial data search was based upon the number of incidents linked to addresses rather than the families reporting the incidents. As a result, the data might not include all calls for service from the families identified, or certain families that have high demand for services may not have been identified due to property relocation during 2013. In addition, the data in this study only included calls which were coded as incidents. There were approximately 700,000 calls received in Lancashire in 2013 which were classed as ‘non-incidents’ and these were not included in the current data set. Furthermore, this research is limited to incidents occurring only during 2013 and in the one specific area (Central Division). Future research could examine if the same families are continuing to demand a large
portion of police resources over a number of years in order to determine the effectiveness of any implemented interventions. This research does have the potential to be replicated across the different operating divisions with Lancashire Constabulary to examine if these themes are prevalent across the county. Finally, these results are based on quantitative data only and therefore lack full exploration of any contextual factors that may have impacted the findings. Future research should utilise qualitative data based on real-world examples (i.e. call for service logs), to advance understanding of the topic and any contributing factors.ConclusionsThe requirements and expectations of the police are constantly changing and it is important that the police stay relevant by addressing current demands. In order to efficiently achieve this, the demand profile for Lancashire should be continuously monitored to ensure services fit this demand. This research found that the majority of incidents being dealt with by the police within Lancashire Constabulary’s Central Division are not inherently traditional police work. Furthermore, incidents most typically associated with traditional police work were found to occur the least in this sample. This suggests that reducing demand and addressing key issues requires increased involvement with other agencies to enable the most appropriate and effective response regarding calls for service. This multi-agency early response could also free resources and reduce overall costs. Furthering the results of this study, Lancashire Constabulary are currently engaged in a large funded project around transforming Public Services within Lancashire by engaging with a range of public services who will collectively provide the most appropriate support, at the earliest point possible in that individuals life. Early identification and appropriate use of interventions are key to reduce the likelihood of individuals escalating to crisis point.ReferencesBichler, G., Schmerler, K. and Enriquez, J. (2013), "Curbing nuisance motels: an evaluation of police as place regulators", Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, Vol. 36 No. 2, pp. 437-462.
Caudill, J.W., Getty, R.., Smith, R., Patten, R. and Trulson, C.R. (2013), “Discouraging window breakers: the lagged effects of police activity on crime”, Journal of Criminal Justice, Vol. 41 No. 1, pp. 18-23.Clark, M. (2015), “Co-production in mental healthcare”, Mental Health Review Journal, Vol.20 No. 4.Clark, R.V. and Weisburd, D. (1994), “Diffusion of crime control benefits: Observations on the reverse of displacement”, in Clark, R.V. (Ed.), Crime Prevention Studies, Criminal Justice Press, Monsey, NY, pp. 165-183.College of Policing (2015), “College of policing analysis: estimating demand on the police service”, available at: http://www.college.police.uk/documents/demand_report_21_1_15.pdf (accessed 09March 2015).Edwards, M.J., Bassett, G., Sinden, L. and Fothergill, R.T. (2014), “Frequent callers to the ambulance service: patient profiling and impact of case management on patient utilisation of the ambulance service”, Emergency Medicine Journal, Vol. 0, pp. 1-5, available at: http://emj.bmj.com/content/early/2014/10/13/emermed-2013- 203496.full.pdf+html (accessed 27 January 2015).Fleming, J. and Grabosky, P. (2009), “Managing the demand for police services, or how to control an insatiable appetite”, Policing, Vol. 3 No. 3, pp. 281-291.Hill, B. and Paynich, R. (2014), Fundamentals of Crime Mapping, 2nd ed, Jones and Bartlett Learning, Burlington, Massachusetts.HMIC. (2012), “Taking time for crime: A study of how police officers prevent crime in the field”, available at: http://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmic/media/taking-time- for-crime.pdf (accessed 20 November 2015).HMIC. (2013), “Lancashire Constabulary’s response to the funding challenge”, available at: http://www.hmic.gov.uk/media/lancashire-response-to-the-funding-challenge.pdf (accessed 27 January 2015).
Home Office. (n.d), “Have you got what it takes? Tackling troubled families”, available at https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/117408/tackling-troubled-families.pdf (accessed 27 January 2015).Innovation Unit. (n.d.), Co-production in mental Health, [online], available at: http://innovationunit.org/our-projects/projects/co-production-mental-health (accessed 20 November 2015).Health and Social Care Information Centre, (2014) “Inpatients Formally Detained in Hospitals Under the Mental Health Act 1983 and Patients Subject to Supervised Community Treatment, England - 2013-2014, Annual figures”, available at: http://www.hscic.gov.uk/catalogue/PUB15812 (accessed 09 March 2015).Johnson, R.R. and Rhodes, T.N. (2009), “Urban and small town comparison of citizen demand for police services”, International Journal of Police Science & Management, Vol. 11 No. 1, pp. 27-38.Karn, J. (2013), Policing and Crime Reduction: The evidence and its implications for practice, The Police Foundation, London.Lancashire Constabulary, (2016) About Us, [online], available at: http://www.lancashire.police.uk/about-us (accessed 12 January 2016).McKenna, B., Furness, T., Oaks, J. and Brown, S. (2015), “Police and mental health clinician partnership in response to mental health crisis: A qualitative study”, International Journal of Mental Health Nursing, Vol. 24 No. 5, pp. 386-393.Ratcliffe, J.H., Taniguchi, T., Groff, E.R. and Wood, J.D. (2011), “The Philadelphia foot patrol experiment: a randomized controlled trial of police patrol effectiveness in violent crime hotspots”, Criminology, Vol. 49 No. 3, pp. 795-831.Sampson, R.J., Raudenbush, S.W. and Earls, F. (1997), “Neighbourhoods and Violent Crime: A Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy”, Science, Vol. 277, pp. 918-924.Scott, E.J. (1981), Calls for Service – Citizen Demand and Initial Police Response, National Institute of Justice, Washington, DC.
Shapiro, G.K., Cusi, A., Kirst, M., O’Camp, P., Nakhost, A., and Stergiopoulos, V. (2014), “Co-responding police-mental health programs: A review”, Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research, Vol. 42 No. 5, pp. 1-15.Sherman, L.W. and Weisburd, D. (1995), “General deterrent effects of Police patrol in crime “hot spots”: A randomized, controlled trial”, Justice Quarterly, Vol. 12 No. 4, pp.625-648.Srinivasan, S., Sorrell, T.P., Brooks, J.P., Edwards, D.J. and McDougle, R.D. (2013), "Workforce assessment method for an urban police department ", Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, Vol. 36 No. 4, pp. 702- 718.Taylor Griffiths, C., Pollard, N. and Stamatakis, T. (2014), “Assessing the effectiveness and efficiency of a police service: the analytics of operational reviews”, Police Practice and Research, working paper, Australian Institute of Police Management, Manly, 27 January.Vinod Kumar, T.K. (2014),"Differing services, rising expectations, and greater demands", Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, Vol. 37 No. 1, pp. 170-189.Walker, S. and Katz, C.M. (2005). The police in America: An introduction, McGraw Hill, Boston.Weisburd, D. and Braga, A.A. (2006), “Hot spots policing as a model for police innovation”, in Weisburd, D. and Braga, A.A. (Eds.), Police Innovation. Contrasting Perspectives, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 225-244.Weisburd, D. and Eck, J.E. (2004), “What can police do to reduce crime, disorder and fear?”,The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 593 No. 1,pp. 42-65.Wilcox, P. and Eck, J.E. (2011), “Criminology of the unpopular: implications for policy aimed at payday lending facilities”, Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 10 No. 2, pp. 473-482.
Wilson, J.M. (2012), "Articulating the dynamic police staffing challenge", Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, Vol. 35 No. 2, pp. 327- 355.Wilson, J. and Kelling, G. (1982), “Broken Windows”, Atlantic Monthly, Vol. 249 No. 3, pp.29-38.Worrall, J.L. and Kovandzic, T.V. (2010), “Police levels and crime rates: an instrumental variables approach”, Social Science Research, Vol. 39 No. 3, pp. 506-516.Figure 1: A chart showing the time frames for incident classifications across the top ten addresses for all categories
Figure 2: A chart showing the mode time frames for incidents occurring for the 5 categoriesTable I. Property categories
Residential	Residential addresses excluding children’s homes and residential care homes.Statutory Bodies	NHS facilities, prisons, probation, councilRetail	Supermarkets, clothing stores, convenience stores, convenience food outlets, department storesNightlife	Bars, clubs and pubs in the area Young People’s Services	Schools and children’s homesTable II. Incident classifications and descriptions.Incident classification	Description Acquisitive (household)	Burglary Acquisitive (person)	Theft, robberyConditions	Bail conditions, breach of bail/curfew/license, abscondedDisputes	Civil disputes, personalNuisance	Nuisance, hoax calls, abandoned calls, suspicious circumstancesVandalism/Criminal damage	Criminal damage, vandalism, vehicle crime, public order,arsonViolence against the person	Assault, wounding, ABH, GBH, homicide Sexual offences	Sexual offences, rapeDomestic incidents	Domestic incidentsWelfare	Concern for safety, collapse/illness/injury, missing from home, truancyOther	Any other classification not included previously, i.e. lost/recovered property, police generated activity and messagesTable III. Response code grades and descriptions.
Code	Grade	Description
1 Emergency Response2 Priority Response3 Planned Response4 Telephone Resolution5 Police Report Only
An incident where there is likely to be a risk of danger to life; use/immediate threat of use of violence; serious injury to a person; serious damage to property. Attendance usually within 15 minutes.A degree of importance or urgency associated with the initial police action but an emergency response is not required.Attendance usually within 1 hour.Response time is not critical in apprehending offenders so response given by a member of the Neighbourhood Police Teams, an appointment at a fixed surgery or an appointment by a scheduled car. Attendance usually within 48 hours, or at an agreed time.Resolution sorted at first contact. Does not require any further intervention outside the Communications Centre other than the passing of information or the recording of minor crimes.Where public assistance is not required, but an incident has occurred and a report needs to be written.

Incident classificationn% of totalincidentsMSDMdnOther113628.3523.1847.0912Welfare75618.8716.0933.024Nuisance73418.3215.2914.3512.5Acquisitive (person)66716.6517.5522.47Disputes2095.224.985.463Violence against the person2035.075.645.174.5Vandalism/criminal damage972.422.852.022Domestic incidents952.375.289.221.5Conditions8024.717.272Sexual offences200.51.671.721Acquisitive (household)100.251.430.791
Table V. Incident classification for individual address categoriesIncident classificationCategoriesResidential addressesStatutory bodiesRetail addressesNightlife addressesYoung people’s servicesn (%)n (%)n (%)n (%)n (%)Other74 (13.36)565 (47.28)192 (20.06)200 (28.3)105 (18.55)Welfare210 (37.91245 (20.5)24 (2.51)46 (6.26)231 (40.81)Nuisance97 (17.51)178 (14.9)166 (17.35)208 (28.3)85 (15.02)Acquisitive (person)8 (1.44)51 (4.27)475 (49.63)105 (14.29)28 (4.95)Disputes55 (9.93)37 (3.1)57 (5.96)40 (5.44)20 (3.53)Violence against the person15 (2.71)47 (3.93)14 (1.46)101 (13.74)26 (4.59)Vandalism/criminal damage13 (2.35)22 (1.84)21 (2.19)22 (2.99)19 (3.36)Domestic incidents76 (13.72)7 (0.59)5 (0.52)5 (0.82)2 (0.35)Conditions4 (0.72)26 (2.18)1 (0.1)6 (0.82)14 (7.6)Sexual offences2 (0.36)13 (1.09)1 (0.1)1 (0.1)3 (0.53)Acquisitive (household)0 (0)4 (0.33)1 (0.1)1 (0.1)4 (0.71)
24/03/2025  Business continuityhttps://www.college.police.uk/app/civil-emergencies/civil-contingencies/business-continuity PageBusiness continuityThis page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published23 October 2013 Updated3 April 2024Civil contingencies 3 mins readAn emergency or major incident is likely to place a significant burden on the police. Business continuity planning helps police forces understand the relative priority of functions if their ability to maintain day-to-day operations has been compromised. A continued policing provision is still required, both in the area directly affected and across the rest of the force area. This requirement is one of the strategic objectives in maintaining the rule of law. The effectiveness of any response to an incident can be reduced where there is a partial or full breakdown in law and order in the location and wider affected area.Business continuity management is the strategic and tactical capability of the organisation to plan for and respond to incidents and business disruptions, so business operations can continue at an acceptable pre-defined level.The starting point for business continuity plans is that normal business cannot be achieved in extraordinary circumstances. It is, therefore, important that resources can be deployed and reallocated to critical functions. Planning must consider the likelihood and effects of losing one or more critical activities or infrastructure. Business continuity plans list the minimum resources and staffing levels required to fulfil only those functions.Plans should consider the IT, equipment, building and human resources required to deliver identified critical functions for each department. The risk and resilience of each force is different and must be evaluated locally.Category 1 responders produce local business continuity plans. Local resilience forums (LRFs) need to be aware of these plans and support business continuity management activities. The National Police Chiefs' Council has produced new business continuity management guidance.For further information see: British standard ISO 22301 Cabinet Office guidance on the role of LRFs Cabinet Office expectations of Category 1 and 2 responders  Planning section of this APPBack to Civil contingencies overview
TagsCivil emergencies
college.police.ukCode of Practice on Armed Policing and Police use of Less Lethal WeaponsJanuary 2020

 Code of Practice on Armed Policing and Police use of Less Lethal WeaponsPresented to Parliament pursuant to Section 39A(5) of the Police Act 1996, as amended by Section 124 of the Anti-social Behaviour,Crime and Policing Act 2014January 2020
© Crown copyright 2020This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives. gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3.Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.This publication is available at www.gov.uk/official-documents.Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at contactus@ college.pnn.police.uk.ISBN 978-1-5286-1724-6 CCS0120853800	01/20Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimumPrinted in the UK by the APS Group on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
Contents1 Introduction	71.1 Purpose of the code	71.2 Statutory basis of the code	71.3 Use of force by police officers	81.4 Law relating to the use of force	101.5 Use of force and transparency	101.6 Secretary of State powers to prohibit or approve police forces to usespecified equipment	102 Scope and status of this code	112.1 Weapons and munitions covered by this code	112.2 Relationship of the code to other guidance	122.3 Role of HM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire and Rescue Services	122.4 Applicability of code	123 Responsibilities of chief officers	133.1 Armed policing and less lethal weapons portfolio holder	133.2 Armed policing strategic threat and risk assessment (APSTRA)	133.3 Authorisation procedures for operational deployment of weaponscovered by this code	143.4 Communication with police and crime commissioners (or equivalent) community engagement and impact	154 Procedures for the selection and acquisition of firearms, ammunition and specialist munitions	164.1 Selection and acquisition of weapons	164.2 Development of new firearms, munitions and specialist munitions	164.3 Availability of approved firearms, ammunitions and specialist munitions	174.4 Issue of weapons to competent officers	174.5 Approval of specialist munitions	175 Development and the approval of less lethal weapons bythe Home Office	185.1 Strategic principles	185.2 The process for Home Office approval of less lethal weapon systems	195.3 The acquisition and use of less lethal weapons	206 Selection, training and accreditation of officers	216.1 Chief firearms instructor	216.2 Selection, training and maintaining competence	216.3 Record keeping	216.4 Training to common national standards	226.5 Joint training and exercising	226.6 Development of curriculum	226.7 Development and approval of new tactics	226.8 Awareness training on armed policing and less lethal weapons	221.1 
7 Post-deployment procedures	237.1 Accountability	237.2 Post-incident investigations	237.3 Role of Independent Investigatory Authority	257.4 Community impact	258 Promulgation of learning	268.1 Promulgation of good practice	268.2 Safety critical incidents in training	269 Maintenance, storage and accounting of weapons and munitions 279.1 Procedures	279.2 Fault reporting	279.3 Storage	279.4 Auditing and accounting	277.1 
1 Introduction1.1 Purpose of the code1.1.1 The purpose of this code is to:? set out the responsibilities of the chief officer in relation to armed policing and less lethal weapons (section 3)? set out the basic principles in relation to the selection, evaluation, approval, authorisation, acquisition and use of firearms, specialist munitions and less lethal weapons by police? set out the manner in which those principles are implemented within the police service? provide a statement on standards of competence, accreditation and operational practice relating to armed policing and less lethal weapons? ensure that observance of these principles, and the standards for implementation, results in a systematic programme of continuous development of police policy, practice and capability? promote compatibility of operating procedures for such weapons to support procedures for evaluation and maintaining standards of competence, and to support operations involving officers drawn from more than one force? foster the identification and promulgation of good practice, and encourage and support the continuing development and improvement of police responses to the requirement identified in the armed policing strategic threat and risk assessment (APSTRA), (refer to section 3.2).1.2 Statutory basis of the code1.2.1 This code of practice comes into effect on 14 January 2020 and replaces the Code of Practice on Police Use of Firearms and Less Lethal Weapons published November 2003.1.2.2 This code of practice has been issued by the College of Policing with the approval of the Secretary of State for the Home Department. It is made under section 39A of the Police Act 1996, which allows the College of Policing, with the approval of the Secretary of State, to issue codes of practice relating to the discharge of their functions by chief officers of police if the College of Policing considers that:1.1.1 
? it is necessary to do so in order to promote the efficiency and effectiveness of police forces generally? it is necessary to do so in order to facilitate the carrying out by members of any two or more police forces of joint or coordinated operations, or? it is for any other reason in the national interest to do so.1.2.3 It applies directly to the police forces maintained for the police areas of England and Wales defined in section 1 of the Police Act 1996 (or as defined in any subsequent legislation).1.2.4 It applies particularly to chief officers in the discharge of their duties.1.2.5 It is available for adoption by non-Home Office police forces and agencies1 in England and Wales and by other jurisdictions within the United Kingdom.1.2.6 The Code should be used in conjunction with the Authorised Professional Practice for Armed Policing2 (APP-AP) issued by the College of Policing and other relevant guidance.1.2.7 In discharging any function to which a code of practice issued under section 39A relates, a chief officer of police must have regard to the code.1.3 Use of force by police officers1.3.1 The British model of ‘policing by consent’ is based on the principle that the power of the police comes from the common consent of the public, as opposed tothe power of the state. The police service in England and Wales has long been generally unarmed. The use of firearms by the police should always be a last resort, considered only where there is a serious risk to public or police safety. However, where an operational need arises, authorised firearms officers should be available to be deployed.1Non-Home Office police forces may include Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI), Police Scotland, British Transport Police (BTP), Ministry of Defence Police and Civil Nuclear Constabulary (CNC). Agencies may include the National Crime Agency and HM Prison and Probation Service.2https://www.app.college.police.uk/app-content/armed-policing/
1.3.2 When police are required to use force to achieve a lawful objective (eg making a lawful arrest, acting in self-defence or protecting others) all force used must be reasonable in the circumstances. If the force used is not reasonable and proportionate, the officer is open to criminal or misconduct proceedings. It may also constitute a violation of the human rights of the person against whom the force was used.United Nations’ basic principles on the use of force and firearms by law enforcement officials1.3.3 According to the UN basic principles on the use of force and firearms by law enforcement officials:“Governments and law enforcement agencies shall adopt and implement rules and regulations on the use of force and firearms against persons by law enforcement officials. In developing such rules and regulations, governments and law enforcement agencies shall keep the ethical issues associated with the use of force and firearms constantly under review.”“Governments and law enforcement agencies should equip law enforcement officials with various types of weapons andammunition to allow for a differentiated use of force and firearms. These should include the development of non-lethal incapacitating weapons for use in appropriate situations.”“The development and deployment of non-lethal incapacitating weapons should be carefully evaluated in order to minimise the risk of endangering uninvolved persons, and the use of such weapons should be carefully controlled.”“Law enforcement officials, in carrying out their duty, shall, as far as possible, apply non-violent means before resorting to the use of force and firearms. They may use force and firearms only if other means remain ineffective or without any promise of achieving the intended result.”
1.4 Law relating to the use of force1.4.1 This code applies within the framework of law governing the use of force by the police, which forms part of the general law of England and Wales - the relevant parts of which are summarised within the APP-AP.1.5 Use of force and transparency1.5.1 In the interests of accountability and transparency the APP-AP is publicly available.1.5.2 In the interests of ensuring transparency in how police officers use force, from April 2017 police forces began to record and publish a range of data each time force is used. Data collected includes the reason force was used, injury data, the type of force used, the gender, ethnicity and age of the subject involved, and the location and outcome of the incident.1.5.3 Police forces should analyse operational use of force data to build an evidence base to learning which can be reflected in the development of policy, training and tactics to improve safety for all. Particular attention should be given to data and information relating to those individuals and groups identified as most vulnerable.1.5.4 Data is provided to the Home Office as part of the annual data requirement and published annually.1.6 Secretary of State powers to prohibit or approve police forces to use specified equipment1.6.1 The Secretary of State may, using the powers under sections 53 and 53A of the Police Act 1996 (as amended by the Police Reform Act 2002), prohibit police forces from, or approve police forces to, use specified equipment. These powers may only be used:? if considered necessary by the Secretary of State to promote the efficiency or effectiveness of the police force? following consultation with representatives of the interests of chief officers, PCCs and any others whose advice is considered necessary? if the text of the regulation has been prepared or approved by the College of Policing.? 
2 Scope and status of this code2.1 Weapons and munitions covered by this code2.1.1 This code applies to any firearms, specialist munitions and less lethal weapons available for deployment within police forces, in the circumstances and framework described within the APP-AP.Less lethal weapons are defined as: weapon systems designed to be used by law enforcement directly against an individual or group of individuals to achieve a physical effect in order to mitigate a threat, without substantialrisk3 to the subject of permanent or serious injury, or death. While the actual outcome may, on occasions, be lethal, this outcome is less likely than when conventional firearms are used.As set out in the APP-AP, the less lethal aspect does not derive from the weapon or munitions alone but from the weapon system, and it is this which is assessed by an independent medical advisory body before the system can be approved for use.Specialist munitions are defined as: devices or munitions used by law enforcement personnel for the purpose of gaining a tactical advantage. For example, distraction devices or breaching rounds, which are used to facilitate entry to a building.While not fired or propelled directly at an individual, certain specialist munitions may achieve their intended purpose through a direct physical effect on an individual(s). Where this is the case, they will also require appropriate medical evaluation and must be considered for approval by the Home Office (refer to section 5).2.1.2 The range of equipment available for the purposes described at paragraph 1.3.2 may include not only conventional firearms but also less lethal weapons and specialist munitions which may not necessarily fall within the statutory definition4 of a firearm. All such weapons will require the appropriate evaluation (refer to section 5) prior to use and will only be used by those who have met predefined standards of competence (refer to section 6).3The level of risk will be substantially higher if the less lethal weapon is used without adherence to the relevant guidance and training.4See 1968 Firearms Act.
2.1.3 Weapons and munitions covered by this code currently include all conventional firearms, specialist munitions, conducted energy devices (CEDs), attenuating energy projectiles (AEP) and their delivery systems. The code will also apply to all such weapons available to police forces now or in the future which have been subject to the relevant approval process as described in section 5.2.1.4 This code does not apply to personal safety equipment routinely issued to patrol officers for self-defence purposes, such as a baton, sensory irritant spray and restraint equipment. Information about the use of PSE can be found in the National Personal Safety Manual. This code does not apply to conventional or kinetic equipment used for manual method of entry (MOE).2.1.5 Where there is any doubt whether this code should apply to a firearm, specialist munition or less lethal weapon, it should be referred to the relevant National Police Chiefs’ Council (NPCC) leads for armed policing or less lethal weapons and the Home Office for consideration.2.2 Relationship of the code to other guidance2.2.1 When applying this code, chief officers must take account of:? Authorised Professional Practice (APP) issued by the College of Policing.? Other relevant guidance, including that issued by the relevant independent investigative authority.2.3 Role of HM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire and Rescue Services2.3.1 HM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire and Rescue Services (HMICFRS) will continue to inspect police forces in regard of their arrangements for armed policing and the use of less lethal weapons.2.4 Applicability of code2.4.1 The code is directly applicable to law enforcement officers in all 43 Home Office forces. According to the relevant chief officer’s wishes, it may also be adopted by:? Ministry of Defence Police, National Crime Agency, British Transport Police and Civil Nuclear Constabulary.? Police forces in devolved administrations, Police Scotland and Police Service of Northern Ireland.It is applicable whether officers are deployed within the UK or overseas.
Responsibilities of3 chief officers3.1 Armed policing and less lethal weapons portfolio holder3.1.1 For the purpose of maintaining standards within each force, chief officers should ensure that an officer of at least the rank of assistant chief constable, or equivalent, is nominated to be responsible for:? the arrangements for the training of officers to use weapons covered in this code? the operational deployment of weapons covered in this code.3.1.2 Where cross-force collaborative arrangements exist for training, there must be a single nominated chief officer with responsibility for these arrangements. Where cross-force collaborative arrangements exist for operational deployment there may be separate nominated chief officers with responsibility for these arrangements. All responsibilities should be clearly defined and documented.3.2 Armed policing strategic threat and risk assessment (APSTRA)3.2.1 Chief officers are required to assess the capability and capacity required by their force to respond effectively to identified armed policing related threat and risks. These assessments should be used to determine:? what types of weapons need to be available within their forces, either from each force’s own resources or by agreement with one or more other forces? the numbers of officers in their forces required to be trained in the use of such weapons and in providing tactical advice in the use of such weapons, and the numbers and ranks of officers to be trained to command incidents involving such weapons? arrangements for the deployment within their forces of weapons and personnel trained to use them.? 
3.2.2 Chief officers should ensure that known and reasonably foreseeable threats and risks in their police areas, which may be relevant to the use of police firearms and less lethal weapons, are assessed. In establishing the required capability and capacity, the following should be considered:? common national standards with regard to identified roles? cross-boundary and national interoperability? potential obligations under mutual aid arrangements? the strategic policing requirement, including national policing capabilities? regional and local plans? identified good practice? recommendations made by policing or external bodies.3.2.3 Each force’s APSTRA assessment should be regularly reviewed and updated, at least bi-annually.3.2.4 Guidance on the content and completion of APSTRA is contained within APP-AP.3.3 Authorisation procedures for operational deployment of weapons covered by this code3.3.1 Chief officers must have documented procedures in place for the authorisation of the operational deployment of firearms, specialist munitions and less lethal weapons in accordance with the APP-AP. Operational deployments may only be authorised by officers who are competent to do so.3.3.2 Chief officers may only authorise less lethal weapons and specialist munitions covered by this code for local operational deployment which have previously been approved for use by UK police forces by the Home Office. The process for Home Office approval is detailed in section 5.1.1.1 
3.4 Communication with police and crime commissioners (or equivalent) community engagement and impact3.4.1 Where appropriate, chief officers will provide police and crime commissioners5 (PCCs) with timely and accurate updates of relevant information in relation to armed policing and less lethal weapons, particularly for significant changes in deployment profile, to allow PCCs to fulfil their duties.3.4.2 Chief officers should ensure that community engagement procedures are in place in relation to armed policing and less lethal weapons, particularly for significant changes in deployment profile.3.4.3 Chief officers should consider the need to provide timely and accurate information to local communities to maintain community confidence and reassurance in police action(s).3.4.4 Where appropriate, chief officers should provide timely and accurate updates of activities to communities.3.4.5 When communicating with the public about an incident involving weapons covered by this code, the following should be considered:? a risk of prejudice to possible future legal proceedings? future misconduct proceedings? any disclosure of sensitive operational information? retaining the confidentiality of aspects of training, tactics and weapons.3.4.6 Due regard should be given to authorised professional practice on engagement and communication, published by the College of Policing.3.4.7 Where appropriate a specific community impact assessment should be conducted. The community impact assessment should be considered at the planning stage, during the operation, and after it. The purpose of such assessment is to determine the needs of communities, taking account of their circumstances and vulnerability, and the potential responses from the community to the planned police operation.5Equivalents can include the mayor in major cities or MOPAC in London.
Procedures for the selection and acquisition offirearms,ammunition4 and specialist munitions4.1 Selection and acquisition of weapons4.1.1 Chief officers are responsible for the selection and acquisition of firearms and ammunition. The selection of weapons and ammunition must be based on the operational requirement identified by the threat and risk assessment process set out in 3.2. The chief officer must ensure that the weapons selected are evaluated against a documented operational requirement in accordance with this code. This evaluation should be centrally coordinated as per section 4.2.4.1.2 Chief officers must have regard to APP-AP, National Police Firearms Training Curriculum (NPFTC) and Government guidance as it relates to the selection of firearms, including their calibre, ammunition and specialist munitions.4.1.3 The selection and acquisition process should take account of procurement best practice principles.. However this should not compromise the need to minimise the risk of serious or permanent injury or death (refer to section 1.3). Cross-force collaboration should take place whenever possible to ensure cost savings.4.1.4 Guidance for the selection of ammunition can be found in the APP-AP.4.2 Development of new firearms, munitions and specialist munitions4.2.1 Chief officers should monitor emerging operational requirements in their forces, and the availability of new weapon systems, which may improve the safety of operations involving weapons. It is important that the continuing development of weapon systems, including their related operating procedures, should be centrally coordinated. This is to ensure that emerging requirements of the police service may be properly identified and met, that weapon systems may be adequately tested and evaluated for police use, and that good practice may be promulgated and adopted within the service.4.2.2 Where a force identifies an operational requirement that is not met by an existing weapon system then they must consult NPCC Armed Policing Lead who can request technical information on the system. Dstl, under direction of the Home Office, provides guidance on the evaluation of weapons and munitions. NPCC centrally coordinates evaluation data.6Formerly Home Office CAST (Centre for Applied Science and Technology) prior to their merger with Dstl in April 2018.
4.2.3 When chief officers identify a requirement to introduce any new type of firearm, ammunition or specialist munition they must ensure that the operational requirement is documented and the new weapon system is adequately tested against these requirements before it is introduced.4.2.4 For any ammunition to be used operationally by the police it must be recommended by Dstl, having been assessed against the documented operational requirement and have been:? evaluated by Dstl in respect of its characteristics and ability to meet the defined operational requirement OR? have identical or superior characteristics to ammunition which has been evaluated and recommended by Dstl or other Home Office approved body.4.3 Availability of approved firearms, ammunitions and specialist munitions4.3.1 Chief officers of police must ensure that their officers who are authorised to use firearms and specialist munitions are equipped and trained in accordance with this code.4.3.2 The training for and operational use of such weapons must follow any specific guidance relating to the use of each weapon as set out in section 6 and according to the National Police Firearms Training Curriculum (NPFTC) and APP-AP.4.4 Issue of weapons to competent officers4.4.1 Firearms and specialist munitions must be issued only to officers assessed as competent to use them in accordance with the training and assessment procedures in section 6.4.5 Approval of specialist munitions4.5.1 Where specialist munitions achieve their intended purpose through a physical effect on an individual(s) they will also require appropriate medical evaluation and must be considered for approval by the Home Office. Where this is the case, the approval process will be aligned with the approval process for less lethal weapons. Refer to section 5 for detail of the approval process.1.1.1 
Development and the approval of less lethal5 weapons by the Home Office5.1 Strategic principles5.1.1 The Home Office and the national police lead for less lethal weapons should monitor the continuing research into, and the development of, acceptable and effective less lethal weapon systems in response to an evolving operational requirement and capability gaps.5.1.2 The strategic objective of the development of new weapon systems is to provide police officers with less lethal tactical options which will:? reduce the reliance on conventional firearms and ammunition? allow police officers to achieve a lawful objective when the force used is reasonable and proportionate in the circumstances.5.1.3 New less lethal weapon systems and significant changes to pre-approved less lethal weapons systems will require approval by the Home Office before they can be used by police forces in England and Wales. This approval process is required because of the unique risks and societal implications that apply to use of less lethal weapons, including the careful balance that needs to be struck between them being as effective as possible while also minimising risk of serious or permanent injury or death. All changes to less lethal weapons must be referred to the national policing lead and the Home Office for consideration.5.1.4 Where approval is required by the Home Office, the Home Office will determine on a case by case basis whether the decision is made by the Secretary of State for the Home Department or a delegated Home Office authority as appropriate.5.1.5 As part of the approval, evaluation and assessment process for such weapons the following must be considered, and will include, where appropriate:? a needs analysis? determination of operational requirement? independent (of the manufacturer) technical and medical assessment (to include capability, limitations effect and lethality)? operational performance trials.The approval process will take into account relevant strategic, ethical, operational and societal issues.
5.1.6 The threshold for requiring Home Office approval will be met when:? a new weapons system – which has no precedent of use by law enforcement in England and Wales – meets the definition of a less lethal weapon(or certain specialist munitions)? a significant change (technical, physical or usage) is made to an approved less lethal weapon (or certain specialist munitions)? a new weapons system, or a change to an approved weapons system, represents a potential change to the UK model of policing by consent.5.1.7 Where there is any doubt whether the need for Home Office approval applies to a less lethal weapon system (or certain specialist munitions), or changes to aless lethal weapon system (or certain specialist munitions), it must be referred to the Home Office and the relevant NPCC lead for consideration. The decision on whether Home Office approval is required will be made on a case by case basis by the Home Office following consultation with relevant parties.5.1.8 Where this threshold is not met, the Home Office will notify the NPCC as such, and the decision on approval may be undertaken by the NPCC, taking into account factors as set out in paragraph 5.1.6.5.1.9 As set out in the APP-AP, chief officers must not use new less lethal weapons except in accordance with this code.5.2 The process for Home Office approval of less lethal weapon systems5.2.1 Chief officers must monitor:? emerging capability gaps in their forces, by means of the strategic threat and risk assessment process? in cooperation with each other and the relevant national policing lead, the availability of new less lethal weapon systems which may improve the safety of operations.? 
5.2.2 When a new less lethal weapon (or certain specialist munitions) is identified which requires Home Office approval, the Home Office will provide police with guidance on the information (as set out in paragraph 5.1.6) required to demonstrate its suitability for use by police forces in England and Wales.5.2.3 The Home Office will then commission independent technical and medical advice to assess the technical characteristics and medical implications associated with the weapon system’s use. The Home Office will take into account all relevant information and make a decision on approval.5.2.4 A similar process will take place to allow the Home Office to consider the approval of a significant technical, physical or usage change to a pre-approved less lethal weapon (or certain specialist munitions).5.3 The acquisition and use of less lethal weapons5.3.1 Chief officers will be responsible for the acquisition of less lethal weapons (which have already been approved through the NPCC/Home Office process) for use in their force areas, on the basis of the threat and risk assessment processes referred to at section 3.2 above.5.3.2 Appropriate chief officers should consider procurement best practice when acquiring less lethal weapons. However this should not compromise the need to minimisethe risk of serious or permanent injury or death (refer to section 1.3). Cross-force collaboration should take place whenever possible to ensure cost savings.5.3.3 Chief officers may also have less lethal weapons undergoing trial or evaluation available as part of the national approval process detailed at section 5.2. In such cases, and in adherence to the clear criteria and parameters that will have been issued by the Home Office to chief officers of designated trial forces, they may authorise deployment of such weapons in accordance with any related guidance for use.5.3.4 Chief officers must ensure that only officers who are specially trained in accordance with this code may use less lethal weapons.5.3.5 The training for and operational use of such weapons should follow relevant training curriculum and APP-AP guidance relating to the use of each weapon.1.1.1 
Selection, training and6 accreditation of officers6.1 Chief firearms instructor6.1.1 For the purpose of maintaining standards in training the firearms portfolio holder must appoint a competent person as chief firearms instructor (CFI). The CFI is responsible for the delivery of the annual firearms training plan to meet the capability and capacity requirements identified by the APSTRA (refer to section 3.2).6.2 Selection, training and maintaining competence6.2.1 Chief officers of police must arrange the selection and training of officers:? to use weapons covered by this code? to provide tactical advice for operations involving such weapons? to command the deployment of armed officers? to perform the role of Post Incident Manager and Appointed Officer.6.2.2 Chief officers must ensure that the selection, training and accreditation of officers identified by this code meets the requirements of the NPFTC, APP-AP and the College of Policing licensing standards.6.2.3 Where an officer maintains competence to the common standards identified in the relevant national role profile within the NPFTC and any additional APSTRA based requirements, they may be authorised for operational deployment with weapons covered by this code. While the College of Policing is responsible for setting the relevant standards, it is for forces to authorise such operational deployment.6.2.4 A commander’s, tactical advisor’s and post incident manager’s occupational competence should be formally approved by the firearms portfolio holder. The decision to deploy them operationally in that role will be one for the nominated force chief officer (responsibility for training and operational deployment may or may not be the same portfolio holder).6.3 Record keeping6.3.1 Chief officers should ensure that their force maintains accurate and auditable records of evaluation, selection, training and accreditation of all officers and staff in all roles identified in this code. Such record keeping will inform the accreditation process of an officer’s licence to practise.1.1.1 
6.4 Training to common national standards6.4.1 Training in accordance with the NPFTC not only ensures the maintenance of consistent standards, but also facilitates interoperability. For this purpose the NPFTC will define standards of competence for officers and staff identified in this code.6.5 Joint training and exercising6.5.1 In order to test local and regional response plans and protocols in terms of effectiveness and interoperability, forces should maintain a regular programme of exercising. This programme should be documented within the annual firearms training plan (refer to section 6.1.1) and may include:? joint training with other forces? live and table top exercising within force, with other forces, military and emergency service partners.6.6 Development of curriculum6.6.1 The body responsible for the development and management of curriculum content is the College of Policing, or any successor body designated by the Secretary of State.6.7 Development and approval of new tactics6.7.1 The development of tactics is centrally coordinated in the interests of consistency and interoperability by the College of Policing. Forces and agencies should only develop alternative tactics in consultation with the College of Policing.6.7.2 Where forces identify issues with existing tactics or procedures, in either operations or training, they should consult with the College of Policing so that such tactics or procedures may be reviewed.6.8 Awareness training on armed policing and less lethal weapons6.8.1 Chief officers must ensure that all operationally deployed officers and police staff receive awareness training on their role within armed policing and LLWs deployments, and all associated implications.1.1.1 
Post-deployment7 procedures7.1 Accountability7.1.1 In order to maintain public confidence the police service must remain accountable. Chief officers should recognise the value of independent scrutiny in holding the police service to account and identifying operational and organisational learning.7.1.2 Post-deployment procedures are designed to ensure that all armed and less lethal weapon deployments, irrespective of whether weapons have been discharged, are conducted in a manner which:? ensures the integrity of the legal process in respect of police action, persons arrested or evidential material seized? enables follow-up action related to any ongoing crime? identifies any operational or safety-critical issues in respect of procedures, training, weapons or equipment used? ensures individual, team and organisational learning takes place and is addressed both locally and nationally as appropriate.7.1.3 Chief officers should ensure that there is a debriefing mechanism in place, following an authorisation to deploy armed officers or any use of force that results in a death or serious injury, in order to identify operational learning. The debriefing process should be scalable depending on the significance and consequence of the event.7.2 Post-incident investigations7.2.1 The term post-incident describes the period following the discharge or use of a weapon covered by this code by the police, where an investigation into police action is to be conducted. As with post-deployment procedures, these are also scalable.7.2.2 Post-incident investigations will commence in all situations where there has been a discharge of a weapon by the police (including those involving a conventional firearm or less lethal weapon), whether intentional or unintentional, which has or may have:? resulted in death or serious injury (these will be subject to mandatory referral to the Independant Investigatory Authority (IIA))? revealed failings in command or supervision? caused danger to officers or the public.? 
7.2.2 The European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) article 2 imposes a duty on the state to conduct an effective official investigation when individuals have been killed (or in some cases seriously injured) as a result of the use of force by the police.7.2.3 The essential purposes of an article 2 investigation are:? to secure the effective implementation of domestic laws which protect the right to life? in those cases involving state agents, to ensure their accountability for deaths occurring under their responsibility.The investigation must be capable of leading to a determination of whether the force used was or was not justified in the circumstances, and to the identification and punishment of those responsible in appropriate cases.7.2.4 Chief officers should ensure that operating protocols exist within their forces defining the action to be taken to ensure that APP-AP and other statutory guidance can be applied. These protocols should include the:? management of the incident scene, preservation of evidence and continuity of command until responsibility for the investigation is transferred to the IIA? identification of suitable venues for the post incident procedures to be conducted? provision of post incident managers and appointed officers? hand-over to the Independent Investigatory Authority (IIA) where necessary? maintain the integrity of witness evidence, including the provision of accounts by key police witnesses? return of officers, where appropriate, to operational duties? identification of welfare arrangements including longer term arrangements for the management and welfare of officers and other staff concerned and their families where appropriate.? 
7.3 Role of Independent Investigatory Authority7.3.1 In the case of death or serious injury, and in other cases to be defined by regulations made by the Secretary of State, referral to the IIA is mandatory. But chief officers should also consult the IIA:? where required to do so by any guidance issued by the IIA? in any case where the weapon used was under trial or evaluation as provided for at paragraph 5.3.3? in any other case on a voluntary basis where the gravity of the incident or its special circumstances, including the reaction of the local community, requires consideration of a formal investigation.7.3.2 When considering an investigation connected with police use of weapons covered by this code, chief officers should consult the IIA to enable the IIA to determine,in accordance with Part 3 of Schedule 3 to the Police Reform Act 2002, whether such investigation is necessary and, if so, the form which the investigation will take.7.4 Community impact7.4.1 Chief officers should ensure that the need for community impact assessment is considered where weapons covered by this code are deployed (See paragraph 3.4.6). In a post-incident context the community impact assessment should take particular account of affected families, relatives or close friends of any persons who may be involved. It should also take account of the potential to compromise the investigation.7.4.2 There should be early consideration of the involvement of family liaison officers, and of the need to keep relevant individuals informed.7.4.3 The chief officer should consider the involvement of community representatives as part of post-incident procedures or any subsequent investigation or review.1.1.1 
8 Promulgation of learning8.1 Promulgation of good practice8.1.1 The police service should seek continuous development through the assessment of police practices relating to armed policing and less lethal weapons. Such developments should be made available throughout the police service, including to those responsible at national level for evaluation and approval of weapons, tactics and training procedures.8.1.2 For that purpose, chief officers must arrange a review or debrief following any operation where there is any reason to believe that such a review might identify improvements in procedures within the same force or in other forces.8.1.3 Chief officers must ensure that the College of Policing and NPCC are informed where issues are identified that may have implications for:? other forces? Authorised Professional Practice? the NPFTC.This is particularly important for safety critical issues.8.1.4 The police service should ensure that arrangements are in place to capture learning and recommendations relevant to armed policing (including relevant learning from the military and other countries). This should include a mechanism to ensure central coordination of learning, consideration of recommendations and maintaining an audit of the police service’s response.8.1.5 Operational learning and debriefing should inform the APSTRA process.8.2 Safety critical incidents in training8.2.1 Where an incident occurs in training that that may have safety implications for:? other forces? Authorised Professional Practice? the NPFTC.Chief officers should ensure that the College of Policing and relevant national policing leads are informed. Where there is doubt to whether an incident has such implications the College of Policing should be consulted.
Maintenance, storage and accounting of weapons and9 munitions9.1 Procedures9.1.1 In order that weapons and munitions can be stored, used safely and appropriately audited, chief officers must ensure that procedures are in place for the following:? Routine maintenance and inspection regimes by a competent person.? Quarantining and labelling of unserviceable weapons, ammunition and specialist munitions.? Inspection, testing and repair of weapons, subject to quarantine, by a competent person.? Destruction, withdrawal, replacement, or confinement to non-operational use of weapons that are unserviceable.? Regular auditing of weapons, ammunition and specialist munitions.? Auditable records of the above.9.2 Fault reporting9.2.1 Chief officers should ensure procedures exist for the reporting of failures or defects of munitions and weapons to Dstl. NAP and Dstl will be responsible for advising on the technical investigation of such matters.9.3 Storage9.3.1 Chief officers must ensure that there are secure armoury facilities for storing firearms, less lethal weapons and munitions held for operational and training purposes.9.4 Auditing and accounting9.4.1 The system of accounting for firearms, specialist munitions, less lethal weapons and ammunition must provide an audit trail for the issue, movement and return of weapons, and of the issue, return and use of ammunition.1.1.1 




About the CollegeWe’re the professional body for everyone who works for the police service in England and Wales. Our purpose is to provide those working in policing with the skills and knowledge necessary to prevent crime, protect the public and secure public trust.college.police.uk
Follow us@CollegeofPoliceC002I0120
  CCS0120853800 978-1-5286-1724-6  
 Code of PracticeThird Party Certification
A guide toTHIRD PARTY CERTIFICATIONThis leaflet provides information on the Surveillance Camera Commissioner’s third party certification process.1. What is Third Party Certification?ï It’s a scheme that enables organisations to certify their surveillance camera systems against the Surveillance Camera Code of Practiceï The scheme is offered by UKAS accredited certification bodies2. Who is Certification for?ï Any organisation that operates a surveillance camera system, including CCTV, Body Worn Video, Drones, Automatic Number Plate Recognition (ANPR) and Automatic Facial Recognition (AFR) within a public spaceï Any organisation that wants to evidence its compliance with the Surveillance Camera Code of Practice3. What is in it for me?ï You will receive a certificate of complianceï You will be able to use the Surveillance Camera Commissioner’s certification markï You will be added to a list of certified organisations on the Commissioner’s websiteï It proves you are Code compliant, meet certain standards and will increase public confidence in your schemeï 
4. What are the different types of certification?ï Step one – desk top certificationï Step two – full third party audit5. Who are the Certification Bodies?ï Security Systems and Alarms Inspection Board (SSAIB)ï National Security Inspectorate (NSI)ï IQ Verify6. How do I get started?ï Complete the Commissioner’s self assessment toolï Decide what type of certification you wantï Submit the self assessment tool to one of the certification bodiesï Have all relevant documents ready for inspection, if required7. What documents do I need for Certification?ï Code of Practiceï Information sharing agreementsï Details on the number of cameras the scheme hasï Procedures manualï Data protection Impact assessment (DPIA) (if available)ï Operation requirements (if available)8. Where can I find out more?ï Surveillance Camera Commissioner websiteï NSI websiteï SSAIB websiteï IQ Verify websiteEmail - scc@sccommissioner.gov.uk
Contact the Surveillance Camera Commissioner2 Marsham Street 1st Floor, Peel LondonSW1P 4DFEmail: scc@sccommissioner.gov.uk Twitter: @surcamcom
Chapter 30: Authorisation of armed guards on UK registered shipsPolicyï The policy to allow the use of armed guards applies only in exceptional circumstances:- to ships transiting the area at risk of attack by pirates within the High Risk Area (HRA) which is bounded: in the Red Sea: northern limit: Latitude 15°N; in the Gulf of Oman: Northern limit: Latitude 22°N; Eastern limit: Longitude 065°E; Southern limit: Latitude 5°S;- when ‘Best Management Practices’ to deter piracy is being followed fully but, on its own, is not deemed by the shipping company and the ship’s master as sufficient to protect against acts of piracy; AND- the use of armed guards is assessed to reduce the risk to the lives and wellbeing of those on board the ship.ï The policy applies to internationally trading passenger ships and cargo ships of 500 gross tonnage and above. The policy only applies in relation to the protection of UK registered ships.ï The assurance process for the authorisation of private maritime security companies is to ensure that as far as possible public safety is not endangered by the use of armed guards.ï Private Maritime Security Companies (PMSCs) wishing to employ armed guards on board UK registered ships in these exceptional circumstances must be authorised to possess a range of firearms (which may include section 1 and section 2 weapons), including those requiringan authority from the Secretary of State for the Home Department under section 5 of the Firearms Act 1968 (as amended), and be able to deploy them as necessary. All PMSCs wishing to employ armed guards on UK registered ships must receive clearance via the Home Office section 5 authorisation process.ï It is an offence for a person to have in his possession, purchase, acquire, manufacture, sell or transfer, or possess, purchase or acquire for sale or transfer, a weapon prohibited under section 5 of the Firearms Act 1968 without the authority of the Secretary of State. It is also an offence not to comply with any condition of the authority.Section 5 application: evidence30.1 PMSCs should apply to the Home Office for section 5 authorisation to enable their armed guards to possess firearms on UK registered ships. In support of their application they  must produce a provisional contract or letter of intent with a shipping company intending  to use their services. The PMSC may also provide evidence in support of the application such as information about transits over the previous 12 months. In selecting a PMSCthe shipping company must have conducted a piracy risk assessment and satisfied itself that the PMSC and its personnel are reputable and suitably qualified, based on the Guidance issued by the Department for Transport: www.dft.gov.uk/publications/use-of-armed-guards-to-defend-against-piracy. The PMSC must also ensure it is satisfied that the guards it employs are suitable and properly trained, in accordance with the Department for Transport guidance.
30.2 The shipping company is also required to submit its counter-piracy plan, which should follow the structure of Annex 1 in the DfT guidance, to the Department for Transport, including a signed statement that the Guidance has been followed.Armed guards: suitability30.3 As a general rule, having regard to the provisions of the Firearms Act 1968 and to the potential risks of harm that exist in the armed counter-piracy maritime environment, individuals who have any previous convictions or cautions for violence, disorder or other serious criminality will not be considered as suitable to receive Home Office clearance. There may also be circumstances where other police information or locally held police records on individuals may call into doubt the applicant’s suitability to undertake armed maritime security work. Each case will be considered on its merits.Armed guards: numbers30.4 The number of armed guards included in the application to be approved must be consistent with the evidence provided in support of the application and in any event should not exceed 30 guards in the initial application. Applications that have been submitted without sufficient justification for the number of guards included in the application are likely to be delayed and may be refused. Only those guards who will be employed on a UK registered ship will be considered1.30.5 A PMSC may submit an application for clearance for additional guards at any time, but the number of guards requested to be cleared on each occasion must not exceed 30. If a PMSC wishes to request clearance for additional guards following issue of a section 5 authority, evidence must be provided to show that the guards will be employed on a UK registered ship and that the additional guards are necessary. The number of guards to be checked must be kept to the minimum necessary to service the PMSC’s contract in order to prevent delay in processing of the section 5 application.Armed guards: duration of clearance30.6 Following the grant of a section 5 authority, when a PMSC wishes to submit further guards for clearance they should be aware of the following: guards are servants of the PMSCand their clearances are linked to the expiry date of the company’s section 5 authority. Therefore, when the PMSC’s section 5 authority expires, most guards will also need to have their clearances renewed at that time. However, guards whose clearances were carried out four months or less before the PMSC’s authority is due to expire do not need to have their clearance renewed. In cases where a PMSC has been given a three year authority, guards will need to have their clearances undertaken every 12 months, and the PMSC should submit an application to the Home Office on this basis.Armed guards: information to be provided30.7 The following information should be provided in respect of each armed guard:ï full name (including any previous names)ï date and place of birth1 This only applies to guards on UK ships because the Firearms Act 1968 as a whole (and accordingly the section 5 requirement for an authority) applies to UK registered vessels rather than foreign registered vessels.1 
ï residential addresses covering the previous five yearsï copy of the guard’s passportï and a declaration of consent to checks being carried out.30.8 A copy of the guard’s passport must be provided so that their identity can be verified. To speed up the application process PMSCs may wish to submit an enhanced Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS) certificate for each of the armed guards. PMSCs should not put forward people who, through their own due diligence checks, are not suitable.Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS)30.9 The Disclosure and Barring Service – www.homeoffice.gov.uk/agencies-public-bodies/dbs/ – will, on payment of the appropriate fee, provide an Enhanced Disclosure for armed guardswho are proposed to be deployed as part of a section 5 application. There will be an additional charge for the use of a Registered Body who will check and countersign applications and submit them to the DBS. Supply of DBS certificates is not mandatory, but if the PMSC does not provide DBS certificates then the cost of the checks will fall to the public purse. Although some police checks must still be carried out for each application, supply of a DBS certificate is likely to reduce the time taken to process the application.30.10 The DBS will issue each applicant with a certificate based on the individual’s criminal record, including any relevant local police information. This certificate can be submitted by the PMSC with the application. For the purposes of granting a section 5 authority, the DBS Disclosure should be no more than four months old at the time of application. The DBS has introduced an update service, which allows people (if they choose to subscribe to it and pay a small fee) to apply for a criminal record check to refresh their existing certificate, with employers checking online to see if it is still up to date. This avoids having to go through the full clearance process again.Armed guards who cease to be employed by the PMSC30.11 If an armed guard ceases to be employed (including as a sub contractor) by the PMSC once the section 5 authority is in place the Home Office must be informed immediately. Failure to do so will be a breach of the conditions of the section 5 authority and such a breach may result in revocation of the authority. If the PMSC wishes to employ new guards during this period they must provide the Home Office with each guard’s full details, and this may include a DBS certificate, so that the relevant checks can be carried out. The guard cannot be in possession of firearms until the PMSC is notified by the Home Office that the company’s section 5 conditions have been amended accordingly.Armed guards employed by a second PMSC30.12 A process has been introduced whereby one PMSC can utilise the services of another PMSC’s guards. This has been agreed on the basis that the Home Office is notified by the requesting PMSC, and provided that the guard is authorised by the Home Office and the parent PMSC still retains their services and provides confirmation by e-mail or letter of this fact. Before proceeding, the requesting PMSC must receive confirmation from the Home Office that the arrangement is acceptable. If the requesting PMSC has obtained registered firearms dealer status there is no requirement for each guard to hold a firearm certificate in their own right.30.1 
30.13 PMSCs from other countries, or those wishing to use non-UK guards, may apply for section 5 authorisation only if the guards will be protecting UK vessels. The application process is similar to that for UK nationals. However, for a non-UK PMSC details will be required to show that the company is an accredited company and is registered with, or is a member of, the maritime and defence industry associations in the country of origin. Details will also be required for the company’s proposed named authority holder, who will be held accountable for any breaches and for the non-UK guards. A form will be provided, to be completed and returned to the Home Office for forwarding on to the UK Central Authority for the Exchange of Criminal Records checks (UKCA-ECR). If these checks cannot be completed, or the evidence is insufficient to make a decision based on ensuring public safety, then the application is likely to be refused.Types of firearms: section 1, section 2 and section 530.14 The PMSC must provide details of the number and type of section 5 prohibited firearms they wish to possess on board the UK registered ship, and why this number and type of weapon is necessary. All PMSCs must be authorised to possess section 5 firearms.30.15 Whether they will be in possession of section 1, section 2 or section 5 firearms, all guards must receive Home Office approval before they can be utilised by the PMSC on a UK registered ship. The requirement for each guard to be approved as part of the Home Office section 5 process not only enables a wide range of firearms to be used by the guard,it also forms an important part of the assurance process. The section 5 authorisation process is designed to encompass the appropriate checks for the possession of the most dangerous weapons and is subject to ministerial oversight. This level of authorisation is deemed necessary for armed guards in view of the circumstances in which the firearms are held, which involves greater risk than for those possessing guns for sport or wildlife management in the UK.PMSCs who wish to register as a firearms dealer (RFD)30.16 PMSCs may apply to the police to be registered as a firearms dealer, but this will not be approved until the PMSC has received section 5 authorisation from the Home Office. Once a section 5 authorisation has been issued, the police may approve registration as a firearms dealer for the applicant, and may specify that only those guards cleared by the Home Office can possess firearms. PMSCs who have already obtained RFD status and who wish to conduct maritime security operations on board UK registered vessels must proceed to submit their application for a section 5 authority to the Home Office.30.17 Under section 8 of the Firearms Act 1968 a registered firearms dealer and their servants are exempt from having to hold a firearms certificate in order to possess, purchase or acquire firearms or ammunition. Therefore, once the Home Office has issued the section 5 authority, followed by issue of the RFD by the police, there is no requirement for eacharmed guard who has been cleared by the Home Office to hold a firearm certificate in their own right, provided that the PMSC they are employed by, or to whom they are acting as a sub-contractor, is a registered firearms dealer.
PMSCs who are not registered firearms dealers (RFDs)30.18 If a PMSC is not a registered firearms dealer then each of the armed guards will need to apply to their local police for a firearm certificate for the weapons specified in their own right, following issue of the section 5 authority to the PMSC. Given the additional administration involved, it is expected that most PMSCs will wish to become registered firearms dealers.Section 5 authorisation30.19 Once the necessary checks have been completed, if the Home Office is satisfied, a section 5 authority will be issued to the PMSC with conditions attached to ensure that the firearms will not endanger the public safety or the peace. It is an offence under section 5(5) of the Firearms Act 1968 to fail to comply with these conditions.30.20 A section 5 authority is issued initially for one year followed by three years at first renewal, unless there has been a breach of conditions or other public safety concerns.30.21 PMSCs should submit renewal applications for section 5 authorities, or requests for clearance for guards, at least four months before expiry in order to allow police sufficient  time to carry out the necessary checks.Other issues30.22 Training: the maritime security industry is well-established with a number of PMSCs currently operating to protect shipping. The policy does not currently extend to authorisation of PMSCs to undertake maritime security training in the UK using live firearms, including training in the use of prohibited weapons. Work is underway to consider options for training standards and requirements in the future.30.23 Maritime accreditation has been taken forward at an international level by the ISO (International Organisation for Standardisation). ISO/PAS 28007 ‘Guidelines for Private Maritime Security Companies Providing Privately Contracted Armed Security Personnel on Board Ships’ was published in 2012. For the UK, the SCEG (Security in Complex Environments Group), was appointed by the UK Government as its industry partner forregulation and accreditation, and has been working to produce standards for the UK private security industry operating overseas in hazardous environments. www.sceguk.org.uk. The United Kingdom Accreditation Service (UKAS) has accredited Certification Bodies to issue certificates to UK and other PMSCs.Further information30.24 Further information on the issue of section 5 authorisations can be obtained from the Gov.UK website or from the Home Office at the following address: Firearms Team, Drugs and Firearms Licensing Unit, Home Office, Crime and Policing Group, 5th Floor,Fry Building, 2 Marsham Street, London, SW1P 4DF e-mail: firearms@homeoffice.gsi.gov.uk020 7035 0030020 7035 0273020 7035 5343020 7035 1778020 7035 3123
ï Shipping company selects the PMSC and draws up a draft contract/letter of intentï Shipping company submits its counter-piracy plan (CPP) to the Department for Transport, including a signed statement that the Guidance has been followed.ï The Department for Transport will advise the Home Office when a satisfactory CPP is received from the shipping company. Please note that the Home Office will not proceed with the section 5 application until they receive this notification.ï PMSC applies to Home Office for section 5 authority enclosing:- provisional contract/letter of intent with shipping company;- details of number and type of firearms and why these are required;- details of armed guards: full name, date and place of birth, residential addresses for the past five years, copy of passport, DBS certificate and declaration of consent to any additional police checks;- if the PMSC has obtained alternative supporting information on the guards, this information can also be included.ï PMSC can apply to local police to register as a firearms dealer (RFD).ï 
Home  Money and tax  Court claims, debt and bankruptcyCheck if a claims company is registered
Use the financial services register to check if a claims company is registered.Businesses must be authorised by the Financial Conduct Authority to legally provide claims management services.Before you startYou can search by business name, trading name or authorisation number.You can also use this search to check the status of your own claims company.Complain about a claims companyYou can complain about a claims company if you’re dissatisfied with their service or think they’re operating illegally.
Related contentClaims Management Regulator Get information about a companySearch the bankruptcy and insolvency registerCheck how you can deal with your debts
Explore the topicYour rights and legal sup port Court claims, debt and bankruptcyServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking, jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Crime, justice and the law  Your rights and legal supportCheck if a website can legally sell medicines online in Northern Ireland
You can search the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency(MHRA) register to check if a website is allowed to sell medicines in Northern Ireland.You can search the register by the business: name company number  website addressAll websites that sell medicines to the public in Northern Ireland must display the Distance Selling Logo.You can no longer search the MHRA register to check websites selling medicines in England, Wales and Scotland. You can check if an online pharmacy is registered with the General Pharmaceutical Council instead.Before you startYou can report a website to the MHRA if: you think it’s doing something illegal  the EU common logo is not displayed it’s selling prescription medicines but it’s not a pharmacy MHRA will investigate your report.If you’re in England, Wales or Scotland, you should report any concerns about a supplier to the General Pharmaceutical Council.Contact MHRAContact MHRA if you have a problem using this service. dsl@mhra.gov.ukTelephone: 020 3080 6096Find out about call charges
Related contentRegister for the Distance Selling logo
Explore the topicYour rights and legal supportServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Working , jobs and pensions  Finding a jobCheck if you need to tell someone about your criminal record
When you need to tell someone about your criminal recordYou might need to tell an organisation about your criminal record when applying for: a job a university or college course  insurance housingIf you have a conviction from a court or a caution from the police, whether you need to tell the organisation depends on: if they ask, for example in an interview or on an application form  when you got it  what type of punishment or sentence you got  the type of criminal record check they might requestThere are di?erent rules in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Related contentChecks employers can make on job applicantsEmploying prisoners and ex-o?enders
Check what information you need to give about your criminal record. NextWhat information you need to giveView a printable version of the whole guideExplore the topicYour rights and legal support Universities and higher education Finding a jobServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Child Support (Enforcement) Act 2023. (See end of Document for details)Child Support (Enforcement) Act 20232023 CHAPTER 35An Act to make provision about the enforcement of child support maintenance and other maintenance; and for connected purposes.	[20th July 2023]BE IT ENACTED by the King’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:—1 InterpretationIn this Act—“the 1991 Act” means the Child Support Act 1991;“the 2008 Act” means the Child Maintenance and Other Payments Act 2008.2 Making of liability orderIn section 32M of the 1991 Act (as inserted by section 25 of the 2008 Act) (liability orders), for subsection (1) substitute—“(1) Where it appears to the Secretary of State that—(a) a person has failed to pay an amount of child support maintenance, and(b) either—(i) it is inappropriate to make a deduction from earnings order against the person (because, for example, the person is not employed), or(ii) although a deduction from earnings order has been made against the person, it has proved ineffective as a means of(i) 
Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Child Support (Enforcement) Act 2023. (See end of Document for details)securing that payments are made in accordance with the maintenance calculation in question,the Secretary of State may make an order in respect of that amount against the person.”3 Power to vary liability orderIn section 32N of the 1991 Act (as inserted by section 25 of the 2008 Act) (regulations about liability orders), in subsection (2), after paragraph (b) insert—“(ba)	make provision for the variation of a liability order;”.4 Appeal of liability order(1) The 1991 Act is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (4).(2) In section 32N (as inserted by section 25 of the 2008 Act) (regulations about liability orders), after subsection (2) insert—“(3) The Secretary of State must by regulations make provision for a person against whom a liability order is made to have a right to appeal to a court against the making of the order.(4) On an appeal under regulations under subsection (3), the court must not question the maintenance calculation by reference to which the order was made.(5) Regulations under subsection (3) may include—(a) provision with respect to the period within which a right of appeal under the regulations may be exercised;(b) provision with respect to the powers of the court to which the appeal under the regulation lies.”(3) In section 32M (as inserted by section 25 of the 2008 Act) (liability orders), in subsection (3) for “section 20” in both places substitute “regulations under section 32N(3)”.(4) In section 52 (regulations and orders), in subsection (2A), after paragraph (a) insert— “(aa)	the first regulations under section 32N(3),”.(5) In Schedule 7 to the 2008 Act (minor and consequential amendments), omit paragraph 1(3) to (6).(1) 
Child Support (Enforcement) Act 2023 (c. 35)	3Document Generated: 2023-11-23Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Child Support (Enforcement) Act 2023. (See end of Document for details)5 Consequential amendmentsIn section 59 of the 2008 Act (transition)—(a) in subsection (4), omit “20(5A),”;(b) in subsection (5)—(i) omit “20(7A),”;(ii) after “32M,” insert “32N,”.6 Extent, commencement and short title(1) This Act extends to England and Wales and Scotland.(2) Section 1 and this section come into force on the day on which this Act is passed.(3) Section 4(5) and section 5 come into force at the end of the period of two months beginning with the day on which this Act is passed.(4) The rest of this Act comes into force—(a) so far as extending to England and Wales, at the same time as section 25 of the 2008 Act comes into force so far as extending to England and Wales;(b) so far as extending to Scotland, at the same time as section 25 of the 2008 Act comes into force so far as extending to Scotland.(5) This Act may be cited as the Child Support (Enforcement) Act 2023.

Statutory Code of Practice and guidance setting out the basic principles in relation to the ethical and professional processing of data and information managed through PNC and LEDS.The Code of Practice for the Police National Computer (PNC) applies to every chief officer of a police force in England and Wales who has access to the PNC and the Law Enforcement Data Service (LEDS) in connection with the discharge of their functions. This Code replaces the Code of Practice for the Police National Computer (2005).The Code is available for adoption by other police forces including:Police ScotlandPolice Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI)those in other local jurisdictionsThe Code is also applicable to other non-police organisations who access PNC and LEDS by written agreement.PNC provides police and law enforcement agencies with access to a centralised source of information concerning individuals, property and vehicles.The Home Office, through the Law Enforcement Data Service (LEDS) Programme, is developing LEDS to replace PNC. The development work on LEDS will result in the decommissioning of PNC. Meanwhile, both systems will co-exist.The Code of Practice is supplemented by the guidance for PNC and LEDS. This provides detail on how managers and users can support their chief officers in complying with the requirements of the Code.
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 (section 23(1))Code of PracticeRevised in accordance with section 25(4) of the Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996March 2015

Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 (section 23(1))Code of PracticeRevised in accordance with section 25(4) of the Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
© Crown copyright 2015This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open- government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/publicationsAny enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at: humanrights@justice.gsi.gov.ukPrint ISBN 9781474114851Web ISBN 9781474114868ID 26011511	01/15Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum.Printed in the UK by the Williams Lea Group on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ContentsPreamble	31. Introduction	32. Definitions	43. General responsibilities	64. Recording of information	75. Retention of material	8(a) Duty to retain material	8(b) Length of time for which material is to be retained.	96. Preparation of material for prosecutor	10(a) Introduction	10(b) Magistrates’ Court	10(c) Crown Court	11(d) Sensitive material – Crown Court	117. Revelation of material to prosecutor	138. Subsequent action by disclosure officer	149. Certification by disclosure officer	1410. Disclosure of material to accused	15Annex

Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 Code of Practice under Part IIPreambleThis code of practice is issued under Part II of the Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 (‘the Act’). It sets out the manner in which police officers are to record, retain and reveal to the prosecutor material obtained in a criminal investigation and which may be relevant to the investigation, and related matters.1. Introduction1.1 This code of practice applies in respect of criminal investigations conducted by police officers which begin on or after the day on which this code comes into effect. Persons other than police officers who are charged with the duty of conducting an investigation as defined in the Act are to have regard to the relevant provisions of the code, and should take these into account in applying their own operating procedures.1.2 This code does not apply to persons who are not charged with the duty of conducting an investigation as defined in the Act.1.3 Nothing in this code applies to material intercepted in obedience to a warrant issued under section 2 of the Interception of Communications Act 1985 or section 5 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000, or to any copy of that material as defined in section 10 of the 1985 Act or section 15 of the 2000 Act.1.4 This code extends only to England and Wales.1.1 
2. Definitions2.1 In this code:* a criminal investigation is an investigation conducted by police officers with a view to it being ascertained whether a person should be charged with an offence, or whether a person charged with an offence is guilty of it. This will include:* investigations into crimes that have been committed;* investigations whose purpose is to ascertain whether a crime has been committed, with a view to the possible institution of criminal proceedings; and* investigations which begin in the belief that a crime may be committed, for example when the police keep premises or individuals under observation for a period of time, with a view to the possible institution of criminal proceedings;* charging a person with an offence includes prosecution by way of summons or postal requisition;* an investigator is any police officer involved in the conduct of a criminal investigation. All investigators have a responsibility for carrying out the duties imposed on them under this code, including in particular recording information, and retaining records of information and other material;* the officer in charge of an investigation is the police officer responsible for directing a criminal investigation. He is also responsible for ensuring that proper procedures are in place for recording information, and retaining records of information and other material, in the investigation;* the disclosure officer is the person responsible for examining material retained by the police during the investigation; revealing material to the prosecutor during the investigation and any criminal proceedings resulting from it, and certifying that he has done this; and disclosing material to the accused at the request of the prosecutor;* the prosecutor is the authority responsible for the conduct, on behalf of the Crown, of criminal proceedings resulting from a specific criminal investigation;* material is material of any kind, including information and objects, which is obtained or inspected in the course of a criminal investigation and which may be relevant to the investigation. This includes not only material coming into the possession of the investigator (such as documents seized in the course of searching premises) but also material generated by him (such as interview records);* material may be relevant to an investigation if it appears to an investigator, or to the officer in charge of an investigation, or to the disclosure officer, that it has some bearing on any offence under investigation or any person being investigated, or on the surrounding circumstances of the case, unless it is incapable of having any impact on the case;* 
* sensitive material is material, the disclosure of which, the disclosure officer believes, would give rise to a real risk of serious prejudice to an important public interest;* references to prosecution disclosure are to the duty of the prosecutor under sections 3 and 7A of the Act to disclose material which is in his possession or which he has inspected in pursuance of this code, and which might reasonably be considered capable of undermining the case against the accused, or of assisting the case for the accused;* 	references to the disclosure of material to a person accused of an offence include references to the disclosure of material to his legal representative;* 	references to police officers and to the chief officer of police include those employed in a police force as defined in section 3(3) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985.* 
3. General responsibilities3.1 The functions of the investigator, the officer in charge of an investigation and the disclosure officer are separate. Whether they are undertaken by one, two or more persons will depend on the complexity of the case and the administrative arrangements within each police force. Where they are undertaken by more than one person, close consultation between them is essential to the effective performance of the duties imposed by this code.3.2 In any criminal investigation, one or more deputy disclosure officers may be appointed to assist the disclosure officer, and a deputy disclosure officer may perform any function of a disclosure officer as defined in paragraph 2.1.3.3 The chief officer of police for each police force is responsible for putting in place arrangements to ensure that in every investigation the identity of the officer in charge of an investigation and the disclosure officer is recorded. The chief officer of police for each police force shall ensure that disclosure officers and deputy disclosure officers have sufficient skills and authority, commensurate with the complexity of the investigation, to discharge their functions effectively. An individual must not be appointed as disclosure officer, or continue in that role, if that is likely to result in a conflict of interest, for instance, if the disclosure officer is the victim of the alleged crime which is the subject of the investigation. The advice of a more senior officer must always be sought if there is doubt as to whether a conflict of interest precludes an individual acting as disclosure officer. If thereafter the doubt remains, the advice of a prosecutor should be sought.3.4 The officer in charge of an investigation may delegate tasks to another investigator, to civilians employed by the police force, or to other persons participating in the investigation under arrangements for joint investigations, but he remains responsible for ensuring that these have been carried out and for accounting for any general policies followed in the investigation. In particular, it is an essential part of his duties to ensure that all material which may be relevant to an investigation is retained, and either made available to the disclosure officer or (in exceptional circumstances) revealed directly to the prosecutor.3.5 In conducting an investigation, the investigator should pursue all reasonable lines of inquiry, whether these point towards or away from the suspect. What is reasonable in each case will depend on the particular circumstances. For example, where material is held on computer, it is a matter for the investigator to decide which material on the computer it is reasonable to inquire into, and in what manner.3.6 If the officer in charge of an investigation believes that other persons may be in possession of material that may be relevant to the investigation, and if this has not been obtained under paragraph 3.5 above, he should ask the disclosure officer to inform them of the existence of the investigation and to invite them to retain the material in case they receive a request for its disclosure. The disclosure officer should inform the prosecutor that they may have such material. However, the officer in charge of an investigation is not required to make speculative enquiries of other persons; there must be some reason to believe that they may have relevant1.1 
material. That reason may come from information provided to the police by the accused or from other inquiries made or from some other source.3.7 If, during a criminal investigation, the officer in charge of an investigation or disclosure officer for any reason no longer has responsibility for the functions falling to him, either his supervisor or the police officer in charge of criminal investigations for the police force concerned must assign someone else to assume that responsibility. That person's identity must be recorded, as with those initially responsible for these functions in each investigation.4. Recording of information4.1 If material which may be relevant to the investigation consists of information which is not recorded in any form, the officer in charge of an investigation must ensure that it is recorded in a durable or retrievable form (whether in writing, on video or audio tape, or on computer disk).4.2 Where it is not practicable to retain the initial record of information because it forms part of a larger record which is to be destroyed, its contents should be transferred as a true record to a durable and more easily-stored form before that happens.4.3 Negative information is often relevant to an investigation. If it may be relevant it must be recorded. An example might be a number of people present in a particular place at a particular time who state that they saw nothing unusual.4.4 Where information which may be relevant is obtained, it must be recorded at the time it is obtained or as soon as practicable after that time. This includes, for example, information obtained in house-to-house enquiries, although the requirement to record information promptly does not require an investigator to take a statement from a potential witness where it would not otherwise be taken.1.1 
5. Retention of material(a) Duty to retain material5.1 The investigator must retain material obtained in a criminal investigation which may be relevant to the investigation. Material may be photographed, video-recorded, captured digitally or otherwise retained in the form of a copy rather than the original at any time, if the original is perishable; the original was supplied to the investigator rather than generated by him and is to be returned to its owner; or the retention of a copy rather than the original is reasonable in all the circumstances.5.2 Where material has been seized in the exercise of the powers of seizure conferred by the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, the duty to retain it under this code is subject to the provisions on the retention of seized material in section 22 of that Act.5.3 If the officer in charge of an investigation becomes aware as a result of developments in the case that material previously examined but not retained (because it was not thought to be relevant) may now be relevant to the investigation, he should, wherever practicable, take steps to obtain it or ensure that it is retained for further inspection or for production in court if required.5.4 The duty to retain material includes in particular the duty to retain material falling into the following categories, where it may be relevant to the investigation:* crime reports (including crime report forms, relevant parts of incident report books or police officers’ notebooks);* custody records;* records which are derived from tapes of telephone messages (for example, 999 calls) containing descriptions of an alleged offence or offender;* final versions of witness statements (and draft versions where their content differs from the final version), including any exhibits mentioned (unless these have been returned to their owner on the understanding that they will be produced in court if required);* interview records (written records, or audio or video tapes, of interviews with actual or potential witnesses or suspects);* communications between the police and experts such as forensic scientists, reports of work carried out by experts, and schedules of scientific material prepared by the expert for the investigator, for the purposes of criminal proceedings;* 	records of the first description of a suspect by each potential witness who purports to identify or describe the suspect, whether or not the description differs from that of subsequent descriptions by that or other witnesses;* any material casting doubt on the reliability of a witness.* 
5.5 The duty to retain material, where it may be relevant to the investigation, also includes in particular the duty to retain material which may satisfy the test for prosecution disclosure in the Act, such as:* information provided by an accused person which indicates an explanation for the offence with which he has been charged;* any material casting doubt on the reliability of a confession;* any material casting doubt on the reliability of a prosecution witness.5.6 The duty to retain material falling into these categories does not extend to items which are purely ancillary to such material and possess no independent significance (for example, duplicate copies of records or reports).(b) Length of time for which material is to be retained5.7 All material which may be relevant to the investigation must be retained until a decision is taken whether to institute proceedings against a person for an offence.5.8 If a criminal investigation results in proceedings being instituted, all material which may be relevant must be retained at least until the accused is acquitted or convicted or the prosecutor decides not to proceed with the case.5.9 Where the accused is convicted, all material which may be relevant must be retained at least until:* the convicted person is released from custody, or discharged from hospital, in cases where the court imposes a custodial sentence or a hospital order;* six months from the date of conviction, in all other cases.If the court imposes a custodial sentence or hospital order and the convicted person is released from custody or discharged from hospital earlier than six months from the date of conviction, all material which may be relevant must be retained at least until six months from the date of conviction.5.10 If an appeal against conviction is in progress when the release or discharge occurs, or at the end of the period of six months specified in paragraph 5.9, all material which may be relevant must be retained until the appeal is determined. Similarly, if the Criminal Cases Review Commission is considering an application at that point in time, all material which may be relevant must be retained at least until the Commission decides not to refer the case to the Court.1.1 
6. Preparation of material for prosecutor(a) Introduction6.1 The officer in charge of the investigation, the disclosure officer or an investigator may seek advice from the prosecutor about whether any particular item of material may be relevant to the investigation.6.2 Material which may be relevant to an investigation, which has been retained in accordance with this code, and which the disclosure officer believes will not form part of the prosecution case, must be listed on a schedule. This process will differ depending on whether the case is likely to be heard in the magistrates’ court or the Crown Court.(b) Magistrates’ CourtAnticipated Guilty pleas6.3 If the accused is charged with a summary offence or an either-way offence that is likely to remain in the magistrates’ court, and it is considered that he is likely to plead guilty (e.g. because he has admitted the offence), a schedule or streamlined disclosure certificate is not required. However, the Common Law duty to disclose material which may assist the defence at bail hearings or in the early preparation of their case remains, and where there is such material the certification on the Police Report (MG5/SDF) must be completed. Where there is no such material, a certificate to that effect must be completed in like form to that attached at the Annex.6.4 If, contrary to the expectation of a guilty plea being entered, the accused pleads not guilty at the first hearing, the disclosure officer must ensure that the streamlined disclosure certificate is prepared and submitted as soon as is reasonably practicable after that happens.Anticipated Not Guilty pleas6.5 If the accused is charged with a summary offence or an either-way offence that is likely to remain in the magistrates’ court, and it is considered that he is likely to plead not guilty, a streamlined disclosure certificate must be completed in like form to that attached at the Annex.Material which may assist the defence6.6 In every case, irrespective of the anticipated plea, if there is material known to the disclosure officer that might assist the defence with the early preparation of their case or at a bail hearing (for example, a key prosecution witness has relevant previous convictions or a witness has withdrawn his or her statement), a note must be made on the MG5 (or other format agreed under the National File Standards). The material must be disclosed to the prosecutor who will disclose it to the defence if he thinks it meets this Common Law test.1.1 
No undermining or assisting material and sensitive material – magistrates’ court cases6.7 If there is no material which might fall to be disclosed as undermining the prosecution case or assisting the defence, the officer should complete the appropriate entry on the streamlined disclosure certificate. If there is any sensitive unused material the officer should complete a sensitive material schedule (MG6D or similar) and attach it to the prosecution file. In exceptional circumstances, when its existence is so sensitive that it cannot be listed, it should be revealed to the prosecutor separately.(c) Crown Court6.8 For cases to be held in the Crown Court, the unused material schedules (MG6 series) are used.6.9 The disclosure officer must ensure that a schedule is prepared in the following circumstances:* the accused is charged with an offence which is triable only on indictment;* the accused is charged with an offence which is triable either way, and it is considered that the case is likely to be tried on indictment.6.10 Material which the disclosure officer does not believe is sensitive must be listed on a schedule of non-sensitive material. The schedule must include a statement that the disclosure officer does not believe the material is sensitive.Way in which material is to be listed on schedule6.11 For indictable only cases or either-way cases sent to the Crown Court, schedules MG6 C, D and E should be completed to facilitate service of the MG6C with the prosecution case, wherever possible. The disclosure officer should ensure that each item of material is listed separately on the schedule, and is numbered consecutively. The description of each item should make clear the nature of the item and should contain sufficient detail to enable the prosecutor to decide whether he needs to inspect the material before deciding whether or not it should be disclosed.6.12 In some enquiries it may not be practicable to list each item of material separately. For example, there may be many items of a similar or repetitive nature. These may be listed in a block and described by quantity and generic title.6.13 Even if some material is listed in a block, the disclosure officer must ensure that any items among that material which might satisfy the test for prosecution disclosure are listed and described individually.(d) Sensitive material – Crown Court6.14 Any material which is believed to be sensitive either must be listed on a schedule of sensitive material or, in exceptional circumstances where its existence is so sensitive that it cannot be listed, it should be revealed to the prosecutor separately. If there is no sensitive material, the disclosure officer must record this fact on a schedule of sensitive material, or otherwise so indicate.1.1 
6.15 Subject to paragraph 6.16 below, the disclosure officer must list on a sensitive schedule any material the disclosure of which he believes would give rise to a real risk of serious prejudice to an important public interest, and the reason for that belief. The schedule must include a statement that the disclosure officer believes the material is sensitive. Depending on the circumstances, examples of such material may include the following among others:* material relating to national security;* material received from the intelligence and security agencies;* material relating to intelligence from foreign sources which reveals sensitive intelligence gathering methods;* material given in confidence;* material relating to the identity or activities of informants, or undercover police officers, or witnesses, or other persons supplying information to the police who may be in danger if their identities are revealed;* material revealing the location of any premises or other place used for police surveillance, or the identity of any person allowing a police officer to use them for surveillance;* material revealing, either directly or indirectly, techniques and methods relied upon by a police officer in the course of a criminal investigation, for example covert surveillance techniques, or other methods of detecting crime;* material whose disclosure might facilitate the commission of other offences or hinder the prevention and detection of crime;* material upon the strength of which search warrants were obtained;* material containing details of persons taking part in identification parades;* material supplied to an investigator during a criminal investigation which has been generated by an official of a body concerned with the regulation or supervision of bodies corporate or of persons engaged in financial activities, or which has been generated by a person retained by such a body;* material supplied to an investigator during a criminal investigation which relates to a child or young person and which has been generated by a local authority social services department, an Area Child Protection Committee or other party contacted by an investigator during the investigation;* material relating to the private life of a witness.6.16 In exceptional circumstances, where an investigator considers that material is so sensitive that its revelation to the prosecutor by means of an entry on the sensitive schedule is inappropriate, the existence of the material must be revealed to the prosecutor separately. This will apply only where compromising the material would be likely to lead directly to the loss of life, or directly threaten national security.6.17 In such circumstances, the responsibility for informing the prosecutor lies with the investigator who knows the detail of the sensitive material. The investigator should act as soon as is reasonably practicable after the file containing the prosecution case is sent to the prosecutor. The investigator must also ensure that the prosecutor is able to inspect the material so that he can assess whether it is disclosable and, if so, whether it needs to be brought before a court for a ruling on disclosure.1.1 
7. Revelation of material to prosecutor7.1 Certain unused material must be disclosed to the accused at Common Law if it would assist the defence with the early preparation of their case or at a bail hearing. This material may consist of items such as a previous relevant conviction of a key prosecution witness or the withdrawal of support for the prosecution by a witness. This material must be revealed to the prosecutor for service on the defence with the initial details of the prosecution case.7.1 A	In anticipated not guilty plea cases for hearing in the magistrates’ court the disclosure officer must give the streamlined disclosure certificate to the prosecutor at the same time as he gives the prosecutor the file containing the material for the prosecution case.7.1 B	In cases sent to the Crown Court, wherever possible, the disclosure officer should give the schedules concerning unused material to the prosecutor at the same time as the prosecution file in preparation for the first hearing and any case management that the judge may wish to conduct at that stage.7.2 The disclosure officer should draw the attention of the prosecutor to any material an investigator has retained (including material to which paragraph 6.16 applies) which may satisfy the test for prosecution disclosure in the Act, and should explain why he has come to that view.7.3 At the same time as complying with the duties in paragraphs 7.1 and 7.2, the disclosure officer must give the prosecutor a copy of any material which falls into the following categories (unless such material has already been given to the prosecutor as part of the file containing the material for the prosecution case):* information provided by an accused person which indicates an explanation for the offence with which he has been charged;* any material casting doubt on the reliability of a confession;* any material casting doubt on the reliability of a prosecution witness;* any other material which the investigator believes may satisfy the test for prosecution disclosure in the Act.7.4 If the prosecutor asks to inspect material which has not already been copied to him, the disclosure officer must allow him to inspect it. If the prosecutor asks for a copy of material which has not already been copied to him, the disclosure officer must give him a copy. However, this does not apply where the disclosure officer believes, having consulted the officer in charge of the investigation, that the material is too sensitive to be copied and can only be inspected.7.5 If material consists of information which is recorded other than in writing, whether it should be given to the prosecutor in its original form as a whole, or by way of relevant extracts recorded in the same form, or in the form of a transcript, is a matter for agreement between the disclosure officer and the prosecutor.7.1 
8. Subsequent action by disclosure officer8.1 At the time when a streamlined disclosure certificate is prepared for magistrates’ court cases, or a schedule of non-sensitive material is prepared for Crown Court cases, the disclosure officer may not know exactly what material will form the case against the accused. In addition, the prosecutor may not have given advice about the likely relevance of particular items of material. Once these matters have been determined, the disclosure officer must give the prosecutor, where necessary, an amended certificate or schedule listing any additional material:* which may be relevant to the investigation,* which does not form part of the case against the accused,* which is not already listed on the schedule, and* which he believes is not sensitive,unless he is informed in writing by the prosecutor that the prosecutor intends to disclose the material to the defence.8.2 Section 7A of the Act imposes a continuing duty on the prosecutor, for the duration of criminal proceedings against the accused, to disclose material which satisfies the test for disclosure (subject to public interest considerations). To enable him to do this, any new material coming to light should be treated in the same way as the earlier material.8.3 In particular, after a defence statement has been given, or details of the issues in dispute have been recorded on the effective trial preparation form, the disclosure officer must look again at the material which has been retained and must draw the attention of the prosecutor to any material which might reasonably be considered capable of undermining the case for the prosecution against the accused or of assisting the case for the accused; and he must reveal it to him in accordance with paragraphs 7.4 and 7.5 above.9. Certification by disclosure officer9.1 The disclosure officer must certify to the prosecutor that, to the best of his knowledge and belief, all relevant material which has been retained and made available to him has been revealed to the prosecutor in accordance with this code. He must sign and date the certificate. It will be necessary to certify not only at the time when the schedule and accompanying material is submitted to the prosecutor, and when relevant material which has been retained is reconsidered after the accused has given a defence statement, but also whenever a schedule is otherwise given or material is otherwise revealed to the prosecutor.1.1 
10. Disclosure of material to accused10.1 Other than early disclosure under Common Law, in the magistrates’ court the streamlined certificate at the Annex (and any relevant unused material to be disclosed under it) must be disclosed to the accused either:* at the hearing where a not guilty plea is entered, or* as soon as possible following a formal indication from the accused or representative that a not guilty plea will be entered at the hearing.10.1 A If material has not already been copied to the prosecutor, and he requests its disclosure to the accused on the ground that:* it satisfies the test for prosecution disclosure, or* the court has ordered its disclosure after considering an application from the accused,the disclosure officer must disclose it to the accused.10.2 If material has been copied to the prosecutor, and it is to be disclosed, whether it is disclosed by the prosecutor or the disclosure officer is a matter of agreement between the two of them.10.3 The disclosure officer must disclose material to the accused either by giving him a copy or by allowing him to inspect it. If the accused person asks for a copy of any material which he has been allowed to inspect, the disclosure officer must give it to him, unless in the opinion of the disclosure officer that is either not practicable (for example because the material consists of an object which cannot be copied, or because the volume of material is so great), or not desirable (for example because the material is a statement by a child witness in relation to a sexual offence).10.4 If material which the accused has been allowed to inspect consists of information which is recorded other than in writing, whether it should be given to the accused in its original form or in the form of a transcript is a matter for the discretion of the disclosure officer. If the material is transcribed, the disclosure officer must ensure that the transcript is certified to the accused as a true record of the material which has been transcribed.10.5 If a court concludes that an item of sensitive material satisfies the prosecution disclosure test and that the interests of the defence outweigh the public interest in withholding disclosure, it will be necessary to disclose the material if the case is to proceed. This does not mean that sensitive documents must always be disclosed in their original form: for example, the court may agree that sensitive details still requiring protection should be blocked out, or that documents may be summarised, or that the prosecutor may make an admission about the substance of the material under section 10 of the Criminal Justice Act 1967.10.1 
Annex1. FOR USE IN GAP CASES AT 1ST HEARING WHERE THERE IS NOTHING TO DISCLOSE PURSUANT TO R v DPP ex parte LEEURN:	Defendant: First Name Last Name2. FOR USE IN ALL NGAP CASES AT 1ST HEARING WHERE THERE IS NOTHING TO DISCLOSEURN:	Defendant: First Name Last NameSCHEDULE OF NON-SENSITIVE UNUSED MATERIAL – NOT FOR DISCLOSURENo.Police use(Brief description of materials)CPS use1Having applied the disclosure tests set out in the CPIA 1996, I amsatisfied from the descriptions listed in this schedule that the items in question are clearly not disclosable.2345678910
Disclosure Officer’s CertificationI certify –* that any relevant unused material has been recorded and retained in accordance with the CPIA 1996 Code of Practice (as amended),* that such material as is non-sensitive is shown on the schedule above,* and that to the best of my knowledge and belief there are no items shown in the schedule that might reasonably undermine the prosecution case, or, so far as it is apparent, assist the defence with the early preparation of their case or at a bail hearing.Disclosure Officer NameSIGNATURE:CPS Prosecutor NameSIGNATURE:DateDate3. FOR USE IN ALL NGAP CASES AT 1ST HEARING WHERE THERE ARE SOME ITEMS TO DISCLOSEURN:	Defendant: First Name Last NameSCHEDULE OF NON-SENSITIVE UNUSED MATERIALNo.Police useCPS use(Brief description of materials including those falling under para.7.3 of the Code)(Against each item insert D for disclose; I for inspect; CND for clearly not disclosable)12345678910
Disclosure Officer’s CertificationI certify –* that any relevant unused material has been recorded and retained in accordance with the CPIA 1996 Code of Practice (as amended)* that such material as is non-sensitive is shown on the schedule above,* and that to the best of my knowledge and belief items…in the schedule might reasonably undermine the prosecution case, or assist the defence with the early preparation of their case or at a bail hearing, because….
Disclosure Officer NameSIGNATURE:
CPS Prosecutor NameSIGNATURE:
Date	Date


Department for Environment, Food and Rural AffairsCode of practice on litter and refuseModification to the Code of Practice on Litter and Refuse 2006 – Effective enforcement1. This modification of the Code of Practice on Litter and Refuse published in 2006 is made under section 89(9) of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 (‘EPA 1990’) and is issued by the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural affairs. The Code of Practice on Litter and Refuse provides practical guidance on how to discharge the duties imposed on duty bodies to keep relevant land clear of litter and refuse, and on local authorities and the Secretary of State to keep clean those public highways for which they are responsible, as set out in section 89(1) and (2) EPA 1990.2. Many duty bodies (referred to in this part of the Code of Practice as “enforcing authorities”) also therefore have complementary enforcement powers to help deter and sanction the behaviours that lead to the defacement of land by litter. Appropriate, effective and proportionate use of enforcement powers will help all duty bodies to comply with their duties to keep relevant land clear of litter and refuse, and to keep relevant highways clean. A balanced approach to enforcement should strike the balance between national consistency, local circumstances, fairness and effectiveness.3. This modification to the Code:(a) updates the Code in respect of the changes to fixed penalty levels, and the new civil penalties for littering from vehicles, that resulted from the introduction of the Environmental Offences Regulations (Fixed Penalties) (England) Regulations 2017 and the Littering from Vehicles Outside London (Keepers: Civil Penalties) Regulations 2018;(b) relates particularly to the use of fixed penalty notices in lieu of prosecution for the offences of littering (s87 EPA 1990), and the unauthorised distribution of free literature (paragraph 9 Schedule 3A EPA 1990), and the use of civil penalties to penalise the keeper of a vehicle from which litter is thrown (s88A EPA 1990);(c) advises the relevant authorities of the procedures that they must follow, the procedures to which they must have regard, and the procedures that the government recommends they follow when enforcing against littering and related offences;(d) sets out the policy framework within which the government believes that litter authorities should be exercising their environmental enforcement powers, including how to approach, carry out and review enforcement activity;(e) contains information for members of the public, as well as local authorities, about environmental offences and their enforcement.4. Since dog faeces are also classed as “refuse” for the purposes of Part 4 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990,1 this modification to the Code also applies to the1 Litter (Animal Droppings) Order 1991
use of enforcement action in respect of dog fouling offences contrary to Public Space Protection Orders (PSPOs) issued under the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014. It should be read in conjunction with wider guidance on powers to control dogs.25. As set out in Part 2 of the Code of Practice (Advisory standards for graffiti and fly- posting), duty bodies are also encouraged to manage the problems of graffiti and fly- posting as part of compliance with their section 89 duties. This guidance will therefore also be relevant to enforcement against these offences.36. This part of the Code of Practice is good practice guidance. Where it says that something must be done, this means that it is a requirement in either primary or secondary legislation. Where a statute imposes a duty on a body or organisation, a failure to comply will constitute a breach of statutory duty. If there appear to be differences between primary or secondary legislation and this Code, the legislation always takes precedence.7. Section 89(10) EPA 1990 stipulates that local authorities must have regard to the information contained in the Code of Practice on Litter and Refuse, of which this modification forms part. It should be read alongside any other relevant guidance and any further modifications to the Code of Practice on Litter and Refuse subsequently issued by the government (available on the GOV.UK website).48. The Code of Practice on Litter and Refuse is modified as follows:(a) On page 3 (“Contents”), before Part 2 insert: “Part 1A – Effective enforcement”(b) On page 5, following section 1.5, section 1.5A has been inserted with the following wording:“Part 1A (as inserted by modification in 2019) contains guidance on the proportionate and effective use of enforcement action against littering and related offences. Appropriate, effective and proportionate use of enforcement powers will help all duty bodies to comply with their duties to keep relevant land clear of litter and refuse, and to keep relevant highways clean. A balanced approach to enforcement should strike the balance between national consistency, local circumstances, and fairness and effectiveness.”(c) After Part 1, the new Part 1A set out in the Annex is inserted.2 https://www.gov.uk/guidance/control-dogs3 Section 43 of the Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003 enables “authorised officers” of local authorities to issue fixed penalty notices for graffiti or fly-posting offences EXCEPT in circumstances where (i) the commission of a graffiti offence under s 1(1) of the Criminal Damage Act 1971 also involves the offence of racially or religiously aggravated criminal damage under section 30 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998, or (ii) any other graffiti or fly-posting offence is motivated (wholly or in part) by hostility towards one or more members of a racial or religious group based on their membership of that group.4	https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/code-of-practice-on-litter-and-refuse
Code of PracticePowers of EntryDecember 2014
Code of PracticePowers of EntryPresented to Parliament pursuant to Section 48 (1)(a) of the Protection of Freedoms Act 2012December 2014
© Crown copyright 2014This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open- government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/publicationsAny enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at: PofEGateway@homeoffice.gsi.gov.ukPrint ISBN 9781474112710Web ISBN 9781474112727ID 25111402 12/14Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum.Printed in the UK by the Williams Lea Group on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
Contents1 Purpose and Scope	32 Exceptions	43 Avoiding Discrimination	44 Definitions used in this Code	55 Availability/monitoring and changes to the Code	66 Authorisation and approval	77 Providing notice of rights to occupiers	78 Entering premises	89 Number of persons present	910 Private dwellings	911 Entry without consent or a warrant	912 Entry under warrant	913 Timing of exercise of powers	1014 Seizure of property	1015 Retention of property	1016 Other persons	1117 Conduct	1118 Assistance from occupiers	1219 Leaving premises	1320 Action after exercise of powers	1321 Register of exercise of powers	1422 Conflict of interests	1423 Complaints	1424 Staff training	1425 Further information	141 

1 Purpose and Scope1.1 This Code of Practice is issued by the Secretary of State under Section 48 of the Protection of Freedoms Act 2012 (the Act). Under Section 51 of the Act a ‘relevant person’ must have regard to this Code when exercising any functions to which the Code relates. A failure on the part of any person to act in accordance with any provision of this Code does not of itself make that person liable to criminal or civil proceedings. However, the Code is admissible as evidence in any such proceedings and any failure by a relevant person to have regard to the Code may be taken into account.1.2 Powers of entry and associated powers are important tools that facilitate the protection of the public from harm, enable the effective investigation of offences and allow for the necessary enforcement of regulations. The Code provides guidance and sets out considerations that apply before, during and after powers of entry and associated powers are exercised including those circumstances where entry is exercised with the consent of an occupier. The purpose of the Code is to ensure greater consistency in the exercise of powers of entry and greater clarity for those affected by them while upholding effective enforcement.1.3 Powers of entry and associated powers (such as search and seizure) are intrusive in nature and may engage rights enshrined in the European Convention on Human Rights.ï Article 8 states that any interference by a public authority with the right to respect for private and family life must be in accordance with the law and necessary for one of the stated purposes, e.g. for the prevention of disorder and crime.ï Article 1 of the First Additional Protocol states that no one shall be deprived of their possessions except in the public interest and subject to the conditions provided by law.1.4 Relevant persons should consider whether the necessary objectives can be met by less intrusive means.1.5 This Code applies to powers of entry and associated powers as specified under any Act or Statutory Instrument other than devolved powers of entry and devolved associated powers. Devolved powers of entry and devolved associated powers are powers:(i) in relation to which the Welsh Ministers may issue a code under Schedule 3 of the Act,(ii) which, if it were contained in an Act of the Scottish Parliament, would be within the legislative competence of that Parliament, or(iii) which, if were contained in an Act of the Northern Ireland Assembly, would be within the legislative competence of that Assembly and would deal with a transferred matter (within the meaning given by section 4(1) of the Northern Ireland Act 1998).(i) 
2 Exceptions2.1 The Code does not override specific statutory powers to conduct routine inspections or to enter premises for enforcement purposes nor does it apply where the power of entry is granted through an order of a court where that order is made under court powers defined in legislation. (This is distinct from an existing power of entry being exercised following authorisation by a warrant of a court).2.2 This Code does not apply to the entry to premises for purposes and in circumstances which are subject to a separate statutory Code of Practice.2.3 For example, PACE Code B, issued under section 66 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) relates to the search of premises and seizure of property by police officers. Section 67(9) of PACE 1984 requires persons other than police officers who are charged with the duty of investigating offences or charging offenders to have regard to that Code. Paragraph 2.5 of that Code states that it does not apply if the exercise of a power is not dependent on the existence of grounds for suspecting that an offence may have been committed and the person exercising the power has no reasonable grounds for such suspicion. Therefore in circumstances where that Code does not apply, and if no other relevant Code does apply, then relevant persons should have regard to this Code.2.4 It may be the case that the circumstances requiring entry to premises change during the course of a visit. For example, a routine inspection carried out under this Code of Practice may reveal suspicion of an offence having been committed. The purpose of the visit may then become a search for evidence of the offence. This may require that this Code ceases to apply and the exercise of powers be continued under PACE Code B.2.5 The guidance and considerations at sections 6-7, 10-12 and 14-25 of this Code need not apply where a relevant person is acting as a private individual. A private individual should act reasonably and with respect for persons and property when exercising a statutory power of entry.13 Avoiding Discrimination3.1 The Equality Act 2010 makes it unlawful to discriminate against, harass or victimise any person on the grounds of age, disability, gender reassignment, race, religion or belief, sex, sexual orientation, marriage or civil partnership, pregnancy or maternity in the discharge of an authorised persons powers. This applies to the exercise of powers of entry.1	The considerations described in these sections need not apply in these circumstances as they depend on the relevant person being part of a public authority or other organisation.
4 Definitions used in this Code4.1 ‘Relevant person’ means any person exercising a power of entry or associated power, other than a devolved power of entry or devolved associated power, unless such exercise is subject to a separate Code of Practice (however described) issued under any enactment (whenever passed or made.)4.2 ‘Power of entry’ means a power (however expressed) in any enactment to enter land or other premises; and includes any safeguard which forms part of the power.24.3 ‘Associated powers’ means any power which:a) is contained in an enactmentb) is connected with a power of entry, andc) is a power:i. to do anything on, or in relation to, the land or other premises entered in pursuance of the power of entry,ii. to do anything in relation to any person, or anything found on the land or other premises entered in pursuance of the power of entry, or   iii. otherwise to do anything in connection with the power of entry, and includes any safeguard which forms part of the associated power.4.4 ‘Premises’ is defined under section 46 of the Act and includes any place and, in particular, includes:a) any vehicle, vessel, aircraft or hovercraft,b) any off-shore installation,c) any renewable energy installation,d) any tent or movable structure4.5 The following are definitions for the purpose of this Code:4.6 ‘Authorised persons’ means a person authorised to exercise statutory non- devolved powers of entry (titles other than ‘authorised persons’ used in legislation where the Code applies are to be treated as meaning the same).4.7 ‘Dwelling’ means any premises wholly or mainly used as place of residence or abode(including any garden, yard, garage, outhouse or other appurtenance of such premises which is not used in common by the occupants of more than one such dwelling);34.8 ‘Occupier’ refers to a person who is or appears to be in charge of the premises;4.9 ‘Owner/landowner’ refers to the person owning the premises;2	This does not include terms in tenancy agreements that are implied by statute, for example, it would not apply to section 11(6) Landlord and Tenant Act 1985.3	Adapted from s53 of the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974.
4.10 ‘Authorised person in charge’ means the authorised person assigned to lead the search, inspection, sampling etc. One authorised person must act as the authorised person in charge whenever powers of entry are exercised.5 Availability/monitoring and changes to the Code5.1 Section 49 of the Act requires the Secretary of State to keep this Code under review and enables the Secretary of State to alter or replace the Code. This Code and any subsequent replacement Code will be published on the GOV.UK website and relevant persons must have regard to it.
6 Authorisation and approval6.1 The exercise of powers of entry should be provided for by the relevant legislation.6.2 There should also be a proper process of approval for the exercise of powers of entry, whether for specific visits or for programmes of visits. If an approval process is laid out in legislation, this should be followed, otherwise organisations should ensure that an approval process is in place for the exercise of powers of entry. Where routine inspections or visits for large scale operations are involved, processes should be agreed and approval granted by a senior official or manager (this should be someone sufficiently senior in the chain of command who is authorised to approve the exercise of powers). It is not necessary for every individual visit to be separately approved.6.3 Authorised persons and processes for the approval of the exercise of a power of entry should be periodically reviewed to ensure that persons and management processes are appropriate.7 Providing notice of rights to occupiers7.1 Where it is judged necessary to exercise a power of entry authorised persons should generally provide a Notice of Powers and Rights in a standard format to the occupier. This should include:ï whether the entry will be conducted with or without a warrant;ï the powers of entry and associated powers used;ï the occupier’s rights;ï any compensation or complaints procedures that exist; andï where a copy of this Code of Practice may be obtained.7.2 In appropriate cases, compensation may be payable for damage caused by entering and searching premises. In such cases authorised persons should explain any compensation procedures.7.3 Examples of where it may not be necessary to provide a Notice of Powers and Rights to occupants are:ï Routine checks on vehicles at ports where a check or search is brief, the person concerned consents to the search and no issues of concern arise, or routine checks on ships or aircraft where no occupant with responsibility for the ship or aircraft is present.ï Where powers are exercised routinely with the consent of the occupier or where the premises are readily accessible by the public (e.g. trading estate) or where the entry is solely to gain access to other premises.7.4 Relevant powers should however be explained where this is requested.1.1 
8 Entering premisesAdvance notice8.1 Where it is appropriate and practicable to do so, reasonable notice (usually not less than 48 hours or as specified in relevant legislation) should be provided to the occupier or landowner of the intention before exercising a power of entry. Where legislation specifically provides that no notice need be given, authorised persons should nevertheless still consider whether notice could be provided, and where appropriate provide this, where it will not frustrate the purposes of exercising the power of entry.8.2 Where notice is provided this should set out the purpose of the proposed entry and date and time when it is proposed that the power should be exercised.8.3 If pre-notification of a visit would defeat the purposes of exercising powers, officers, provided they have the statutory power to do so, can still visit unannounced. There will also be occasions on which notice is clearly not practicable, for example in respect of routine vehicle searches in ports or where routine frequent visits are made to the same premises.8.4 In the context of powers of entry for the purposes of inspecting an institution / service provider, it may be necessary to conduct an unannounced inspection in order to gain a genuine picture of ordinary day to day processes relating to that institution / service provider rather than a manufactured or pre-prepared impression. Unannounced visits may also be necessary for the purpose of safeguarding children and other vulnerable groups.8.5 Reasonable notice need not be given where the purpose of the entry is the initial safety investigation in the aftermath of an accident, incident or other emergency where there is an urgent need to investigate the circumstances/causes of the accident, incident, or other emergency or to maintain public safety.Consent8.6 Reasonable effort should also be made to obtain the consent of the landowner or occupier,4 unless obtaining consent would frustrate the purpose of the exercise, for example by causing undue delay. It is important that consent is informed and that the occupier is notified about the purpose of the visit and, for exercising the powers of entry and associated powers, what these powers are and how they will be used. Where consent is sought but not obtained (the occupier refuses or obstructs entry, contact could not be established with the occupier or the premises were unoccupied at the time) authorised persons should record their attempts to obtain consent as a matter of good practice.8.7 If consent is withdrawn by the occupier at any time, the right to enter the premises should be clearly explained to him or her and also the consequences or penalty for obstructing authorised persons when exercising their legal powers. Where consent4	Whether consent is sought from landowner or occupier will depend on the nature of the power of entry and the nature of the premises in question.
is not given it may still be possible to exercise lawful authority to enter, where this is based either on specific statutory powers or judicial authority such as a warrant.9 Number of persons present9.1 Relevant persons should consider the number of persons needed for the exercise of powers of entry and associated powers to be carried out effectively. The number of persons present should reflect what is reasonable and proportionate in the circumstances.10 Private dwellings10.1 Where the relevant legislation requires, an authorised person must obtain the occupier’s consent or obtain a warrant, court order or other judicial authorisation in order to enter premises used as a private dwelling.10.2 Where the relevant legislation provides the authorised person with a specific power to enter dwellings with no requirement for a warrant/court order etc, the power should only be used where necessary and proportionate and on the approval of the appropriate person in authority, unless entry is required urgently to protect life or property from harm.11 Entry without consent or a warrant11.1 Where it is proposed to exercise a power of entry without seeking consent, and without a warrant, authorised persons must follow the conditions set out in statute granting them entry and, before deciding to exercise powers, should consider whether the object of entry might be achieved by less intrusive alternative means.11.2 On arrival at the premises, the authorised person exercising the power of entry should make reasonable attempts to make contact with the occupier of the premises, or the person appearing to be in charge of them, unless doing so would frustrate the purposes of entry. He or she should show them suitable identification and explain in straightforward language the purpose of the visit and their powers.11.3 If that is not possible, for example because the premises are unoccupied or no person is present, wherever possible, written notice setting out the purpose of entry should be left in a prominent place on the premises.12 Entry under warrant12.1 Where it is proposed to exercise a power of entry under warrant, the procedures set out in the legislation providing the power must be followed. Authorised persons need to consider all available intelligence before applying for a warrant, such as taking reasonable steps (as practicable) to verify that the information is accurate, recent and not provided maliciously. An application to the court for a warrant should1.1 
generally be supported by a signed written authority from a senior official or manager (this should be someone sufficiently senior in the chain of command who is authorised to approve the exercise of powers) within the relevant authority.13 Timing of exercise of powers13.1 The exercise of powers of entry by a relevant person should only be undertaken at reasonable hours (reasonable hours should be determined by reference to the normal working practices of the particular business concerned e.g. entry at night might be considered reasonable for a business that has overnight deliveries). Where appropriate, for premises used as a dwelling, any entry should be at a time agreed in advance with the occupier. However, this need not apply where the power of entry is being exercised in accordance with a judicial warrant.14 Seizure of property14.1 In many cases powers to seize property will be subject to PACE Code B however where powers to seize property are subject to this Code the following considerations should apply. An authorised person may only seize property where such powers granting the right to seize objects or items are clearly set out in relevant legislation. The power of seizure will be determined by the relevant legislation and this should be carried out to create minimal burden and distress to the occupier of the premises subject to the requirements of enforcing the legislation.14.2 Unless the legislation states otherwise, an authorised person should provide the occupier of the premises with details of the items seized, procedures relating to the retention of property, appeal rights, should disclose how long items may be held before they are returned (although counterfeit, illegal or hazardous items may be destroyed) and should explain any compensation procedures.15 Retention of property15.1 Unless the process for retention and/or destruction of seized property is provided for under a relevant statutory provision, anything seized may be retained only for as long as is necessary. Property should not be retained if a copy or image would be sufficient.15.2 Generally, property may be retained, among other purposes:ï for use as evidence at a trial for an offence;ï to facilitate the use in any investigation or proceedings to which it is linked;ï for forensic examination or other investigation; orï in order to establish its lawful owner when there are reasonable grounds for believing it has been stolen or obtained by the commission of an offence or its ownership is otherwise in dispute.ï 
15.3 The occupier or their representative should be allowed supervised access to the property to examine or photograph it, or should be provided with a photograph or copy, in either case within a reasonable time following any request and at their own expense, unless the authorised person in charge has reasonable grounds for believing this would:ï prejudice the investigation of any offence or criminal proceedings;ï lead to the commission of an offence by providing access to unlawful material; orï compromise the personal safety of security staff and/or the security of storage facilities.15.4 In exceptional circumstances, and in the interest of the personal safety of an individual, access to lawfully held property, for example, medication or personal items left in a seized vehicle should be made available to the individual.15.5 A record should be made of the grounds for denying any such request.16 Other persons16.1 Anyone accompanying an authorised person under their authority onto premises should be encouraged to abide by this Code as a matter of best practice. The authorised person should ensure that he/she has the right to take that person on to the premises before doing so.17 Conduct17.1 Where a power of entry is exercised without the consent of an occupier an authorised person should identify themselves clearly to the landowner or occupier (where present) by showing his/her authorisation or other means of formal identification (except in situations where the safety of authorised personnel would be compromised by doing so), disclose their authority to exercise the power of entry and explain clearly the purpose of the visit. When requested to do so, he/she should:ï give his/her name and the name of his/her organisation; andï provide an official contact address and telephone number.17.2 Whilst exercising powers an authorised person should:ï not exercise any powers other than those granted under legislation;ï comply with the requirements under relevant legislation including relevant safeguards;ï exercise their powers reasonably and courteously and with respect for persons and property;ï be impartial and fair at all times;ï comply with any restrictions on seizure e.g. legally privileged material;ï 
ï only use reasonable force where this is expressly permitted under the legislation that provides the power of entry and before doing so be satisfied that it is both necessary and proportionate in the circumstances andï be clear about what associated powers may be exercised (such as powers to inspect, search, seize or survey) and exercise those legally and fairly.17.3 In many cases powers to search for evidence of an offence will be subject to PACE Code B however where powers to search are subject to this Code premises should be searched only to the extent necessary to achieve the purpose of the search.In particular:ï The search should no longer continue once the object of that search has been achieved or it is clear that whatever is sought is not on the premises.ï Searches should be conducted with due consideration for the property and privacy of the occupier with no more disturbance than is necessary.ï When reasonable force is lawfully permitted it may be used only when justified and because the co-operation of the occupier cannot be obtained or is insufficient for the purpose. In all cases where a power authorises the use of force, only the minimum force necessary to achieve the purposes of the power may be used.ï When only one person is present on the premises at the time when a power is to be exercised, a friend, neighbour or other person should be allowed to witness any search that is undertaken if the occupier wishes and where it is practicable to do so, unless the authorised person in charge of the entry has reasonable grounds to suspect that this would seriously disrupt the purposes of the entry, or would lead to an unreasonable delay in its exercise.17.4 Unless taking such steps would frustrate the purpose of the visit, when exercising powers to enter business premises authorised persons should:ï seek to minimise the potential for causing reputational damage to businesses, particularly where the high visibility of operations, for example during peak business trading hours, may give rise to customer concerns; andï have regard to businesses’ ability to continue legitimate trading operations and seek to cause as little disruption to the legitimate conduct of business as possible, where that is reasonably practicable.17.5 The landowner or occupier may accompany authorised persons during the course of a visit if it is not explicitly restricted by the relevant statute or, in the opinion of the authorised person in charge, it would not interfere with the purposes of the visit.17.6 If an authorised person requests that a landowner / occupier does not accompany him/her during the visit he/she should give that person clear reasons, for example health and safety issues.18 Assistance from occupiers18.1 In certain circumstances, an occupier should give an authorised person reasonable assistance if required by the authorised person to do so (for instance opening locked doors or containers). If an authorised person requires such assistance from an occupier, the authorised person should give the person clear instruction as to1.1 
what assistance is required and make that person aware of why, in the authorised person’s opinion, the person is required to give that assistance and whether non- compliance carries a sanction under the relevant legislation.19 Leaving premises19.1 If premises have been entered by force, before leaving, the authorised person in charge should make sure the property is left as secure as possible and in as close to the original condition before entry as practicable.20 Action after exercise of powers20.1 The authorised person in charge of the exercise of a power of entry should make or have made a record of any exercise of powers of entry or associated powers. This is particularly important where powers of entry are used for enforcement purposes. Generally, a record should include:ï the statutory provision under which the power was exercised;ï the approval process that allowed for the exercise of the power of entry, and whether it was exercised with or without a warrant;ï the address of the premises entered;ï whether the occupier granted consent and what attempts were made to obtain consent;ï the date, time and duration that powers were exercised;ï the names of those involved in exercising powers and names of any other persons present (if known), unless operational imperatives are sensitive and require that the names of those involved are withheld or not disclosed;ï any grounds for the refusal of any requests made by an occupier;ï a list of any items seized, and if not covered by a warrant, the grounds for their seizure;ï whether reasonable force was used; and if so, why;ï details of any damage caused and the reason / circumstances; andï details, where known, of premises crossed to gain access to other premises.20.2 When powers are exercised under warrant, following its use, the record should show as a minimum:ï the name of Justice of the Peace or judge / judicial authority issuing the warrant;ï the date and time the warrant was executed, and if present name of occupier or person in charge of the premises;ï names of authorised persons executing warrant and anyone accompanying them;ï whether a copy of the warrant (together with Notice of Powers and Rights) was handed to the occupier, or, left on the premises and where;ï 
ï whether any articles specified in the warrant were found, and their location,ï whether any other articles were seized;ï advice provided to the occupier about consequences of any obstruction; andï information about any obstructive conduct by an occupier.20.3 A briefer record may be appropriate in certain situations such as routine inspections or visits or where the occupier consents to the visit and no issues of concern arise. Such records should nevertheless make clear the statutory power being exercised and details of the purposes and outcomes of the inspection or visit.20.4 In the case of routine checks on vehicles at ports, where a check or search is brief, the person concerned consents to the search and no issues of concern arise, it may not be necessary to maintain a record of the search. Operational discretion should be exercised, bearing in mind the possibility that a challenge to the legal justification for, or conduct of, the search may be raised at a later date.21 Register of exercise of powers21.1 Ideally, a register should be maintained containing the record of exercise of powers of entry or associated powers under paragraph 20 of this Code.22 Conflict of interests22.1 An authorised person should notify his / her manager immediately if any situation arises which might reasonably be perceived as a conflict of interests.23 Complaints23.1 Any complaints procedures should be explained in straightforward language to the occupier of the premises including explaining where they might obtain further information from or a copy of this Code of Practice.24 Staff training24.1 Authorities should ensure that all relevant persons are familiar with this Code of Practice.25 Further information25.1 Further copies of this Code are available from the GOV.UK website https://www.gov.uk/powers-of-entry1.1 

Department for Environment, Food and Rural AffairsPart 1A - Effective enforcement Code of practice for litter and refuseSeptember 2019 (updated October 2023)Contents11A.0 Enforcement action – prosecution and other penalties	411B.0 Policy objectives	511C.0 Financial objectives	7Local authorities	7Other authorities	711D.0 Funding enforcement activity	811E.0 Training and professionalism	811F.0	Dual function civil enforcement officers	911G.0 Collecting evidence and standards of proof	911H.0 Keeping records	1111I.0	Issuing fixed penalty notices in lieu of prosecution	11When not to issue a fixed penalty notice in lieu of prosecution	12Persistent offenders	13Issuing fixed penalty notices on private land	13Getting the offender’s details	1411J.0	Issuing civil penalties for littering from vehicles	14Introduction	14Relationship between civil penalties for littering from vehicles and fixed penalties in lieu of prosecution	15Form of civil penalty notices	16Cameras, recording devices and evidence from the public	16
Using the DVLA’s database	1711K.0 Enforcement against young people	17Children	18Juveniles (aged 10 to 17)	18Juveniles aged 10 to 15	18Juveniles aged 16 to 17	1811L.0	Payment options	1911M.0 Providing a quality service	2111N.0 Considering disputes of liability, representations and appeals	22Exercise of discretion	23Handling disputes of liability to pay a fixed penalty issued in lieu of prosecution	23Formal representations and appeals against civil penalty notices for littering from vehicles.	2511O.0 Non-payment of fixed penalty notices in lieu of prosecution - prosecuting offenders . 27 11P.0 Non-payment of civil penalty notices for littering from vehicles	2811Q.0 Reporting	28Appraising enforcement	29
11K.0	Enforcement against young people	16Children	17Juveniles (aged 10 to 17)	17Juveniles aged 10 to 15	17Juveniles aged 16 to 17	1711L.0	Payment options	1811M.0	Providing a quality service	2011N.0	Considering disputes of liability, representations and appeals	21Exercise of discretion	22Handling disputes of liability to pay a fixed penalty issued in lieu of prosecution	22Formal representations and appeals against civil penalty notices for littering from vehicles	2411O.0	Non-payment of fixed penalty notices in lieu of prosecution - prosecuting offenders 2711P.0	Non-payment of civil penalty notices for littering from vehicles	2811Q.0	Reporting	28Appraising enforcement	29
11A.0 Enforcement action – prosecution and other penalties11A.1	Littering, the unauthorised distribution of free printed material, graffiti, fly- posting, and breach of a PSPO are all criminal offences, for which enforcing authorities may bring prosecutions in the magistrates’ courts, or may issue fixed penalties in lieu of prosecution. If a littering offence is committed from a vehicle, litter authorities (district councils in England outside London) may issue a civil penalty which carries no criminal liability to the keeper of the vehicle from which the offence is committed. (See paragraphs 11A.5 to 11J.9 for more information on the relationship between these criminal and civil penalties.)11A.2	Fixed penalties can provide enforcing authorities with an effective and visible way of responding to environmental crimes, and provide a lower-cost alternative to prosecution in the magistrates’ courts. There is no obligation on an enforcing authority to offer an alleged offender the option of paying a fixed penalty. Equally, as a fixed penalty offers an option to discharge liability for an offence, an alleged offender may choose not to accept or pay a fixed penalty, and choose instead to defend the case in court (at the risk of being liable for a potentially higher penalty on conviction). Since issuing a fixed penalty notice is an alternative to prosecution, if an alleged offender does not pay a fixed penalty, the enforcing authority should be prepared to prosecute them for the original offence.Failure to follow up on unpaid fixed penalty notices will undermine their effectiveness as an enforcement tool. Therefore, the authority must ensure it collects sufficient evidence which can be used in court, is reliable and credible.11A.3	In some circumstances, (domestic waste receptacle offences, and keeper liability for littering from vehicles), where criminal liability would be considered disproportionate, civil penalties are available to maintain the deterrent threat of enforcement. Civil penalty notices are not an alternative to prosecution, and an unpaid penalty notice may be recovered by the enforcing authority as a civil debt, or as if under an order of the county court. Since there is no opportunity for the recipient of a civil penalty to defend their case in court, authorities using these civil penalties must also provide a formal process for considering representations and appeals against these penalties (as set out in the relevant regulations).11A.4	Fixed penalty notices should only be used for the offence for which they were created. Failing to abide by this rule may make prosecution for the original offence problematic if the case is pursued through the courts after a fixed penalty notice goes unpaid. This in turn could create further problems for an authority if it had employed such practices over a period of time.11 This guidance relates to the use of enforcement powers under Part IV of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 to help keep land and highways clear of litter and refuse. Separate guidance is available on the use of
11A.5	In all cases, enforcing authorities have discretion about whether to take enforcement action in a particular case, and they may consider that other forms of sanctions or education may be more effective and appropriate in some cases. The overriding objective of enforcement action against environmental offences is to educate the offender and change their behaviour, and to deter others from committing the same offence. With this in mind, some enforcing authorities have successfully offered alternatives to formal enforcement action (such as completion of a stop-smoking programme as an alternative to a fixed penalty for littering cigarette ends).11A.6	Community Payback (previously ‘community service’) is the work carried out by offenders who have an Unpaid Work requirement as part of their community sentence. It can be offered by the courts as an alternative to a custodial sentence. Community Payback is therefore not available as a sanction for littering offences, but may be available in cases of serious fly-tipping or criminal damage. The use of litter-picking as a sanction in itself must be handled with care, to avoid creating a perception that anyone seen litter- picking must be serving some form of penalty, which could deter law-abiding citizens from volunteering to take part in these activities.11B.0 Policy objectives11B.1	Taking proportionate and effective enforcement action against littering and related offences is a practical step that enforcing authorities can take to help them in delivering their statutory duties to keep relevant land clear of litter and refuse. As well as influencing the behaviour of those against whom enforcement action is taken, the use of proportionate enforcement can also help to deter others from committing offences which cause damage to local environmental quality. In turn, this will assist all duty bodies in keeping their relevant land and highways clear of litter and refuse.11B.2	The principles of the Regulators Code apply to enforcement action carried out by local authorities. An effective environmental offences enforcement regime is one that is proportionate, consistent, targeted, transparent and accountable. Section 21 of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006 states:21(1) Any person exercising a regulatory function to which this section applies must have regard to the principles in subsection (2) in the exercise of the function. 2(2) Those principles are that—(a) regulatory activities should be carried out in a way which is transparent, accountable, proportionate and consistent;other powers such as Community Protection Notices (see pg. 38) or civil penalties for domestic waste receptacle offences. Councils and other land managers must have regard to any relevant guidance when exercising their enforcement powers.2 For a list of these regulatory functions, see the Legislative and Regulatory Reform (Regulatory Functions) Order 2007 (as amended).
(b) regulatory activities should be targeted only at cases in which action is needed.(3) The duty in subsection (1) is subject to any other requirement affecting the exercise of the regulatory function.11B.3	Enforcing authorities are expected to combine enforcement with education in order to change behaviour. Given the quasi-judicial nature of the enforcement process, enforcing authorities will need to balance the need for consistency with an approach which remains targeted and proportionate. A blanket ‘zero-tolerance’ approach when issuing penalties is unlikely to achieve this.11B.4	In particular, enforcement action should not be taken if it would be disproportionate to the offence, for example against accidental littering. Paragraph 11I.7 sets out further guidance on when a fixed penalty may not be appropriate. Enforcement action may also be better targeted at specific problem areas or times, rather than applied across a whole local authority area.11B.5	Enforcing authorities should communicate to the community their reasons for their use of enforcement, and make it clear that enforcement is about supporting the achievement of a clean and attractive local environment: in no circumstances should enforcement be considered a means to raise revenue. Any perception that enforcement activity is being used intentionally to generate income is likely to undermine the legitimacy of the enforcement regime in the eyes of the local community, which in turn may diminish the deterrent effect.11B.6	Enforcing authorities should not view their enforcement regime in isolation. In addition to taking enforcement action, enforcing authorities should aim to reduce the commission of littering and other environmental offences through clear, well-designed communications, and the provision, regular emptying and maintenance of bins.11B.7	Enforcing authorities should also publish, promote and explain their enforcement policies openly, so that the public can understand their approach. This should include details of:a. the offences against which enforcement action will be takenb. the level of penalty for each offence (particularly following any changes)c. details of any early payment discountsd. arrangements for issuing fixed penalties (by post, electronically etc.)e. policies on enforcement against juvenile offendersf. policies in the event of non-paymentg. appeals (if appropriate)h. policies on the use of income from fixed penaltiesi. what records are kept, and how information associated with enforcement action is used.Enforcing authorities may also choose to make clear their policies on when a fixed penalty should not be issued.
It is recommended that enforcing authorities explore the benefits of consistent, and possibly collaborative, approaches to enforcement with neighbouring authorities.11C.0 Financial objectives11C.1	The receipts from fixed penalties for environmental offences may be retained by enforcing authorities in accordance with the relevant legislation, and may only be spent in accordance with that legislation. Different rules on the use of receipts apply, depending on the enforcing authority and the offence:Local authoritiesOffencePenalty receipts may be spent on functions relating to:Litter GraffitiFly-postingUnauthorised distribution of free printed material on designated landLittering from a vehicle (civil penalty)Litter and refuse (including keeping land and highways clear of litter and refuse, and enforcement against littering and littering from vehicles); graffiti and fly-posting; controlling and enforcing against the unauthorised distribution of free literatureNuisance parkingRoad traffic, litter and refuseAbandoning a vehicleRoad traffic, litter and refuseFly-tippingWaste on landHousehold waste duty of careWaste on landFailing to show waste documentsWaste on landOther authorities11C.2	National Park authorities can use fixed penalty notice receipts for their own litter enforcement.11C.3	The Broads authority can use fixed penalty notice receipts for functions relating to litter and anti-social behaviour.
11C.4	The Environment Agency must pay its fixed penalty notice receipts to the Secretary of State.11C.5	The police must pay receipts from fixed penalty notices issued by Police Community Support Officers to their local authority.11D.0 Funding enforcement activity11D.1	Raising revenue should never be an objective of enforcement.11D.2	Local authorities may spend the income from fixed penalties issued for littering offences on their functions relating to litter (including keeping their relevant land clear of litter and refuse, keeping relevant highways clean, and enforcement against littering), and on enforcement against graffiti and fly-posting offences. This may include spending on communications and education to abate littering, or on the provision of bins and other street litter disposal infrastructure.11D.3	As far as is possible, enforcement should be self-financing, and neither national nor local taxpayers should be expected to meet any deficit. Any surplus income must only be spent in accordance with the provisions set out in the relevant enabling statute. We recognise that, for good governance purposes, enforcement authorities may need to forecast enforcement revenue in advance, but the effectiveness of enforcement activity should be measured in terms of improved environmental cleanliness, and authorities should not set targets for revenue or number of penalties issued.11D.4	Enforcing authorities should run their enforcement operations efficiently, effectively and economically. Enforcing authorities must set fixed penalties, within the ranges specified in the Environmental Offences (Fixed Penalties) (England) Regulations 2017. They should select an appropriate level to reflect local circumstances, including local ability to pay.11E.0 Training and professionalism11E.1	If the service is to command public confidence and respect, it is essential to give enforcement staff at all levels the skills and training to do their jobs effectively, whether they are employed directly by the enforcing authority, or by a contractor. For parish council enforcement officers, it is a legal requirement that they attend a suitable training course.3 Training should be seen as a legitimate and important aspect of running costs.11E.2	The office processes involved are important and staff carrying them out need similar levels of skill, training and professionalism as the more visible on-street3 Environmental Offences (Fixed Penalties) (England) Regulations 2017, regulation 12
enforcement officers. Enforcement authorities should provide enough staff for the volume of work. They should also make sure that those staff (whether employed directly by the authority or by a contractor) have the skills, training, accountability, authority and resources to give the public a high-quality, professional, efficient, timely and user-friendly service.11E.3	Authorities that outsource any area of environmental offences enforcement to private companies should ensure that the contractor and its employees meet the same standards as would be expected of the authority itself.11E.4	Authorised persons carrying out enforcement activity on behalf of an enforcing authority (“enforcement officers”) should be identifiable from their dress code or badge, and carry a Police and Criminal Evidence Act (PACE) Notebook, or an equivalent electronic device, for recording evidence to support a fixed penalty or prosecution.Enforcement officers should also carry identification and evidence of their formal authorisation to issue penalty notices e.g. a warrant card.11F.0 Dual function civil enforcement officers11F.1	Enforcement officers may be authorised to carry out other functions in addition to environmental enforcement (for example, parking enforcement duties), or vice versa.4 Enforcement authorities that choose to take this approach must ensure that neither function is compromised as a result of the integration of duties. Income from penalties issued under each regime should be kept separate.11F.2	Staff or contractors authorised to issue fixed penalties in lieu of prosecution for littering or other offences will need separate written authorisation to issue civil penalties for littering from vehicles.11G.0 Collecting evidence and standards of proof11G.1	In the case of criminal offences such as littering, a successful prosecution will require evidence sufficient to prove the offender’s guilt beyond reasonable doubt. While a fixed penalty may be issued where the authorised officer has “reason to believe” that the offence has been committed, it will still be necessary to submit evidence proving the offence beyond reasonable doubt in order to prosecute the offender if the fixed penalty4 ‘Dual Function Civil Enforcement Officers’, Department for Transport (2016), available at https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/609788/statutory-guidance- local-authorities-enforcement-parking-contraventions.pdf
is unpaid. Failure to pursue unpaid penalties will undermine the threat of enforcement, and their effectiveness as a deterrent.11G.2	To issue a civil penalty for littering from a vehicle, enforcement officers have to be satisfied that, on the balance of probabilities, litter was thrown from that vehicle on the litter authority’s relevant land.11G.3	The enforcing authority will need to provide evidence of the offence either from direct observation or report including details of:a. the offence, including a description of the littered item(s)b. the date and timec. the locationd. the name and address of the offendere. the age of the offenderf. the offender’s appearanceg. the weather and light conditions at the timeh. the enforcement officer’s identification numberi. the fixed penalty number11G.4	If an offence occurs in which litter is thrown or dropped from a vehicle, additional relevant details should be noted, in order to cross match with the details from the DVLA’s database, including;a. the make of the vehicleb. the modelc. the colourd. the vehicle’s registration11G.5	The opening from which the litter was thrown (e.g. driver’s side window) should also be noted when practicable.11G.6	Enforcing authorities may take enforcement action on the basis of CCTV evidence, or evidence supplied by members of the public provided that, in the enforcing authority’s opinion, the evidence is sufficient to meet the standards of proof relevant to the offence or contravention in question.11G.7	Any photographs, video footage and notes taken by the enforcement officer about the circumstances should be kept as further evidence that the offence took place and to help resolve any disputes.11G.8	Enforcing authorities should provide their staff with the appropriate equipment, training and guidance to collect such evidence in the circumstances that the authority has prescribed.11G.9	Enforcing authorities should disclose their evidence at the earliest possible opportunity.
11H.0 Keeping records11H.1	In order to operate a fair and effective enforcement system, enforcing authorities will need to keep records of:a. all penalty notices issued, and decisions taken at each stage from issue through to payment and prosecution;b. any disputes of liability for the alleged offence, or formal representations against a (civil) penalty notice and any applicable appeal;c. the evidence on which each penalty notice is based, for if the case goes to court.11H.2	Enforcing authorities must ensure that the retention, storage, sharing or disclosure of any personal data is compliant with the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).11I.0 Issuing fixed penalty notices in lieu of prosecution11I.1	A fixed penalty notice in lieu of prosecution should only be issued when all of the following apply:a. the enforcement officer has reason to believe that an offence has been committedb. a fixed penalty notice is a proportionate response in the circumstances (see below for circumstances under which a fixed penalty notice should not be issued)c. there is sufficient evidence of the alleged offender’s guilt to support prosecution if the fixed penalty is unpaidd. the alleged offender understands why the fixed penalty notice is being issuede. the enforcement officer believes that the name and address given by the recipient are correct11I.2	A fixed penalty notice in lieu of prosecution must be issued to the person who is alleged to have committed the offence. Where possible, a fixed penalty notice should be issued on the spot and alleged offenders should be made aware of an offence at the time. If necessary, a fixed penalty notice can also be issued by post.11I.3	A fixed penalty notice in lieu of prosecution must state all of the following:a. the alleged offence, for example, “littering”b. details about the offence, for example, what sort of litter was droppedc. where and when the offence took placed. the amount of the penalty to be paid (and if there’s a discount for paying early)e. how the penalty can be paidf. when the penalty must be paid by (this must give the recipient at least 14 days from the date of issue) in order to discharge the alleged offender’s liability to be prosecuteda. 
11I.4	A fixed penalty notice in lieu of prosecution should state how the penalty notice has been issued (in person or by post).11I.5	A fixed penalty notice in lieu of prosecution should not conflate the amount of the fixed penalty (which for littering may be up to £500) with the potential fine that could be imposed by a court on conviction for the offence (which for littering could be up to £2,500).11I.6	If the enforcing authority operates a process for alleged offenders to dispute their liability for the offence to which the fixed penalty relates, the fixed penalty notice should also include instructions on how to use that process, including:a. how, when, and where to send any relevant informationb. what happens if the dispute is successful (i.e. no further action will be taken and the fixed penalty notice will be cancelled)c. what happens if the dispute is rejected and the offender doesn’t pay (the offender should be prosecuted, unless the enforcing authority has other compelling reasons to cancel the fixed penalty notice)d. how to complainWhen not to issue a fixed penalty notice in lieu of prosecution11I.7	Fixed penalty notices should not be issued if any of the following apply:a. there is no criminal liability – for example if the offender is a child under the age of 10 (the child’s parents or legal guardian should be informed instead). See section 11K.0 below for further detail on enforcement against young people.b. enforcement action is inappropriate or would be disproportionate for the offence – for example, if the offender is vulnerable or it would not be in the public interest to prosecute (see section 11B.0 above)c. prosecution is more suitable – for example, if:ï the offence is major, e.g. racist or other forms of abusive graffiti or fly- posting; deliberate smashing of glass; or the scale and effect of the offence merits prosecutionï the offence constitutes racially or religiously aggravated criminal damage under section 30 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998;ï the offence is committed for reward, e.g. the offender is a registered waste carrierï the offence is committed by a persistent offender (see paragraph 11I.8 below)ï the offender is violent or aggressived. If a littering offence is accidental - for example if something falls from someone’s pocket. In order to maintain public trust in the legitimacy of enforcement actiona. 
against littering, enforcement action should only be taken where there is evidence of an intent to drop and leave litter. It is not in the public interest to take enforcement action if there is not clear evidence that the individual intended to cause litter.e. If the behaviour in question does not fall within the terms of the offence for which the fixed penalty is available. For example, littering fixed penalties should not be issued for fly-tipping offences or waste receptacle breaches (for which other specific fixed penalty powers are available), or to try to sidestep or circumvent the “harm to local amenity” test in the legislation for household waste receptacle breaches.Persistent offenders11I.8	Some people commit environmental offences deliberately and often, and may also fail to pay the fixed penalties issued against them. A person can be classed as a ‘persistent offender’ if there are two or more recorded offences by the individual. In such circumstances, a further fixed penalty is unlikely to be appropriate and enforcement authorities should consider prosecuting (if it is in the public interest to do so).Issuing fixed penalty notices on private land11I.9	It is an offence to drop litter on any land within the area of a principal litter authority which is open to the air5. This can include private land, although it is not an offence to drop litter with the landowner’s consent. 611I.10	There are no explicit powers of entry associated with issuing fixed penalties against littering. To avoid any question over an enforcement officer’s right to carry out their function on private land, before entering private land to issue a fixed penalty in connection with littering offences committed on that land, enforcement officers should, where practicably possible, engage and consult landowners/occupiers to obtain their consent.This will also help to establish whether the landowner/occupier has given permission for litter to be dropped on their land (in which case, no offence is committed.)7 Enforcing authorities may wish to discuss their approach to enforcement with the owners of large areas of private land to which the public routinely have access (e.g. shopping centres, retail parks, transport hubs etc.) in advance of any enforcement activity being undertaken there.5 But where land is considered to be “open to the air” by virtue of section 86(13) EPA 1990, i.e. because it is covered but open on at least one side, an offence of littering can only be committed on that land if the public have access (with or without payment) to that land (section 87(3) EPA 1990).6 Consent may only be given in relation to depositing litter in a watercourse, lake or pond if the same person owns all the surrounding land. (section 87(4B) EPA 1990).7 It is not an offence to fail to provide name and address details to an enforcement officer in connection with enforcement under a Public Spaces Protection Order (Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014, section 68).
11I.11	If a landowner/occupier seeks to prevent access to their land by authorised enforcement officers but has not given explicit consent to littering on their land, enforcing authorities should consider whether enforcement against offences committed on that land is in the public interest, particularly if the “victim” is unwilling to support the enforcement activity taking place. Any enforcement officer that remains on or re-enters land once the landowner/occupier has asked them to leave may be committing trespass.11I.12	The validity of any enforcement action against the offender (either prosecution, or issue of an FPN) is not affected by whether either the offender or the enforcement officer has a legal right to access or enter onto the land on which the offence was committed.Getting the offender’s details11I.13	It is an offence if an alleged offender fails to provide the appropriate details, such as name and address, in order for a fixed penalty to be issued for the offences of littering, or unauthorised distribution of free printed material.8 The police may be called to assist if the offender refuses to provide their details, or provides false details. A police community support officer (PCSO) may detain the offender for up to 30 minutes before a police constable arrives. If a person refuses to supply their details, or provides false details, they may be liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.11J.0 Issuing civil penalties for littering from vehiclesIntroduction11J.1	The Littering from Vehicles Outside London (Keepers: Civil Penalties) Regulations 2018 enable district councils in England (outside London), and the Council for the Isles of Scilly, to issue a civil penalty notice to the keeper of a vehicle from which litter is thrown.9 In this context, “district” includes authorities which may call themselves district, metropolitan, borough, unitary or any other name: it simply means the council for the district. London boroughs have similar but separate powers under the London Local Authorities Acts 2007 and 2012.109 SI 2018/171 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2018/171/contents/made10 London Councils has provided guidance to London boroughs on the use of these powers. https://www.londoncouncils.gov.uk/download/file/fid/893
11J.2	Under the Regulations, and in this guidance, enforcing authorities with the power to issue these civil penalties are known as “litter authorities”.11J.3	A civil penalty is a civil fine which unlike a criminal penalty, does not carry the risk of a criminal prosecution.11J.4	The ‘keeper’ of a vehicle is presumed to be the ‘registered keeper’, but evidence may be provided by showing that the vehicle was ‘kept’ by another person at the relevant time: the liability to pay the civil penalty rests with the keeper of the vehicle at the time of the offence.Relationship between civil penalties for littering from vehicles and fixed penalties in lieu of prosecution11J.5	Only one penalty, either a civil penalty, or a fixed penalty in lieu of prosecution may be issued in respect of any one littering offence. Either type of penalty may be cancelled by the enforcing authority at any time before it is paid (see section 11N.0 below for further information on cancelling penalties).11J.6	If a civil penalty notice is issued but is then cancelled it before it is paid, a fixed penalty notice in lieu of prosecution may still be issued in respect of the same offence.11J.7	If a civil penalty notice is issued and it is paid, no further enforcement action ((either a fixed penalty notice or prosecution) may be taken against anybody for the same littering offence.11J.8	If a civil penalty is issued but, before it is paid either:ï prosecution proceedings are brought against anyone; ORï a fixed penalty notice in lieu of prosecution is issued in respect of the same offence,the vehicle keeper’s liability to pay the civil penalty notice is discharged and the civil penalty notice cannot be pursued further. This applies whether or not any prosecution is successful.11J.9	Therefore, if a civil penalty notice is issued and the recipient then provides evidence as to the identity of the litterer, the enforcing authority will need to consider whether this is a sufficiently compelling reason to cancel the original civil penalty (see paragraphs 11N.22 to 11N.38). The enforcing authority may also (separately) decide whether sufficient evidence has been provided to pursue criminal enforcement action (a fixed penalty notice or prosecution) against the alleged litterer. However, only one – or no – penalty notice may be issued and pursued in respect of a single littering offence.
Form of civil penalty notices11J.10	A penalty notice for littering from a vehicle must state all of the following:ï the circumstances alleged to constitute the littering offence in question, including the registration mark (if known) of the vehicle concernedï how long they have to pay the penalty (28 days from the date the penalty notice is given)11ï the amount of the penalty if paid within 28 daysï that the amount of the penalty will double if not paid within 28 daysï that the enforcing litter authority may recover any penalty not paid within 28 days in courtï [If applicable] details of any early-payment discount available if the penalty is paid within 14 days (including the amount of the discounted penalty, which must not be less than £50)ï details of how to pay (the name and address of the person to whom payment must be made, and the permissible methods of payment)ï that the recipient has a right to make representations to the enforcing litter authorityï the grounds on which representations may be made; andï in general terms, how an appeal to an adjudicator can be made11J.11 The description of the circumstances to constitute the littering offence should include a description of the litter alleged to have been deposited.Cameras, recording devices and evidence from the public11J.12	Enforcement action may be taken on the basis of evidence supplied by members of the public provided that, in the opinion of the enforcing authority, the evidence is sufficient to meet the relevant standards of proof. Enforcing authorities may decide to adopt a policy of only issuing a notice based on multiple public reports of litter from the same vehicle, or a pattern of behaviour.11J.13	If evidence from a recording device (such as a CCTV camera or dash-cam in one of your own vehicles) is intended to be used in appeal proceedings relating to civil penalties for littering from vehicles, the enforcing authority will need to produce the recording(s), and a certificate stating the circumstances in which the record was produced must be provided (signed by a person authorised to do so by the litter authority which11 In the case of penalty notices issued by first-class post to an address in the UK, the notice is taken to be given on the second working day after posting (fifth working day in the case of an address outside the UK). If the notice is sent electronically, it is taken to be given on the working day immediately following the day on which it was sent.
installed the device).12 The recording devices must be able to produce a record of the presence of a particular vehicle on the litter authority’s land, and the date and time at which the vehicle is present.11J.14	If it is intended to use recording devices to gather evidence in this way, enforcing authorities must also ensure that they remain compliant with other relevant legislation, such as the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000, and the Protection of Freedoms Act 2012.Using the DVLA’s database11J.15	The Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) vehicle keeper database may be used to establish the ownership of vehicles used in connection with the commission of criminal offences, including littering. As set out in the Littering from Vehicles Outside London (Keepers: Civil Penalties) Regulations 2018, a civil penalty may only be issued when a section 87 EPA 1990 criminal offence of littering has been committed from the vehicle.11J.16	Access to the DVLA Web Enabled Enquiry system is available to all local authorities upon request. Local authorities without existing access should contact the DVLA at: Kadoeservice.support@DVLA.gov.uk11J.17	For the purposes of issuing a civil penalty to the keeper of a vehicle from which litter is thrown, the “keeper” to which the penalty notice should be issued is the person by whom the vehicle is kept at the time when the littering offence in question occurs. In the case of a registered vehicle this is to be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, to be the registered keeper.11K.0 Enforcement against young people11K.1	Enforcing authorities should determine a consistent policy on whether enforcement action will be taken in respect of offences committed by people aged younger than 18, and how such enforcement will be carried out. They should work with both the youth offending team and children’s services in designing this policy.11K.2	As a matter of good practice, it is recommended that enforcement officers issuing fixed penalties to young people should:a. always be in uniformb. never touch a young personc. approach from the front, not behindd. identify themselves and show formal identification12 Littering from Vehicles Outside London (Keepers: Civil Penalties) Regulations 2018, regulation 20
e. ideally work in pairsChildren11K.3	Fixed penalties are issued in lieu of prosecution. A valid fixed penalty therefore cannot be issued to a child under 10, as they are below the age of criminal responsibility. Enforcement authorities may contact the child’s parents or legal guardian to make them aware of the offence.Juveniles (aged 10 to 17)11K.4	Fixed penalties may be issued to young people between the ages of 10 to17. Different considerations apply to juveniles aged 10-15, and those aged 16-17.Juveniles aged 10 to 1511K.5	Fixed penalties should only be issued on-the-spot to 10 to 15-year-olds, if:a. the alleged offender is known to the enforcement officer; andb. the alleged offender’s school has agreed to the use of fixed penalties11K.6	Enforcement authorities should notify the alleged offender’s parents or legal guardian as soon as possible.11K.7	If the enforcement officer does not know the alleged offender, or the school has not agreed to the use of fixed penalties, officers should obtain the young person’s details, and details of their parents or legal guardian in order to make further enquiries. If it is subsequently decided that a fixed penalty is suitable, it should be issued to the alleged offender in person with a parent or legal guardian present. If the fixed penalty must be issued by post, the alleged offender’s parent or legal guardian should be notified at the same time.Juveniles aged 16 to 1711K.8	Enforcement officers should obtain all of the following details from the alleged offender:a. nameb. addressc. aged. date of birth11K.9	They should also obtain the name and address of a parent or legal guardian of the alleged offender.
11K.10	The young offender should be informed that this information will be shared with their local youth offending team.11K.11	If it is necessary to interview a young person under 17 under caution, an appropriate adult must be present.11L.0 Payment options11L.1	Enforcing authorities should offer people a range of facilities for paying penalty notices, including provision for accepting payment in cash.13 Where they provide payment centres, these should be safe and accessible. Enforcing authorities should ensure that any payment facility (particularly telephone and online payments) can confirm any amount outstanding if part payment only has been received. The imposition of surcharges for payment by personal credit or debit card is not permissible.1411L.2	If there are unusual delays with the postal system, authorities should make allowances for late payments made by post when considering whether a payment was received within the statutory period. Enforcing authorities may wish to keep the envelope that the payments came in, as the franking can be used as evidence of the date of posting.11L.3	A fixed penalty notice is deemed ‘paid’ as soon as it is received by the enforcing authority. The enforcing authority should promptly close the case. An authority’s systems should accurately record the day on which it receives payments so that no further enforcement action is taken.11L.4	If a fixed penalty notice is issued in lieu of prosecution, recipients must be given 14 days to pay before any prosecution proceedings can be brought.11L.5	Recipients of civil penalty notices have 28 days from the date of receipt in which to make the payment, otherwise the penalty will double. If a civil penalty notice is issued by first-class post, it is deemed to have been received on the second working day after posting (or the fifth working day, if sent to an address outside the UK).11L.6	To encourage prompt payment, enforcing authorities may offer recipients a reduction in the penalty if paid before this deadline. The period during which a discount for early payment is offered must be no more than 14 days and to avoid confusion, it is recommended that it should not be more than 10 days. The minimum discounted penalty is set out in the relevant legislation:13 Section 88(3) EPA 1990.14 Payment Service Regulations 2017
OffenceDefault penaltyMinimum full penaltyMaximum full penaltyMinimum discounted penaltyLittering£100£65£500£50Graffiti£100£65£500£50Fly-posting£100£65£500£50Unauthorised distribution of free literature on designated land£100£65£150£50Nuisance parking£100£100£100£60Abandoning a vehicle£200£200£200£120Fly-tipping£200£150£1000£120Household waste duty of care£200£150£600£120Failure to produce a waste transfer note£300£300£300£180Industrial and commercial waste receptacle offences£100£75£110£60Failing to show waste documents£200£150£400£12011L.7	Discounts for early payment may also be offered for civil penalty notices:
ContraventionDefault penaltyMinimum full penaltyMaximum full penaltyMinimum discounted penaltyLittering from a£100Equivalent to local fixed£50vehiclepenalty for litteringoffences£65 - £500Domestic waste£60£60£80£40receptacle offences11L.8	Enforcing authorities may choose to send recipients of penalty notices a reminder letter. Again, it is recommended that these are sent out no earlier than 7 days from the date the penalty was issued. The reminder letters should inform the recipient of the following:a. how much they must payb. when they must pay byc. what happens if they don’t payd. how they can make representations (civil penalties) or dispute their liability for the offence to which the penalty relates (penalties in lieu of prosecution)11L.9	Enforcing authorities may also choose, in exceptional circumstances, to offer recipients the option of paying in instalments if they cannot afford the full amount. Until the full amount of a fixed penalty (in lieu of prosecution) is paid, the alleged offender’s liability to prosecution is not discharged. Enforcing authorities should make clear when offering payment by instalments what the consequences will be if a payment is missed or the penalty is not paid in full within the time agreed. Payment plans should not offer repayment terms longer than 5 months, since any prosecution for a summary offence such as littering must be brought within 6 months of the alleged offence.11M.0 Providing a quality service11M.1	Enforcing authorities remain responsible for the whole enforcement process (including considering disputes of liability for the alleged offence), whether they contract out part of it or not. Authorities that outsource any area of enforcement to private companies should ensure that the contractor fulfils all the requirements set down for the authority itself.11M.2	Enforcing authorities should offer individuals flexible and efficient ways to contact them, including e-mail and telephone. They should ensure there is an adequate audit trail to rebut any accusations of unfairness.
11N.0 Considering disputes of liability, representations and appeals11N.1	Enforcing authorities should make sure that their processes for handling informal disputes of liability for the offence to which a fixed penalty relates, or formal representations and appeals against civil penalties, are efficient, effective and impartial. Decisions must be made on the facts and evidence presented, and processes must comply with all relevant primary legislation and regulations.15 Authorities are encouraged to seek independent quality assurance of their environmental offences enforcement processes.11N.2	Enforcing authorities should deal with offenders promptly and professionally. Authorities are encouraged to set time and quality targets for dealing with queries, in addition to any statutory time limits and those set out in this guidance. As good practice they should publish information about their enforcement activity (see paragraph 11B.6).Fair and efficient systems for carrying out this work should ensure that the number of cases going to prosecution or an adjudicator is minimised – so saving the authority time and expense – without allowing people to evade an appropriate penalty.11N.3	Enforcing authorities should maintain a clear separation between the staff that decide on the issuing and processing of penalty notices and the staff that decide on disputes of liability/representations, to ensure that decisions are seen to be impartial. It is good practice for all disputes or representations to be considered by the service manager (or equivalent) who has delegated authority to consider them. All such disputes or representations should be addressed to them, and not the person that issued the penalty notice.11N.4	Enforcing authorities should ensure that only fully trained staff make decisions on disputes of liability or representations against civil penalty notices, and should be clear on which officers have the authority to cancel penalty notices. Officers dealing with disputes of liability or formal representations against a civil penalty notice should be familiar with all aspects of environmental offences enforcement, particularly the legal nature of the process, so that they can judge whether or not a representation falls within the statutory grounds or the authority’s guidelines for exceptional cases. 11N.5	Elected members and unauthorised staff should not play any part in deciding the outcome of individual challenges or representations.11N.6	The process of considering disputes of liability, representations and appeals requires officers dealing with these aspects to be trained in the relevant legislation and how to apply it. They should be well versed in the collection, interpretation and15 See in particular Part 4 of the Littering from Vehicles Outside London (Keepers: Civil Penalties) Regulations 2018
consideration of evidence; writing clear but concise case-specific responses to disputes of liability, enquiries and representations; presenting the authority’s case to adjudicators.11N.7	Enforcement authorities have a duty not to fetter their discretion. They should approach the exercise of discretion objectively and without regard to any financial interest in the penalty or decisions that may have been taken at an earlier stage in proceedings.Authorities should formulate (with advice from their legal department) and then publish their policies on the exercise of discretion. They should apply these policies flexibly and judge each case on its own merits. An enforcement authority should be ready to depart from its policies if the particular circumstances of the case warrant it.11N.8	It is in the interests of the authority and the individual to resolve any dispute at the earliest possible stage. Authorities should take account of the enforcement officer’s actions in issuing the fixed penalty notice but should always give disputes of liability and representations a fresh and impartial consideration.11N.9	Authorities should ensure that their legal departments are involved in establishing a processing system that meets all the requirements of the law. They should also consult them about complex cases.Exercise of discretion11N.10	The exercise of discretion should, in the main, rest with back office staff as part of considering disputes of liability, representations and appeals that are made to the enforcing authority. This is to protect enforcement officers from allegations of inconsistency, favouritism or suspicion of bribery. It also gives greater consistency in the enforcement of environmental offences regulations.11N.11	However, the enforcing authority may wish to set out certain situations when an enforcement officer should exercise a degree of discretion, such as circumstances in which a fixed penalty should not be issued. The enforcing authority should have clear policies, instructions and training available on how to exercise such authority. These policies should form the basis for staff training and should be published.11N.12	Local authorities should also recognise the role of councillors to raise issues on behalf of their ward constituents, and more generally, for councillors to scrutinise the manner in which the broader policy operates.Handling disputes of liability to pay a fixed penalty issued in lieu of prosecution11N.13  This section applies to fixed penalty notices issued in lieu of prosecution for criminal offences, including littering, and unauthorised distribution of free literature etc.
11N.14	Because it is offered in lieu of prosecution, there is no formal right of appeal against a fixed penalty notice. If an alleged offender does not accept their liability for the offence, there is no requirement on them to pay the fixed penalty. The assumption should always be that if a fixed penalty is unpaid, the case should be prosecuted, giving the alleged offender the opportunity to defend their case in court.11N.15	Enforcing authorities should be motivated to work to keep cases out of the court where possible, as court processes are time consuming for all parties and can be expensive. To prevent unnecessary cases reaching the courts, it is therefore good practice for enforcing authorities to operate a process through which an alleged offender may offer evidence in mitigation, lines of defence or other relevant information that may not have been available to the enforcing authority at the time the fixed penalty notice was issued, and which may influence the authority’s decision whether to issue a fixed penalty or take other enforcement action in that case. As this is an informal process, there are no fixed grounds on which such a challenge may be made.11N.16 The basis on which an alleged offender might dispute their liability might include, but are not limited to:a. if the person issued with the fixed penalty notice was not the person that committed the offence – this might be the case if someone issued with a fixed penalty notice in person has given someone else’s details to the enforcement officerb. if the person issued with the fixed penalty notice brings forward evidence, a statutory defence or other reasonable excuse that could undermine any later prosecutionc. if evidence is provided that the person issued with a fixed penalty notice is in some way vulnerable and the enforcement of the fixed penalty notice would not be in the public interestd. if evidence is provided that enforcement would, for any other reason, not be considered to be in the public interest11N.17	An authority may cancel a fixed penalty notice at any point. It can do this even when an undoubted contravention has occurred if the authority deems it to be appropriate in the circumstances of the case. Under general principles of public law, authorities have a duty to act fairly and proportionately and are encouraged to exercise discretion sensibly and reasonably and with due regard to the public interest.11N.18	Consideration should take into account the authority’s own guidelines for dealing with extenuating, or mitigating circumstances. If the evidence or circumstances (including mitigating circumstances) provide grounds for cancelling the fixed penalty notice, then the enforcement authority should do so and let the individual know. If the enforcement authority considers that there are no grounds for cancellation, it should tell the individual and explain its reasons as soon as practicably possible.11N.19  If the enforcing authority operates a process for disputing liability for an offence for which a fixed penalty notice is issued, it should ensure that, whatever routes
are offered for alleged offenders to raise such a dispute, there is an adequate audit trail of the case, showing what decision was taken and why.11N.20	It is also considered important that anyone who wants to take advantage of a process for disputing their liability to pay a fixed penalty is not disadvantaged by doing so. Where an authority offers a discount for early payment of a fixed penalty notice it should still be offered in the event of an unsuccessful dispute, providing that the dispute is lodged before the close of any relevant early payment window.11N.21	Authorities should always make it clear that an individual whose attempt to dispute their liability for the offence is rejected may still choose not to pay the fixed penalty and instead choose to defend their case in court.Formal representations and appeals against civil penalty notices for littering from vehicles11N.22	The process for making representations, and appealing against a civil penalty for littering from a vehicle is set out in the Littering from Vehicles Outside London (Civil Penalties: Keepers) (England) Regulations 2018.1611N.23	The recipient may dispute the issuing of a civil penalty notice at two stages:a. once a civil penalty notice has been served, an individual has up to 28 days to make a formal representation to the authority based on any one or more of the grounds for appeal set out in regulation 14 of the Littering from Vehicles Outside London (Civil Penalties: Keepers) (England) Regulations 2018; andb. if a representation is rejected by the enforcing authority, the individual may appealagainst the Notice of Rejection to an independent adjudicatorRepresentations11N.24	Representations must be made in writing. The Littering from Vehicles Outside London (Keepers: Civil Penalties) Regulations 2018 set out 12 formal grounds on which representations may be made.11N.25	A person to whom a penalty notice is given may make written representations to the litter authority if it appears to the person that one or more of the following grounds apply:A. Ground A is that the littering offence in question did not occur.16 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2018/171/contents/made
B. Ground B is that the person became the keeper of the vehicle after the littering offence occurred.C. Ground C is that the person had disposed of the vehicle to another person before the littering offence occurred.D. Ground D is that the vehicle was a stolen vehicle when the littering offence occurred.E. Ground E is that the person;ï was engaged in the hiring of vehicles at the time of the littering offence, andï was not the keeper of the vehicle at that time by virtue of a vehicle hire agreementF. Ground F is that the person was not the keeper of the vehicle for a reason not mentioned in grounds B to E.G. Ground G is that the litter authority was not authorised to give the person a penalty notice.H. Ground H is that the person is not liable to pay the fixed penalty by virtue of regulation 12 (Public service vehicles and licensed taxis etc.).I. Ground I is that liability to pay the fixed penalty has been discharged in the circumstances set out in regulation 13 (Discharge of liability where action taken again person who littered).J. Ground J is that the fixed penalty exceeds the amount payable under these Regulations.K. Ground K is that the litter authority has failed to observe any requirement imposed on it in relation to the imposition or recovery of the fixed penalty.L. Ground L is that there are compelling reasons why, in the particular circumstances of the case, the penalty notice should be cancelled (whether or not any of grounds A to K apply).1711N.26	Litter authorities must consider any representations made on these grounds. The litter authority should acknowledge receipt of the representation and explain the process, including what supporting evidence must be supplied, and when a decision notice will be dispatched.17 Regulation 14
11N.27	The litter authority should consider representations as quickly as possible and serve notice of its decision on the person making the representations, within a maximum of 56 days of the service of the representations, whether or not it accepts that the ground in question has been established.11N.28	A litter authority which accepts a representation must cancel the penalty notice and refund any sum already paid. Cancellation does not prevent the authority from serving another penalty notice for the same litter offence to another person.11N.29	A litter authority which rejects a representation must serve a notice stating that the penalty must be paid unless an appeal is made to an adjudicator. A “notice of rejection” must state:ï the litter authority’s decision, and the reasons for itï that the recipient has a right to appeal to an adjudicator against the litter authority’s decision, within 28 days of the notice of rejectionï the general form and manner in which an appeal can be made, andï that the adjudicator has the power to award costs against either party1811N.30	If, following an unsuccessful representation, a litter authority decides to offer a new discount period for prompt payment, it should set out the dates.11N.31  If a litter authority fails to comply with the requirement to serve a notice of rejection which meets these requirements, it is deemed to have accepted the recipient’s representations and cancelled the penalty notice.Appeals11N.32	Regulation 18 of the Littering from Vehicles Outside London (Keepers: Civil Penalties) Regulations 2018 provides for appeals to be considered by an independent adjudicator appointed to the Traffic Penalty Tribunal. Litter authorities have certain duties to make provision for the adjudication, such as the provision of administrative staff and facilities for adjudicators, and these duties must be discharged by the PATROL (Parking and Traffic Regulations Outside London) Joint Committee. More information about PATROL can be found online at: https://www.patrol-uk.info/ 11N.33	The Traffic Penalty Tribunal operates a digital by default online appeal system – FOAM (Fast Online Appeal Management). Appellants submit their appeal, authorities respond online and upload evidence and the adjudicator publishes a decision online. In some circumstances, the adjudicator will conduct a telephone hearing with all parties invited to participate. All local authorities outside London that operate civil parking enforcement use this system. A dashboard enables authorities to manage their cases and includes reporting functionality. The tribunal also operates an Assisted Digital Support programme for people who are not able to appeal online.18 Littering from Vehicles Outside London (Keepers: Civil Penalties) Regulations 2018, regulation 15
11N.34	If the adjudicator agrees that one of the grounds set out in regulation 14 (paragraph 11N.25 above) applies, the adjudicator must allow the appeal.1911N.35	The adjudicator may also, where an appeal is allowed, give written directions to the litter authority which the adjudicator considers appropriate for the purpose of giving effect to their decision. A litter authority must comply with any such direction as soon as is practicable.11N.36	An adjudicator may (despite not allowing an appeal) give a written recommendation to the litter authority that it cancel the penalty notice if the adjudicator is satisfied that there are compelling reasons why, in the particular circumstances of the case, the penalty notice should be cancelled. A litter authority must then reconsider whether to cancel the penalty notice, taking account of any observations made by the adjudicator, and within 35 days inform the appellant and the adjudicator in writing of its decision (and reasons for it where a recommendation is not accepted). If a litter authority fails to do so, it is deemed to have accepted the recommendation and to have cancelled the penalty notice.11N.37	An adjudicator must dismiss an appeal if the adjudicator concludes that none of the grounds set out in regulation 14 of the Littering from Vehicles Outside London (Keepers: Civil Penalties) Regulations 2018 apply, or there are no compelling reasons why the penalty notice should be cancelled.11N.38	Enforcement authorities should respond promptly to adjudicators concerning appeals and meet time limits set by legislation or the adjudicator’s judicial powers.11O.0 Non-payment of fixed penalty notices in lieu of prosecution - prosecuting offenders11O.1	Should a fixed penalty notice go unpaid then the normal course of action will be to prosecute for the original offence in the magistrates’ court. An enforcement authority must wait at least 14 days after issuing a fixed penalty notice before initiating a prosecution, and must begin legal proceedings for summary offences within 6 months of the offence (for summary offences).2011O.2	Failure to pursue unpaid notices will discredit the use of fixed penalties in the locality, and will lead to declining rates of payment. The need to pursue unpaid fixed penalty notices must be considered in the development of an enforcement strategy and the necessary resources made available. It is not acceptable for an authority to decide19 Littering from Vehicles Outside London (Keepers: Civil Penalties) Regulations 2018, regulation 1620 There is no time limit for bringing proceedings in respect of offences that are triable each way, but proceedings for such offences should be brought as soon as possible as courts have discretion to dismiss a summons on the ground of abuse of process where there has been an unjustified delay.
after a fixed penalty notice has been issued that it does not have the resources to prosecute if the notice is unpaid.11P.0 Non-payment of civil penalty notices for littering from vehicles11P.1 If a penalty notice is not paid within 28 days (the fixed penalty payment period) the amount of the penalty doubles automatically, unless the recipient made representations against the penalty notice within that period. At this point, an enforcement notice may be issued to the recipient of the unpaid penalty notice notifying them of the increased penalty.11P.2 If this increased amount remains unpaid after a further 14 days, the litter authority can recover it as a civil debt or seek an order from the county court for it to be recoverable as if payable under a county court order. Requests for these orders must be filed with the Traffic Enforcement Centre (TEC) at Northampton Crown Court. Existing TEC customers can do this using contravention 75 and their existing prefix – individual identifier. New TEC customers should contact TECInsight@hmcts.gsi.gov.uk for further assistance. The TEC will make the order by registering the request if the relevant requirements are satisfied.11P.3 Once they have received the registered request the litter authority may draw up the order and serve it on the recipient of the unpaid penalty notice (the respondent). They must attach a witness statement1 for the respondent's use which sets out a limited number of grounds on which they can dispute the court order. The litter authority must serve the order (and the witness statement) on the respondent within 15 days of the date on which the request is registered by the TEC.11P.4 The TEC’s procedure is set out in full in Part 75 of the Civil Procedure Rules and associated Practice Direction 75. A litter authority must follow these procedures when seeking to recover unpaid penalties through the TEC.11Q.0 Reporting11Q.1	Reporting is an important part of accountability. Enforcement authorities should report regularly and consistently to help the public understand and accept enforcement and council use of taxpayers’ money. In addition it provides management information for internal performance evaluation and comparison with other councils.Monitoring also helps the authority to identify where it needs to improve.11Q.2	The Government believes that in principle all data held and managed by local authorities should be made available to local people unless there are specific sensitivities to doing so (e.g. protecting vulnerable people or commercial and operational considerations). The Government also expects local authorities to be transparent about how they spend taxpayers’ money and the services they deliver. It is a statutory requirement for local authorities covered by the Transparency Code to comply with Part 2 of the Local Government Transparency Code 2015 which sets out the minimum data that local authorities should be publishing.1 Available at https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/traffic-enforcement-centre-forms
11Q.3	We consider that as good practice local authorities should publish the following information about their enforcement activity (for each of the environmental offences, including the new civil penalties for littering from vehicles):a. number of (a) fixed penalties notices and (b) civil penalty notices issuedb. number of (a) fixed penalty notices and (b) civil penalty notices cancelledc. number of (a) fixed penalty notices and (b) civil penalty notices paidd. number of (a) fixed penalty notices and (b) civil penalty notices paid at discount ratee. number of prosecutions undertaken following non-payment of a fixed penalty notice (whether the case is concluded or not)f. number of prosecutions undertaken for environmental offences for which a fixed penalty notice was not offeredg. number of civil penalty notices cancelled following an appeal made to an adjudicatorh. number of civil penalty notices pursued as civil debts following non-paymenti. number of fixed penalty or civil penalty notices written off for other reasons (e.g. procedural error, not in the public interest to pursue, alternative sanctions used etc.)j. total net income from (a) fixed penalty and (b) civil penalty notices for each of the environmental offences, and net income from civil penalty notices for littering from vehiclesk. total spent on enforcement activity against (a) environmental offences and (b) littering from vehicles offences11Q.4	Where external contractors are used, the full text of such contracts/legal agreements, should be placed in the public domain by the council - to provide additional scrutiny and reassurance that such contracts are not being used as a revenue raiser. The Local Government Transparency Code already requires that councils falling under the Code publish contracts over £5,000 and discourages the use of commercial confidentiality clauses to prevent such publication. As good practice, the Government would also encourage an annual breakdown of fines and revenue, which could be done through an annual scrutiny review.Appraising enforcement11Q.5	Enforcement authorities should monitor their environmental offences policies, enforcement regimes and associated regulatory framework (including fixed penalty levels). They should appraise them when reviewing their local plans, local development framework or community strategy and make recommendations for improvements to members.Enforcement authorities should keep abreast of developments in neighbouring authorities and look into the benefits of consistent, and possibly collaborative, approaches to enforcement.11Q.6	Appraisals should take account of any relevant information that has been collected as part of the environmental offences enforcement process, in particular about the practical effectiveness of the scheme. They will benefit from interviews with enforcement officers, who are in a unique position to identify changes to environmental
offences patterns, and with office staff, who see disputes of liability and representations and the reasons for them.11Q.7	Enforcement authorities should consult locally on their policies when they appraise them. Enforcement authorities should maintain regular dialogue and joint activity where appropriate with on-street contractors.The appraisal should take account of:a. existing and predicted levels of offendingb. availability of relevant infrastructure, such as binsc. adequacy, accuracy and quality of signage and other communicationsd. level of enforcement necessary for compliancee. levels of penaltiesf. payment and prosecution ratesg. the need to resource the operation effectively and ensure that staff are appropriately trained, andh. impact on the accumulation rates of litter11Q.9	Enforcement authorities should judge the performance of contractors and staff according to how far desired objectives have been achieved. Outcome indicators might include compliance statistics, the number of appeals, and the localised impact that enforcement appears to have had on relevant offending and the accumulation rate of litter. Performance management of enforcement staff, including rewards or penalties, should never be based on the volume of penalties issued, nor on a fixed amount of revenue to be raised. Enforcement authorities should have a Service Level Agreement for enforcement operations “in house”, incorporating the specification terms and conditions required by the client department, just as for a contract with an external service provider. Any such Service Level Agreement should reflect these principles.11Q.10	Where external contractors are used, private firms should not be able to receive greater revenue or profits just from increasing the volume of penalties, since this creates a contrary incentive to the overall aim of reducing the number of offences committed.
© Crown copyright 2024This information is licensed under the Open Government Licence v3.0. To view this licence, visit www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/publicationsAny enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at: defra.helpline@defra.gov.uk
Home Office
Karen Bradley MPMinister for Modern Slavery and Organised Crime2 Marsham Street, London SW1P 4DF www.homeoffice.gov.uk1 
Katy Clark MP and Philip Davies MP Co-ChairsPublic Bill Committee Serious Crime Bill House of Commons LondonSW1A0AA8 January 2015Dear Katy and Philip,Serious Crime Bill: Commons Committee stage-Government amendmentsI am writing to let the members of the Public Bill Committee have details of the Government amendments to the Bill which I have tabled today.Proceeds of crime - giving statutory effect to the Supreme Court's judgment in the case of Waya (amendments to clause 77 and Schedule 4)In our response to the report on the Bill by the Joint Committee on Human Rights (JCHR), we undertook to consider further the Committee's recommendation that the Supreme Court's judgment in the case of Waya should be given statutory effect. In Waya the Court ruled that the duty on the Crown Court to make a confiscation order for the recoverable amount (that is, a sum of money equal to the defendant's benefit from the relevant criminal conduct allowing for the change in the value of money) should be qualified so that it did not apply where such an order would be disproportionate under Article 1, Protocol 1 of the ECHR (right to peaceful enjoyment of property). In such a case the court must make an order requiring the defendant to pay whatever lesser amount (if any) it thinks would be proportionate. We agree that, on balance, giving statutory force to Waya would strengthen legal certainty about the regime for the making of confiscation orders. The amendments to Schedule 4 in turn make the appropriate amendments to sections 6, 92 and 156 of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (POCA) which apply to England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland respectively.Protection from civil liability of those making suspicious activity reports in good faith (new clause "Exemption from civil liability for money-laundering disclosures")
Part 7 of POCA obliges an individual to report to the National Crime Agency (NCA) where there are reasonable grounds to know or suspect that a person is engaged in money laundering. Although this requirement to submit "Suspicious Activity Reports" (SARs) applies to any individual, SARs are mostly made by businesses in the "regulated sector" such as banks, other financial institutions and lawyers.The submission of a SAR removes the risk of prosecution for an offence in relation to money laundering. A reporter can also remove the risk to them of committing a money-laundering offence by seeking the consent of the NCA, under section 335 of POCA, to conduct a transaction or activity about which they have suspicions. The NCA has seven days to respond.Whilst the reporter awaits the NCA's decision on consent, the activity or transaction must not proceed. Furthermore, the reporter cannot disclose to the customer the fact that a SAR has been submitted, or any other information that may prejudice the NCA's investigation into the reported activity or transaction, as doing so would constitute a 'tipping off offence under section 333A of POCA This can place the reporter in a difficult position in not informing the customer of the reasons for suspension of their requested activity or transaction, and could result in the collapse of a financial or commercial deal.Failing to carry out a customer's instructions whilst waiting for authorisation can therefore expose financial institutions and others to the risk of civil litigation. The courts (see Shah and others v HSBC Private Bank (UK) Ltd [2010] EWCA Civ 3) have, however, held that whilst customers can require such institutions to prove that the suspicion that gave rise to the SAR was reasonable, provided the suspicion is so proved, the institution cannot be held liable for loss suffered by the customer as aconsequence of the institution's failure to carry out promptly the customer's instructions.New clause "Exemption from civil liability for money-laundering disclosures" makes express statutory provision in relation to our obligation under the third EU Anti? Money Laundering Directive (Directive 2005/60/EC) to ensure that persons who make disclosures to relevant authorities in good faith must be protected from civil liability for doing so. In doing so, the new clause will strengthen the UK's compliance with the Directive and help increase the trust and confidence in the SARs regime of those who report under the system.New offence of domestic abuse: coercive or controlling behaviour (new clauses "Controlling or coercive behaviour in an intimate or family relationship" and "Guidance" and amendments to clauses 75 and 76 and to the long title)Domestic abuse is a serious crime that shatters the lives of victims, trapping them in cycles of abuse that too often end in tragic and untimely deaths. Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Constabulary report that over one million calls were made to the police regarding domestic abuse incidents in the 12 month period to 31 August 2013. These calls range from people seeking advice for themselves, or on another's behalf, to directly reporting abuse. Crown Prosecution Service figures indicate that in
2013/14 78,000 prosecutions were brought. This is the highest number of prosecutions ever recorded, yet it shows there is still work to be done.In September 2013 the Home Secretary commissioned Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Constabulary to review the police response to domestic abuse because she was concerned that it was not as good as it should be. Sadly, when HMIC reported their findings in March, our concerns were realised. The Government is clear that there must be an immediate and lasting change in the police response to domestic abuse. This means a change in culture: from senior officers in charge to those on the frontline. The Home Secretary is chairing a National Oversight Group to make sure this happens. This work remains a priority, however we are also keen to ensure the police and other frontline agencies have the powers they need to respond to domestic abuse.The Home Office ran a consultation last summer seeking views on whether the law on domestic abuse needs to be strengthened. 85% of respondents agreed that the law in this area is inadequate, and 55% agreed that it should be strengthened with a new offence to close the gap in the law relating to coercive and controlling behaviour in	intimate	relationships.	The	consultation	response	is	available	at: https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/strengthening-the-law-on-domestic? abuse.On 18 December the Home Secretary announced in a written ministerial statement that we would be tabling amendments to the Bill to strengthen the protection afforded to the victims of domestic abuse. New clause "Controlling or coercive behaviour in an intimate or family relationship" accordingly provides for a new domestic abuse offence. The new offence will provide an additional charging option where there is continuous or repeated coercive or controlling conduct, the cumulative impact of which can be no less traumatic for the victim than physical violence. The new offence carries a maximum penalty of five years' imprisonment and would extend to England and Wales.The new offence would not apply where the behaviour in question is perpetrated by a parent, or a person who has parental responsibility, against a child under 16 (see subsection (3)). This is because the criminal law, in particular the child cruelty offence in section 1 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 as amended by clause 65 of the Bill, already covers such behaviour.Subsections (8) to (10) of the new clause provides for a limited defence where the accused believes he or she was acting in the best interests of the victim and can show that in the particular circumstances their behaviour was objectively reasonable. The defence will not be available where a victim has been caused to fear violence (as opposed to being seriously alarmed or distressed). This defence is intended to cover, for example, circumstances where a husband was a carer for a mentally ill wife (or vice versa), and by virtue of her medical condition, she had to be kept in her home or compelled to take medication, for her own protection or in her own best interests. In this context, the husband's behaviour might be considered controlling, but would be reasonable under the circumstances.
New clause "Guidance" confers a power on the Home Secretary to issue guidance about the investigation of the new offence.An impact assessment is available on the Bill page of the Government website.New offence of sexual communication with a child (new clause "Sexual communication with a child'' and amendments to clauses 75 and 76, Schedule 4 and the long title)At Lords Third Reading, Lord Bates undertook to consider further an amendment tabled by Lord Harris of Haringey which sought to enhance the protection of children by creating a new offence to criminalise adults who communicate sexually with children (Hansard, 5 November 2014, columns 1621-1633). Lord Harris's amendment was prompted by the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC) which has argued that a new offence is needed to capture those who communicate sexually with a child or who invite a child to communicate sexually with them.The sexual abuse and exploitation of children is a very real danger in today's society. We already have a robust body of criminal law in England and Wales to tackle predatory sexual behaviour by adults against vulnerable children. This law, together with the work carried out by enforcement agencies including the police and Crown Prosecution Service and those in the voluntary sector, ensures that we have an effective response to this dreadful offending.However, the Government is receptive to calls to strengthen the law further where this is shown to be needed. Following further discussions with the NSPCC, the Police and CPS we agree that it is appropriate to create a specific sexual offence to ensure that the criminal law deals effectively with the type of behaviours identified. Accordingly, at the 'WeProtect' Summit on 11 December, the Prime Minister announced that we would be bringing forward an amendment to this Bill to provide for a new offence of sexual communication with a child.The offence would broadly speaking criminalise communication by an adult with a child under 16 (which could be in the form of an e-mail, text message, written note or orally) where the communication is sexual in some way or where it asks a child to communicate sexually with the adult. To commit the offence the adult must act for sexual gratification. Scenarios likely to be covered by the offence include talking sexually to a child via a chatroom or sending sexually explicit text messages to a child as well as inviting a child to communicate sexually ( irrespective of whether the invitation is itself sexual). The new offence has been so constructed as to ensure that we do not criminalise, for example, ordinary social or educational interactions between children and adults or communications between young people themselves.The offence will be triable either way and will be punishable, on conviction on indictment, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years. The offence would automatically attract the notification requirements for registered sex offenders under the Sexual Offences Act 2003.
The offence will extend to England and Wales. I understand the Northern Ireland Department of Justice will seek to provide for a similar new offence in legislation before the Northern Ireland Assembly. In Scotland there are already offences of communicating indecently with a child (in sections 24 and 34 of the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2009).FGM Protection Orders - legal aid (amendments to Schedule 4)Clause 70 of the Bill provides for FGM protection orders. The Government agrees that legal aid should be made available in relation to applications for FGM protection orders (including variations, discharges and appeals) and the enforcement of any breaches. These amendments to Schedule 4 in turn make the necessary amendments to the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 (LASPO) to provide for this.New civil order to compel the disconnection of unauthorised mobile phones in prison (new clause "Prevention or restriction of use of communication devices by prisoners etc" and amendments to clauses 76 and 77 and the long title)Under section 40D(3A) of the Prison Act 1952 it is an offence to possess a mobile phone in prison without authorisation. Unauthorised mobile phones in prisons enable organised criminals to carry on offending from prison, and can facilitate a range of other criminal activity such as radicalisation, harassment or drug dealing. We know of cases of serious crimes including large drug imports, escapes and murders being organised from prison, enabled by illicit mobile phones.The National Offender Management Service (NOMS) takes a range of approaches to tackle this problem including measures to stop phones getting into prisons and measures to find and seize phones in prisons. Indeed, in 2013/14 NOMS seized over 7,400 SIM cards and phones in prisons in England and Wales. Nonetheless, these measures are only a partial solution and significant numbers of unauthorised phones remain in use.Following discussions with mobile network operators, new clause "Prevention or restriction of use of communication devices by prisoners etc" confers a power on the Secretary of State and the Scottish Ministers to make regulations, subject to the affirmative procedure, conferring power on the County Court in England and Wales (and the Sheriff in Scotland) to make a telecommunications restriction order.The effect of such an order would be to require the relevant communications provider(s) to blacklist unauthorised mobile phone handsets and block SIM cards in prison (or other relevant institutions, namely (in England and Wales) young offender institutions, secure training centres and secure colleges). We expect that applications for such orders would normally be made by NOMS having identified unauthorised phones and SIM cards that are in use in a particular prison. Subsection(3) of the new clause sets out the matters that must be addressed in any regulations, including provision conferring rights on persons to make representations and provision about appeals. Subsection (4) of the new clause identifies further matters which may be provided for in any regulations, for example provision about the
enforcement of orders (it would not be necessary to make such provision if, as we currently envisage, the normal rules governing contempt of court are to apply).Preparation or training abroad for terrorism (amendments to clause 77)Clause 72 of the Bill extends extra-territorial jurisdiction (ETJ) to enable persons who commit acts abroad that constitute an offence under section 5 (preparation of terrorist acts) or 6 (training for terrorism) of the Terrorism Act 2006 to be prosecuted in the UK. So that, in appropriate cases, early action can be taken to prosecute individuals carrying out preparatory activities and terrorist training abroad, these amendments provide for clause 72 to come into force on Royal Assent.The explanatory statements published alongside the amendments explain the effect of the various minor and consequential amendments.I attach supplementary ECHR and delegated powers memorandums in respect of relevant amendments.I am copying this letter to all members of the Public Bill Committee, Keith Vaz (Chair, Home Affairs Select Committee), Sir Alan Beith (Chair, Justice Select Committee), Dr Hywel Francis (Chair, Joint Committee on Human Rights), Baroness Thomas of Winchester (Chairman, Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee), Baroness Smith of Basildon, Lord Rosser, Lord Laming, Baroness Hamwee, Lord Harris of Haringey and Lord Wigley. I am also placing a copy in the library of the House and on the Bill page of the Government website.Karen Bradley
Home  Business and self-employed  Business debt and bankruptcyComplain about a claims company
Contact your claims company, the Financial Ombudsman Service, or theFinancial Conduct Authority (FCA) to make a complaint.Claims management companies can help you make certain types of claims against financial services providers for a fee, such as claiming for mis-sold payment protection insurance (PPI). They can give you advice on what you can claim and help you with the legal process.Complaining about poor serviceComplain to the Financial Ombudsman Service if you’re unhappy with the service you’ve received from a claims company, for example the results of your claim or the fees they’ve charged you.
Related contentComplain about a legal adviserClaim compensation for injury or financial loss
Ask the claims company for a copy of their complaints procedure or check their website.Contact the claims company with your complaint so they have a chance to put things right.Keep a record of your complaint, for example details about any communication between you and the claims company.Contact the Financial Ombudsman Service if your claims company does not resolve your complaint in 8 weeks.Complaining about poor conductComplain to the FCA if you’re unhappy with the conduct of a claims company. Poor conduct could include:  breaking the conduct rules for claims companies unsolicited calls or texts - find out how to stop or reduce them  not being registered on the financial services registerThe FCA cannot pay compensation or order a claims management company to compensate you, even if you’ve received poor service.You’ll be referred to the Financial Ombudsman Service if your complaint is about poor service.Explore the topicBusiness debt and bankruptcy Your rights and legal support Court claims, debt and bankruptcyServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Crime, justice and the law  Your rights and legal supportComplain about a financial service or product
Follow the company’s complaints procedure. You can usually then take y our complaint to the Financial Ombudsman Service if you’re unhappy with their response.Ask for a copy of the company’s complaints procedure. This should tell you how to complain and how they’ll deal with it.If you’re unhappy with their response (or they do not respond within 8 weeks) you can complain to an independent complaints service. This is usually the Financial Ombudsman Service - the company’s complaints procedure should tell you which service to contact.
Related contentConsumer rightsComplain about a claims company
MoneyHelper has information on making complaints and time limits for complaining to the ombudsman.The Financial Ombudsman Service www.financial-ombudsman.org.uk Telephone: 0300 123 9 123Monday to Friday, 8am to 5pm Find out about call chargesThe Financial Ombudsman Service Exchange TowerLondon E14 9SRExplore the topicYour rights and legal supportServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking, jobs and pensionsGet involved
Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police (Complaints and Conduct) Act 2012. (See end of Document for details)Police (Complaints and Conduct) Act 20122012 CHAPTER 22An Act to make provision about interviews held during certain investigations under Schedule 3 to the Police Reform Act 2002; and about the application of Part 2 of that Act to matters occurring before 1 April 2004.	[19th December 2012]BE IT ENACTED by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:—1 Interviews of serving officers during investigations(1) The Police Reform Act 2002 is amended as follows.(2) In Schedule 3 (handling of complaints and conduct matters etc) after paragraph 19E insert—“Interview of persons serving with the police etc during certain investigations19F	(1) This paragraph applies to an investigation of a complaint, recordable conduct matter or DSI matter which—(a) is carried out by the appropriate authority under the management of the Commission, or(b) is carried out by the Commission itself.(2) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision as to the procedure to be followed in connection with an interview which—(a) is held with a serving officer during the course of the investigation by the person investigating the complaint or matter, and(b) is not within paragraph 19D(1).(3) Regulations under sub-paragraph (2) may in particular make provision—(a) requiring a serving officer to attend an interview,(a) 
(b) for determining how the time at which an interview is to be held is to be agreed or decided,(c) about the information that must be provided to a serving officer being interviewed,(d) for enabling a serving officer to be accompanied at the interview by a person of a prescribed description.(4) “Serving officer” means a person who—(a) is serving with the police, or(b) is serving with an additional police body.(5) A person is serving with an additional police body if the person is a member of, or is employed or otherwise engaged for the purposes of, that body (subject to sub-paragraph (6)).(6) The Secretary of State may by regulations provide, in relation to an additional police body, that a person is serving with that body only if the person—(a) is a member of, or is employed or otherwise engaged for the purposes of, that body, and(b) is of a prescribed description.(7) An “additional police body” means—(a) a body of constables which is maintained by an authority other than a local policing body and is prescribed in regulations made by the Secretary of State under this sub-paragraph, or(b) a body required by section 26A or 26B to enter into an agreement with the Commission.(8) The Secretary of State must obtain the consent of the Northern Ireland Assembly before making provision in regulations under this paragraph which would be within the legislative competence of the Northern Ireland Assembly.(9) But consent under sub-paragraph (8) is not required in relation to a provision if—(a) a Bill for an Act of the Northern Ireland Assembly containing the provision would require the consent of the Secretary of State under section 8 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998, and(b) the provision does not affect, other than incidentally, a transferred matter (within the meaning of that Act).(10) Nothing in this paragraph prevents or restricts the holding of interviews to which regulations under this paragraph do not apply during the course of any investigation under this Schedule.”F1(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(4) In section 108(7) (provisions of Act which extend to the United Kingdom) before paragraph (a) insert—“(za) the provision contained in paragraph 19F of Schedule 3 (and any interpretative or other supplementary provision as it has effect for the purposes of that provision);”.
Changes to legislation: There are currently no known outstanding effects for the Police (Complaints and Conduct) Act 2012. (See end of Document for details)2 Application of Part 2 of the Police Reform Act 2002 to old cases(1) The Police Reform Act 2002 is amended as follows.(2) After section 28 insert—“28A Application of Part 2 to old cases(1) The Commission may, if it considers that there are exceptional circumstances—(a) direct that a relevant transitional provision does not apply in relation to a pre-commencement matter, and(b) direct the appropriate authority to record the matter under this Part.(2) A “pre-commencement matter” means a matter which—(a) is a complaint or a conduct matter,(b) relates to conduct which took place, or circumstances which occurred, before 1 April 2004, and(c) (apart from this section) is prevented by a relevant transitional provision from being recorded under this Part as a complaint or a conduct matter.(3) “Relevant transitional provision” means article 2, 3 or 4 of the Independent Police Complaints Commission (Transitional Provisions) Order 2004 (S.I. 2004/671).(4) The Commission may, if it considers that there are exceptional circumstances, direct that a matter to which subsection (5) applies should be treated as a conduct matter or a DSI matter.(5) This subsection applies to a matter which—(a) relates to conduct which took place, or circumstances which occurred, before 1 April 2004,(b) has been the subject of a relevant complaint, and(c) would be a conduct matter or a DSI matter if it had not been the subject of a relevant complaint.(6) “Relevant complaint” means—(a) a complaint made before 1 April 2004, or(b) a complaint made on or after that date to which a relevant transitional provision applied.(7) Where under subsection (1)(a) the Commission directs that a relevant transitional provision does not apply in relation to a pre-commencement matter, that provision does not apply in relation to that matter.(1) 
(8) The appropriate authority must comply with a direction under subsection (1) (b).(9) Where under subsection (4) the Commission directs that a matter should be treated as a conduct matter or a DSI matter, the matter is (subject to any regulations under subsection (10)) to be treated as a conduct matter or a DSI matter for the purposes of this Part (including subsections (1) and (2)) and any provision made under it.(10) The Secretary of State may by regulations provide for this Part or any provision made under it to apply with such modifications as the Secretary of State thinks fit to a matter in relation to which the Commission has made a direction under subsection (1) or (4).”(3) In section 12 (definitions of “conduct matter” and “DSI matter”)—(a) in subsection (2), after “this section,” insert “ section 28A and any regulations made under it, ”, and(b) in subsection (2A), after “means” insert “ (subject to section 28A and any regulations made under it) ”.(4) In section 29(1), in the definition of “recordable conduct matter”, after paragraph (a) (and the “or” which follows) insert—“(aa)	a conduct matter that is required to be recorded by the appropriate authority under section 28A(8) or has been so recorded;”.3 Extent, commencement and short title(1) Section 1 (except for subsection (3)) and this section extend to England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.(2) Sections 1(3) and 2 extend to England and Wales only.(3) This Act comes into force on the day on which it is passed.(4) This Act may be cited as the Police (Complaints and Conduct) Act 2012.(1) 

Biometrics and Surveillance Camera CommissionerGuidanceComplying with surveillance camera code of practice: self assessment and third party certificationPublished 22 February 2016
Crown copyright 2016is publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where herwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-  ence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gov.uk.here we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from e copyright holders concerned.is publication is available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/complying-with- rveillance-camera-code-of-practice-self-assessment-and-third-party-certification/complying-with- rveillance-camera-code-of-practice-self-assessment-and-third-party-certification
1. Why organisations should comply with the codeThe Surveillance Camera Commissioner is determined to drive up standards in the industry and provide reassurance to communities that public space CCTV is well managed. His goal is that all overt surveillance camera systems are used transparently and that the cameras protecting the public comply with relevant regulation, particularly the surveillance camera code of practice (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/surveillance-camera-code-of-practice).Maintaining public confidence and ensuring that the surveillance cameras are there to protect the public is incentive enough for complying with the code.2. Tools to show how your organisation complies with the codeThe commissioner has developed a number of tools that make it easier for organisations to show how they comply with the code. If these tools are used effectively, organisations will be able to demonstrate compliance with the code and give the public confidence that their surveillance cameras are being used proportionately, transparently and effectively.2.1 Self assessment toolWe have developed an easy-to-use self assessment tool (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/surveillance-camera-code-of-practice-self- assessment-tool) to help organisations that use surveillance cameras identify if they are complying with the code. Organisations can assess what they are doing well and develop an action plan to improve any areas that fall short of compliance. Once completed, organisations are encouraged to publish this on their website.2.2 Certification schemeFollowing on from the self assessment tool, the commissioner has developed a 2
step certification process (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/surveillance- camera-code-of-practice-third-party-certification-scheme) which is delivered by bodies accredited by the United Kingdom Accreditation Service. The certification process is available to any organisation that operates surveillance cameras in a public space. This could be a small or large organisation that wants to show compliance with the code and demonstrate good practice.Certification will reassure the public that a surveillance camera scheme is there to support a community and not spy on them.3. How to use the tools3.1 Steps for local authorities, district or town and parish councilsStage 1Initially, the certification scheme focuses on town centre public space CCTV systems. The Surveillance Camera Commissioner would like all such systems to achieve certification. This will demonstrate compliance to the code and reassure the public that such surveillance camera schemes are transparent, efficient and effective.For main town centre systems, local authorities are encouraged to:  complete the self assessment tool on their main town centre system take remedial action as soon as possible if the if the tool highlights a number of actions submit the tool to a certification body for step 1 certification (which lasts 1 year) once actions have been completed  apply for full certification before step 1 certification expiresStage 2After the main town centre system has been certified, local authorities are recommended to:nominate a single point of contact to identify all other surveillance camera systems being used in the local authoritycomplete a self assessment tool for all of these surveillance camera systems
  publicise all self assessment tools on public space schemes submit their completed self assessment tool for any larger schemes such as housing, transport, environment for step 1 certification apply for full certification on those larger schemes before step 1 certification expiresLocal authorities are recommended to appoint a nominated senior responsible officer (SRO) to oversee compliance. This SRO should determine if the size and scale of the systems are worthy to go through the certification process. The SRO needs to be pragmatic as this will depend upon the size of scheme, degree of public visibility and overall context of the scheme.3.2 Steps for organisations that voluntarily wish to show complianceWe hope that many organisations who are not relevant authorities (http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2012/9/section/33/enacted) will wish to voluntarily show compliance with the code.The main steps to voluntarily comply are:complete the self assessment toolpublish completed self assessment tool on organisation website publish a statement declaring voluntary adoptionin the future, consider submitting the tool for certification if appropriate go for full certification before the 1 year certification expiresAll content is available under the Open GovernmentLicence v3.0, except where otherwise stated	© Crown copyright
Consumer rightsThe law protects your consumer rights when you buy goods or services. Find out who to contact for consumer protection advice.You can get help if you’re treated unfairly or when things go wrong. This includes problems with: credit and store cards  faulty goods counterfeit goods  poor service contracts  builders rogue tradersYou can call a helpline to get advice. They can also refer your complaint to local Trading Standards Officers who may then investigate on your behalf.England and WalesContact Citizens Advice(https://www.citizensadvice.org .uk/).Citizens Advice Telephone: 0808 223 1133Welsh language: 0808 223 1144 Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pmScotlandContact Advice Direct Scotland (https://www.advice.scot/).
Advice Direct Scotland Telephone: 0808 164 6000 Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pmNorthern IrelandContact Consumerline (https://www.nidirect.gov.uk/contacts/contacts- az/consumerline).ConsumerlineTelephone: 0300 123 6262 Monday to Thursday, 9am to 5pm Friday, 9am to 4pmFind out about call charg es (/call-charg es).Further helpYou can also get information about refunds, repairs and making a complaint from Which? (http://www.which.co.uk/consumer-rights/action).Complain to an ombudsmanAn ombudsman is a person who investigates complaints about organisations for free. They may be able to help you resolve a complaint without going to court.There are different ombudsmen for different industries. You can use the Ombudsman Association(http://www.ombudsmanassociation.org /find-an- ombudsman.php) to find the right ombudsman for your complaint.Money adviceYou can get free, independent help from MoneyHelper (https://www.moneyhelper.org .uk/) about anything to do with money, for example managing debt.
Buying from an EU countryContact the Consumer Centre UK (http://www.ukecc.net) for help with problems buying from an EU country.All content is available under the Open GovernmentLicence v3.0, except where otherwise stated	© Crown copyright
Home  Crime, justice and law  Reporting crimes and getting compensationContact the police
Contact the police by calling 999 to report emergencies or by calling 101 for non-emergencies.Reporting an emergencyCall 999 if you are reporting a crime that is in progress or if someone is in immediate danger.
Related contentHow to report antisocial behaviour Report hate crimeReport suspicious activity to MI5
Reporting non-emergenciesReport crimes online or by calling 101 if they are not an emergency.You can also call 101 to give information to the police or make an enquiry.If you live in Scotland you can search by postcode to find and contact your local policing team.Reporting terrorist activityCall 999 or the police anti-terrorist hotline on 0800 789 321 to report an immediate terrorist threat.You can also report a possible terrorist threat online.Calls to 999, 101 or 0800 numbers are free.Explore the topicReporting crimesServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking, jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Housing and local services  Noise, neighbours, pets and pestsControlling your dog in public
OverviewIt’s against the law to let a dog be dangerously out of control anywhere, such as: in a public place in a private place, for example a neighbour’s house or garden  in the owner’s homeThe law applies to all dogs.You can report a dog that’s out of control. Some types of dogs are banned.XL Bully dogs are now banned in England and Wales. Check what to do if y ou own an XL Bully dog.Out of controlYour dog is considered dangerously out of control if it: injures someone makes someone worried that it might injure themA court could also decide that your dog is dangerously out of control if either of the following apply: it attacks someone’s animal the owner of an animal thinks they could be injured if they tried to stop your dog attacking their animalPenaltiesYou can get an unlimited fine or be sent to prison for up to 6 months (or both) if your dog is dangerously out of control. You may not be allowed to own a dog in the future and your dog may be destroyed.If you let your dog injure someone you can be sent to prison for up to 5 years or fined (or both). If you deliberately use your dog to injure someone you could be charged with ‘malicious wounding’.If you allow your dog to kill someone you can be sent to prison for up to 14 years or get an unlimited fine (or both).If you allow your dog to injure an assistance dog (for example a guide dog) you can be sent to prison for up to 3 years or fined (or both).
Related contentCheck if the council has your missing dog How to report antisocial behaviour Report a dog fouling problemReport a stray dogGet your dog or cat microchipped
 NextBanned dogsView a printable version of the whole guideExplore the topicNoise, neighbours, pets and pestsSafety and the environment in your communityServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
European Conventionon Human Rights
as amended by Protocols Nos. 11, 14 and 15supplemented by Protocols Nos. 1, 4,6, 7, 12, 13 and 16
		
The text of the Convention is presented as amended by theprovisions of Protocol No. 15 (CETS No. 213) as from its entry into force on 1 August 2021 and of Protocol No. 14 (CETS No. 194) as from its entry into force on 1 June 2010. The text of the Convention had previously been amended according to the provisions of Protocol No. 3 (ETS No. 45), which entered into force on 21 September 1970, of Protocol No. 5  (ETS No. 55),  which  entered  into  force on 20 December 1971, and of Protocol No. 8 (ETS No. 118), which entered into force on 1 January 1990, and comprised also the text of Protocol No. 2 (ETS No. 44) which, in accordance with Article 5 paragraph 3 thereof, had been an integral part of the Convention since its entry into force on 21 September 1970. All provisions which had been amended or added by these Protocols were replaced by Protocol No. 11 (ETS No. 155), as from the date of its entry into force on 1 November 1998. As from that date, Protocol No. 9 (ETS No. 140), which entered into force on 1 October 1994, was repealed and Protocol No. 10 (ETS No. 146) lost its purpose.The current state of signatures and ratifications of the Convention and its Protocols as well as the complete list of declarations and reservations are available at www.conventions.coe.int.Only the English and French versions of the Convention are authentic.European Court of Human Rights Council of Europe67075 Strasbourg cedexFrance
ContentsConvention for the Protection of Human Rightsand Fundamental Freedoms	5Protocol	33Protocol No. 4	36Protocol No. 6	40Protocol No. 7	44Protocol No. 12	50Protocol No. 13	54Protocol No. 16	58
Convention for the Protection of Human Rightsand Fundamental FreedomsRome, 4.XI.1950The GovernmenTs siGnaTory hereTo, being members of the Council of Europe,Considering the Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaimed by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 10th December 1948;Considering that this Declaration aims at securing the universal and effective recognition and observance of the Rights therein declared;Considering that the aim of the Council of Europe is the achievement of greater unity between its members and that one of the methods by which that aim is to be pursued is the maintenance and further realisation of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms;Reaffirming their profound belief in those fundamental freedoms which are the foundation of justice and peace in the world and are best maintained on the one hand by an effective political democracy and on the other by a common understanding and observance of the Human Rights upon which they depend;Being resolved, as the governments of European countries which are like-minded and have a common heritage of political traditions, ideals, freedom and the rule of law, to take the first steps for the collective enforcement of certain of the rights stated in the Universal Declaration,

Affirming that the High Contracting Parties, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity, have the primary responsibility to secure the rights and freedoms defined in this Convention and the Protocols thereto, and that in doing so they enjoy a margin of appreciation, subject to the supervisory jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights established by this Convention,Have agreed as follows:ARTICLE 1Obligation to respect Human RightsThe High Contracting Parties shall secure to everyone within their jurisdiction the rights and freedoms defined in Section I of this Convention.      SECTION I RIGHTS AND FREEDOMSARTICLE 2Right to life1. Everyone’s right to life shall be protected by law. No one shall be deprived of his life intentionally save in the execution of a sentence of a court following his conviction of a crime for which this penalty is provided by law.2. Deprivation of life shall not be regarded as inflicted in contravention of this Article when it results from the use of force which is no more than absolutely necessary:(a) in defence of any person from unlawful violence;(b) in order to effect a lawful arrest or to prevent the escape(c) 
in action lawfully taken for the purpose of quelling a riot or insurrection.ARTICLE 3Prohibition of tortureNo one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.ARTICLE 4Prohibition of slavery and forced labour1. No one shall be held in slavery or servitude.2. No one shall be required to perform forced or compulsory labour.3. For the purpose of this Article the term “forced or compulsory labour” shall not include:(a) any work required to be done in the ordinary course of detention imposed according to the provisions of Article 5 of this Convention or during conditional release from such detention;(b) any service of a military character or, in case of conscientious objectors in countries where they are recognised, service exacted instead of compulsory military service;(c) any service exacted in case of an emergency or calamity threatening the life or well-being of the community;(d) any work or service which forms part of normal civic(a) 

ARTICLE 5Right to liberty and security1. Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person. No one shall be deprived of his liberty save in the following cases and in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law:(a) the lawful detention of a person after conviction by a competent court;(b) the lawful arrest or detention of a person for non- compliance with the lawful order of a court or in order to secure the fulfilment of any obligation prescribed by law;(c) the lawful arrest or detention of a person effected for the purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority on reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence or when it is reasonably considered necessary to prevent his committing an offence or fleeing after having done so;(d) the detention of a minor by lawful order for the purpose of educational supervision or his lawful detention for the purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority;(e) the lawful detention of persons for the prevention of the spreading of infectious diseases, of persons of unsound mind, alcoholics or drug addicts or vagrants;(f) the lawful arrest or detention of a person to prevent his effecting an unauthorised entry into the country or of a person against whom action is being taken with a view to deportation or extradition.2. Everyone who is arrested shall be informed promptly, in a language which he understands, of the reasons for his arrest and of any charge against him.3. 
Everyone arrested or detained in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 (c) of this Article shall be brought promptly before a judge or other officer authorised by law to exercise judicial power and shall be entitled to trial within a reasonable time or to release pending trial. Release may be conditioned by guarantees to appear for trial.4. Everyone who is deprived of his liberty by arrest or detention shall be entitled to take proceedings by which the lawfulness of his detention shall be decided speedily by a court and his release ordered if the detention is not lawful.5. Everyone who has been the victim of arrest or detention in contravention of the provisions of this Article shall have an enforceable right to compensation.ARTICLE 6Right to a fair trial1. In the determination of his civil rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law. Judgment shall be pronounced publicly but the press and public may be excluded from all or part of the trial in the interests of morals, public order or national security in a democratic society, where the interests of juveniles or the protection of the private life of the parties so require, or to the extent strictly necessary in the opinion of the court in special circumstances where publicity would prejudice the interests of justice.2. Everyone charged with a criminal offence shall be presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law.1. 

3. Everyone charged with a criminal offence has the following minimum rights:(a) to be informed promptly, in a language which he understands and in detail, of the nature and cause of the accusation against him;(b) to have adequate time and facilities for the preparation of his defence;(c) to defend himself in person or through legal assistance of his own choosing or, if he has not sufficient means to pay for legal assistance, to be given it free when the interests of justice so require;(d) to examine or have examined witnesses against him and to obtain the attendance and examination of witnesses on his behalf under the same conditions as witnesses against him;(e) to have the free assistance of an interpreter if he cannot understand or speak the language used in court.ARTICLE 7No punishment without law1. No one shall be held guilty of any criminal offence on account of any act or omission which did not constitute a criminal offence under national or international law at the time when it was committed. Nor shall a heavier penalty be imposed than the one that was applicable at the time the criminal offence was committed.2. This Article shall not prejudice the trial and punishment of any person for any act or omission which, at the time when it was committed, was criminal according to the general principles of law recognised by civilised nations.
ARTICLE 8Right to respect for private and family life1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his correspondence.2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.ARTICLE 9Freedom of thought, conscience and religion1. Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in public or private, to manifest his religion or belief, in worship, teaching, practice and observance.2. Freedom to manifest one’s religion or beliefs shall be subject only to such limitations as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of public safety, for the protection of public order, health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.1. 
ARTICLE 10Freedom of expression1. Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right shall include freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by public authority and regardless of frontiers. This Article shall not prevent States from requiring the licensing of broadcasting, television or cinema enterprises.2. The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing the disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.ARTICLE 11Freedom of assembly and association1. Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and to freedom of association with others, including the right to form and to join trade unions for the protection of his interests.2. No restrictions shall be placed on the exercise of these rights other than such as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others. This Article shall not prevent the imposition of lawful restrictions on the exercise of these rights by members of the armed forces, of the police or of the administration of the State.
ARTICLE 12Right to marryMen and women of marriageable age have the right to marry and to found a family, according to the national laws governing the exercise of this right.ARTICLE 13Right to an effective remedyEveryone whose rights and freedoms as set forth in this Convention are violated shall have an effective remedy before a national authority notwithstanding that the violation has been committed by persons acting in an official capacity.ARTICLE 14Prohibition of discriminationThe enjoyment of the rights and freedoms set forth in this Convention shall be secured without discrimination on any ground such as sex, race, colour, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, association with a national minority, property, birth or other status.ARTICLE 15Derogation in time of emergency1. In time of war or other public emergency threatening the life of the nation any High Contracting Party may take measures derogating from its obligations under this Convention to the extent strictly required by the exigencies of the situation, provided that such measures are not inconsistent with its other obligations under international law.1. 

2. No derogation from Article 2, except in respect of deaths resulting from lawful acts of war, or from Articles 3, 4 (paragraph 1) and 7 shall be made under this provision.3. Any High Contracting Party availing itself of this right of derogation shall keep the Secretary General of the Council of Europe fully informed of the measures which it has taken and the reasons therefor. It shall also inform the Secretary General of the Council of Europe when such measures have ceased to operate and the provisions of the Convention are again being fully executed.ARTICLE 16Restrictions on political activity of aliensNothing in Articles 10, 11 and 14 shall be regarded as preventing the High Contracting Parties from imposing restrictions on the political activity of aliens.ARTICLE 17Prohibition of abuse of rightsNothing in this Convention may be interpreted as implying for any State, group or person any right to engage in any activity or perform any act aimed at the destruction of any of the rights and freedoms set forth herein or at their limitation to a greater extent than is provided for in the Convention.ARTICLE 18Limitation on use of restrictions on rightsThe restrictions permitted under this Convention to the said rights and freedoms shall not be applied for any purpose other than those for which they have been prescribed.
SECTION IIEUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTSARTICLE 19Establishment of the CourtTo ensure the observance of the engagements undertaken by the High Contracting Parties in the Convention and the Protocols thereto, there shall be set up a European Court of Human Rights, hereinafter referred to as “the Court”. It shall function on a permanent basis.ARTICLE 20Number of judgesThe Court shall consist of a number of judges equal to that of the High Contracting Parties.ARTICLE 21Criteria for office1. The judges shall be of high moral character and must either possess the qualifications required for appointment to high judicial office or be jurisconsults of recognised competence.2. Candidates shall be less than 65 years of age at the date by which the list of three candidates has been requested by the Parliamentary Assembly, further to Article 22.3. The judges shall sit on the Court in their individual capacity.4. During their term of office the judges shall not engage in any activity which is incompatible with their independence, impartiality or with the demands of a full-time office; all questions arising from the application of this paragraph shall be decided by1. 
ARTICLE 22Election of judgesThe judges shall be elected by the Parliamentary Assembly with
The plenary Court shall
ARTICLE 25Plenary Court
respect to each High Contracting Party by a majority of votes cast from a list of three candidates nominated by the High Contracting Party.ARTICLE 23Terms of office and dismissal1. The judges shall be elected for a period of nine years. They may not be re-elected.2. The judges shall hold office until replaced. They shall, however, continue to deal with such cases as they already have under consideration.3. No judge may be dismissed from office unless the other judges decide by a majority of two-thirds that that judge has ceased to fulfil the required conditions.ARTICLE 24Registry and rapporteurs1. The Court shall have a Registry, the functions and organisation of which shall be laid down in the rules of the Court.2. When sitting in a single-judge formation, the Court shall be assisted by rapporteurs who shall function under the authority of the President of the Court. They shall form part of the Court’s Registry.(a) 
elect its President and one or two Vice-Presidents for a period of three years; they may be re-elected;(b) set up Chambers, constituted for a fixed period of time;(c) elect the Presidents of the Chambers of the Court; they may be re-elected;(d) adopt the rules of the Court;(e) elect the Registrar and one or more Deputy Registrars;(f) make any request under Article 26, paragraph 2.ARTICLE 26Single-judge formation, Committees, Chambers and Grand Chamber1. To consider cases brought before it, the Court shall sit in a single-judge formation, in committees of three judges, in Chambers of seven judges and in a Grand Chamber of seventeen judges. The Court’s Chambers shall set up committees for a fixed period of time.2. At the request of the plenary Court, the Committee of Ministers may, by a unanimous decision and for a fixed period, reduce to five the number of judges of the Chambers.3. When sitting as a single judge, a judge shall not examine any application against the High Contracting Party in respect of which that judge has been elected.1. 

4. There shall sit as an ex officio member of the Chamber and the Grand Chamber the judge elected in respect of the High Contracting Party concerned. If there is none or if that judge is unable to sit, a person chosen by the President of the Court from a list submitted in advance by that Party shall sit in the capacity of judge.5. The Grand Chamber shall also include the President of the Court, the Vice-Presidents, the Presidents of the Chambers and other judges chosen in accordance with the rules of the Court. When a case is referred to the Grand Chamber under Article 43, no judge from the Chamber which rendered the judgment shall sit in the Grand Chamber, with the exception of the President of the Chamber and the judge who sat in respect of the High Contracting Party concerned.ARTICLE 27Competence of single judges1. A single judge may declare inadmissible or strike out of the Court’s list of cases an application submitted under Article 34, where such a decision can be taken without further examination.2. The decision shall be final.3. If the single judge does not declare an application inadmissible or strike it out, that judge shall forward it to a committee or to a Chamber for further examination.ARTICLE 28Competence of Committees1. In respect of an application submitted under Article 34, a committee may, by a unanimous vote,(a) 
declare it inadmissible or strike it out of its list of cases, where such decision can be taken without further examination; or(b) declare it admissible and render at the same time a judgment on the merits, if the underlying question in the case, concerning the interpretation or the application of the Convention or the Protocols thereto, is already the subject of well-established case-law of the Court.2. Decisions and judgments under paragraph 1 shall be final.3. If the judge elected in respect of the High Contracting Party concerned is not a member of the committee, the committee may at any stage of the proceedings invite that judge to take the place of one of the members of the committee, having regard to all relevant factors, including whether that Party has contested the application of the procedure under paragraph 1.(b).ARTICLE 29Decisions by Chambers on admissibility and merits1. If no decision is taken under Article 27 or 28, or no judgment rendered under Article 28, a Chamber shall decide on the admissibility and merits of individual applications submitted under Article 34. The decision on admissibility may be taken separately.2. A Chamber shall decide on the admissibility and merits of inter-State applications submitted under Article 33. The decision on admissibility shall be taken separately unless the Court, in exceptional cases, decides otherwise.1. 

ARTICLE 30Relinquishment of jurisdiction to the Grand ChamberWhere a case pending before a Chamber raises a serious question affecting the interpretation of the Convention or the Protocols thereto, or where the resolution of a question before the Chamber might have a result inconsistent with a judgment previously delivered by the Court, the Chamber may, at any time before it has rendered its judgment, relinquish jurisdiction in favour of the Grand Chamber.ARTICLE 31Powers of the Grand ChamberThe Grand Chamber shall(a) determine applications submitted either under Article 33 or Article 34 when a Chamber has relinquished jurisdiction under Article 30 or when the case has been referred to it under Article 43;(b) decide on issues referred to the Court by the Committee of Ministers in accordance with Article 46, paragraph 4; and(c) consider requests for advisory opinions submitted under Article 47.ARTICLE 32Jurisdiction of the Court1. The jurisdiction of the Court shall extend to all matters concerning the interpretation and application of the Convention and the Protocols thereto which are referred to it as provided in Articles 33, 34, 46 and 47.2. 
In the event of dispute as to whether the Court has jurisdiction, the Court shall decide.ARTICLE 33Inter-State casesAny High Contracting Party may refer to the Court any alleged breach of the provisions of the Convention and the Protocols thereto by another High Contracting Party.ARTICLE 34Individual applicationsThe Court may receive applications from any person, non- governmental organisation or group of individuals claiming to be the victim of a violation by one of the High Contracting Parties of the rights set forth in the Convention or the Protocols thereto. The High Contracting Parties undertake not to hinder in any way the effective exercise of this right.ARTICLE 35Admissibility criteria1. The Court may only deal with the matter after all domestic remedies have been exhausted, according to the generally recognised rules of international law, and within a period of four months from the date on which the final decision was taken.2. The Court shall not deal with any application submitted under Article 34 that(a) is anonymous; or(b) is substantially the same as a matter that has already been examined by the Court or has already been submitted to another procedure of international investigation or settlement and contains no relevant new information.(a) 

3. The Court shall declare inadmissible any individual application submitted under Article 34 if it considers that:(a) the application is incompatible with the provisions of the Convention or the Protocols thereto, manifestly ill-founded, or an abuse of the right of individual application; or(b) the applicant has not suffered a significant disadvantage, unless respect for human rights as defined in the Convention and the Protocols thereto requires an examination of the application on the merits.4. The Court shall reject any application which it considers inadmissible under this Article. It may do so at any stage of the proceedings.ARTICLE 36Third party intervention1. In all cases before a Chamber or the Grand Chamber, a High Contracting Party one of whose nationals is an applicant shall have the right to submit written comments and to take part in hearings.2. The President of the Court may, in the interest of the proper administration of justice, invite any High Contracting Party which is not a party to the proceedings or any person concerned who is not the applicant to submit written comments or take part in hearings.3. In all cases before a Chamber or the Grand Chamber, the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights may submit written comments and take part in hearings.
ARTICLE 37Striking out applications1. The Court may at any stage of the proceedings decide to strike an application out of its list of cases where the circumstances lead to the conclusion that(a) the applicant does not intend to pursue his application; or(b) the matter has been resolved; or(c) for any other reason established by the Court, it is no longer justified to continue the examination of the application.   However, the Court shall continue the examination of the application if respect for human rights as defined in the Convention and the Protocols thereto so requires.2. The Court may decide to restore an application to its list of cases if it considers that the circumstances justify such a course.ARTICLE 38Examination of the caseThe Court shall examine the case together with the representatives of the parties and, if need be, undertake an investigation, for the effective conduct of which the High Contracting Parties concerned shall furnish all necessary facilities.ARTICLE 39Friendly settlements1. At any stage of the proceedings, the Court may place itself at the disposal of the parties concerned with a view to securing a friendly settlement of the matter on the basis of respect for human rights as defined in the Convention and the Protocols thereto.1. 

2. Proceedings conducted under paragraph 1 shall be confidential.3. If a friendly settlement is effected, the Court shall strike the case out of its list by means of a decision which shall be confined to a brief statement of the facts and of the solution reached.4. This decision shall be transmitted to the Committee of Ministers, which shall supervise the execution of the terms of the friendly settlement as set out in the decision.ARTICLE 40Public hearings and access to documents1. Hearings shall be in public unless the Court in exceptional circumstances decides otherwise.2. Documents deposited with the Registrar shall be accessible to the public unless the President of the Court decides otherwise.ARTICLE 41Just satisfactionIf the Court finds that there has been a violation of the Convention or the Protocols thereto, and if the internal law of the High Contracting Party concerned allows only partial reparation to be made, the Court shall, if necessary, afford just satisfaction to the injured party.ARTICLE 42Judgments of ChambersJudgments of Chambers shall become final in accordance with the provisions of Article 44, paragraph 2.
ARTICLE 43Referral to the Grand Chamber1. Within a period of three months from the date of the judgment of the Chamber, any party to the case may, in exceptional cases, request that the case be referred to the Grand Chamber.2. A panel of five judges of the Grand Chamber shall accept the request if the case raises a serious question affecting the interpretation or application of the Convention or the Protocols thereto, or a serious issue of general importance.3. If the panel accepts the request, the Grand Chamber shall decide the case by means of a judgment.ARTICLE 44Final judgments1. The judgment of the Grand Chamber shall be final.2. The judgment of a Chamber shall become final(a) when the parties declare that they will not request that the case be referred to the Grand Chamber; or(b) three months after the date of the judgment, if reference of the case to the Grand Chamber has not been requested; or(c) when the panel of the Grand Chamber rejects the request to refer under Article 43.3. The final judgment shall be published.1. 

ARTICLE 45Reasons for judgments and decisions1. Reasons shall be given for judgments as well as for decisions declaring applications admissible or inadmissible.2. If a judgment does not represent, in whole or in part, the unanimous opinion of the judges, any judge shall be entitled to deliver a separate opinion.ARTICLE 46Binding force and execution of judgments1. The High Contracting Parties undertake to abide by the final judgment of the Court in any case to which they are parties.2. The final judgment of the Court shall be transmitted to the Committee of Ministers, which shall supervise its execution.3. If the Committee of Ministers considers that the supervision of the execution of a final judgment is hindered by a problem of interpretation of the judgment, it may refer the matter to the Court for a ruling on the question of interpretation. A referral decision shall require a majority vote of two-thirds of the representatives entitled to sit on the committee.4. If the Committee of Ministers considers that a High Contracting Party refuses to abide by a final judgment in a case to which it is a party, it may, after serving formal notice on that Party and by decision adopted by a majority vote of two-thirds of the representatives entitled to sit on the committee, refer to the Court the question whether that Party has failed to fulfil its obligation under paragraph1.5. 
If the Court finds a violation of paragraph 1, it shall refer the case to the Committee of Ministers for consideration of the measures to be taken. If the Court finds no violation of paragraph 1, it shall refer the case to the Committee of Ministers, which shall close its examination of the case.ARTICLE 47Advisory opinions1. The Court may, at the request of the Committee of Ministers, give advisory opinions on legal questions concerning the interpretation of the Convention and the Protocols thereto.2. Such opinions shall not deal with any question relating to the content or scope of the rights or freedoms defined in Section I of the Convention and the Protocols thereto, or with any other question which the Court or the Committee of Ministers might have to consider in consequence of any such proceedings as could be instituted in accordance with the Convention.3. Decisions of the Committee of Ministers to request an advisory opinion of the Court shall require a majority vote of the representatives entitled to sit on the committee.ARTICLE 48Advisory jurisdiction of the CourtThe Court shall decide whether a request for an advisory opinion submitted by the Committee of Ministers is within its competence as defined in Article 47.

ARTICLE 49Reasons for advisory opinions1. Reasons shall be given for advisory opinions of the Court.2. If the advisory opinion does not represent, in whole or in part, the unanimous opinion of the judges, any judge shall be entitled to deliver a separate opinion.3. Advisory opinions of the Court shall be communicated to the Committee of Ministers.ARTICLE 50Expenditure on the CourtThe expenditure on the Court shall be borne by the Council of Europe.ARTICLE 51Privileges and immunities of judgesThe judges shall be entitled, during the exercise of their functions, to the privileges and immunities provided for in Article 40 of the Statute of the Council of Europe and in the agreements made thereunder.        
SECTION III MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONSARTICLE 52Inquiries by the Secretary GeneralOn receipt of a request from the Secretary General of the Council of Europe any High Contracting Party shall furnish an explanation of the manner in which its internal law ensures the effective implementation of any of the provisions of the Convention.ARTICLE 53Safeguard for existing human rightsNothing in this Convention shall be construed as limiting or derogating from any of the human rights and fundamental freedoms which may be ensured under the laws of any High Contracting Party or under any other agreement to which it is a party.ARTICLE 54Powers of the Committee of MinistersNothing in this Convention shall prejudice the powers conferred on the Committee of Ministers by the Statute of the Council of Europe.
ARTICLE 55Exclusion of other means of dispute settlementThe High Contracting Parties agree that, except by special agreement, they will not avail themselves of treaties, conventions or declarations in force between them for the purpose of submitting, by way of petition, a dispute arising out of the interpretation or application of this Convention to a means of settlement other than

ARTICLE 56Territorial application1. Any State may at the time of its ratification or at any time thereafter declare by notification addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe that the present Convention shall, subject to paragraph 4 of this Article, extend to all or any of the territories for whose international relations it is responsible.2. The Convention shall extend to the territory or territories named in the notification as from the thirtieth day after the receipt of this notification by the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.3. The provisions of this Convention shall be applied in such territories with due regard, however, to local requirements.4. Any State which has made a declaration in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article may at any time thereafter declare on behalf of one or more of the territories to which the declaration relates that it accepts the competence of the Court to receive applications from individuals, non-governmental organisations or groups of individuals as provided by Article 34 of the Convention.ARTICLE 57Reservations1. Any State may, when signing this Convention or when depositing its instrument of ratification, make a reservation in respect of any particular provision of the Convention to the extent that any law then in force in its territory is not in conformity with the provision. Reservations of a general character shall not be permitted under this Article.2. 
Any reservation made under this Article shall contain a brief statement of the law concerned.ARTICLE 58Denunciation1. A High Contracting Party may denounce the present Convention only after the expiry of five years from the date on which it became a party to it and after six months’ notice contained in a notification addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, who shall inform the other High Contracting Parties.2. Such a denunciation shall not have the effect of releasing the High Contracting Party concerned from its obligations under this Convention in respect of any act which, being capable of constituting a violation of such obligations, may have been performed by it before the date at which the denunciation became effective.3. Any High Contracting Party which shall cease to be a member of the Council of Europe shall cease to be a Party to this Convention under the same conditions.4. The Convention may be denounced in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraphs in respect of any territory to which it has been declared to extend under the terms of Article 56.ARTICLE 59Signature and ratification1. This Convention shall be open to the signature of the members of the Council of Europe. It shall be ratified. Ratifications shall be deposited with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.2. The European Union may accede to this Convention.1. 

3. The present Convention shall come into force after the deposit of ten instruments of ratification.4. As regards any signatory ratifying subsequently, the Convention shall come into force at the date of the deposit of its instrument of ratification.5. The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall notify all the members of the Council of Europe of the entry into force of the Convention, the names of the High Contracting Parties who have ratified it, and the deposit of all instruments of ratification which may be effected subsequently.Done aT rome This 4Th Day of november 1950, in English and French, both texts being equally authentic, in a single copy which shall remain deposited in the archives of the Council of Europe. The Secretary General shall transmit certified copies to each of the signatories.
Protocolto the Conventionfor the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental FreedomsParis, 20.III.1952The GovernmenTs siGnaTory hereTo, being members of the Council of Europe,Being resolved to take steps to ensure the collective enforcement of certain rights and freedoms other than those already included in Section I of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms signed at Rome on 4 November 1950 (hereinafter referred to as “the Convention”),Have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE 1Protection of propertyEvery natural or legal person is entitled to the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions. No one shall be deprived of his possessions except in the public interest and subject to the conditions provided for by law and by the general principles of international law.The preceding provisions shall not, however, in any way impair the right of a State to enforce such laws as it deems necessary to control the use of property in accordance with the general interest or to secure the payment of taxes or other contributions or penalties.

ARTICLE 2Right to educationNo person shall be denied the right to education. In the exercise of any functions which it assumes in relation to education and to teaching, the State shall respect the right of parents to ensure such education and teaching in conformity with their own religious and philosophical convictions.ARTICLE 3Right to free electionsThe High Contracting Parties undertake to hold free elections at reasonable intervals by secret ballot, under conditions which will ensure the free expression of the opinion of the people in the choice of the legislature.ARTICLE 4Territorial applicationAny High Contracting Party may at the time of signature or ratification or at any time thereafter communicate to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe a declaration stating the extent to which it undertakes that the provisions of the present Protocol shall apply to such of the territories for the international relations of which it is responsible as are named therein.Any High Contracting Party which has communicated a declaration in virtue of the preceding paragraph may from time to time communicate a further declaration modifying the terms of any former declaration or terminating the application of the provisions of this Protocol in respect of any territory.
A declaration made in accordance with this Article shall be deemed to have been made in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 56 of the Convention.ARTICLE 5Relationship to the ConventionAs between the High Contracting Parties the provisions of Articles 1, 2, 3 and 4 of this Protocol shall be regarded as additional Articles to the Convention and all the provisions of the Convention shall apply accordingly.ARTICLE 6Signature and ratificationThis Protocol shall be open for signature by the members of the Council of Europe, who are the signatories of the Convention; it shall be ratified at the same time as or after the ratification of the Convention. It shall enter into force after the deposit of ten instruments of ratification. As regards any signatory ratifying subsequently, the Protocol shall enter into force at the date of the deposit of its instrument of ratification.The instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, who will notify all members of the names of those who have ratified.Done aT Paris on The 20Th Day of march 1952, in English and French, both texts being equally authentic, in a single copy which shall remain deposited in the archives of the Council of Europe. The Secretary General shall transmit certified copies to each of the signatory
Protocol No. 4to the Conventionfor the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms securing certain rights and freedoms other than those already includedin the Conventionand in the First Protocol theretoStrasbourg, 16.IX.1963The GovernmenTs siGnaTory hereTo, being members of the Council of Europe,Being resolved to take steps to ensure the collective enforcement of certain rights and freedoms other than those already included in Section I of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms signed at Rome on 4th November 1950 (hereinafter referred to as the “Convention”) and in Articles 1 to 3 of the First Protocol to the Convention, signed at Paris on 20th March 1952,Have agreed as follows:ARTICLE 1Prohibition of imprisonment for debtNo one shall be deprived of his liberty merely on the ground of inability to fulfil a contractual obligation.
ARTICLE 2Freedom of movement1. Everyone lawfully within the territory of a State shall, within that territory, have the right to liberty of movement and freedom to choose his residence.2. Everyone shall be free to leave any country, including his own.3. No restrictions shall be placed on the exercise of these rights other than such as are in accordance with law and are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security or public safety, for the maintenance of ordre public, for the prevention of crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.4. The rights set forth in paragraph 1 may also be subject, in particular areas, to restrictions imposed in accordance with law and justified by the public interest in a democratic society.ARTICLE 3Prohibition of expulsion of nationals1. No one shall be expelled, by means either of an individual or of a collective measure, from the territory of the State of which he is a national.2. No one shall be deprived of the right to enter the territory of the State of which he is a national.ARTICLE 4Prohibition of collective expulsion of aliensCollective expulsion of aliens is prohibited.

ARTICLE 5Territorial application1. Any High Contracting Party may, at the time of signature or ratification of this Protocol, or at any time thereafter, communicate to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe a declaration stating the extent to which it undertakes that the provisions of this Protocol shall apply to such of the territories for the international relations of which it is responsible as are named therein.2. Any High Contracting Party which has communicated a declaration in virtue of the preceding paragraph may, from time to time, communicate a further declaration modifying the terms of any former declaration or terminating the application of the provisions of this Protocol in respect of any territory.3. A declaration made in accordance with this Article shall be deemed to have been made in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 56 of the Convention.4. The territory of any State to which this Protocol applies by virtue of ratification or acceptance by that State, and each territory to which this Protocol is applied by virtue of a declaration by that State under this Article, shall be treated as separate territories for the purpose of the references in Articles 2 and 3 to the territory of a State.5. Any State which has made a declaration in accordance with paragraph 1 or 2 of this Article may at any time thereafter declare on behalf of one or more of the territories to which the declaration relates that it accepts the competence of the Court to receive applications from individuals, non-governmental organisations or groups of individuals as provided in Article 34 of the Convention in respect of all or any of Articles 1 to 4 of this Protocol.
ARTICLE 6Relationship to the ConventionAs between the High Contracting Parties the provisions of Articles 1 to 5 of this Protocol shall be regarded as additional Articles to the Convention, and all the provisions of the Convention shall apply accordingly.ARTICLE 7Signature and ratification1. This Protocol shall be open for signature by the members of the Council of Europe who are the signatories of the Convention; it shall be ratified at the same time as or after the ratification of the Convention. It shall enter into force after the deposit of five instruments of ratification. As regards any signatory ratifying subsequently, the Protocol shall enter into force at the date of the deposit of its instrument of ratification.2. The instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, who will notify all members of the names of those who have ratified.In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto, have signed this Protocol.Done aT sTrasbourG, This 16Th Day of sePTember 1963, in English and in French, both texts being equally authoritative, in a single copy which shall remain deposited in the archives of the Council of Europe. The Secretary General shall transmit certified copies to each of the signatory States.
Protocol No. 6to the Conventionfor the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms concerning the Abolitionof the Death PenaltyStrasbourg, 28.IV.1983The member sTaTes of The council of euroPe, signatory to this Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, signed at Rome on 4 November 1950 (hereinafter referred to as “the Convention”),Considering that the evolution that has occurred in several member States of the Council of Europe expresses a general tendency in favour of abolition of the death penalty;Have agreed as follows:ARTICLE 1Abolition of the death penaltyThe death penalty shall be abolished. No one shall be condemned to such penalty or executed.
ARTICLE 2Death penalty in time of warA State may make provision in its law for the death penalty in respect of acts committed in time of war or of imminent threat of war; such penalty shall be applied only in the instances laid down in the law and in accordance with its provisions. The State shall communicate to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe the relevant provisions of that law.ARTICLE 3Prohibition of derogationsNo derogation from the provisions of this Protocol shall be made under Article 15 of the Convention.ARTICLE 4Prohibition of reservationsNo reservation may be made under Article 57 of the Convention in respect of the provisions of this Protocol.ARTICLE 5Territorial application1. Any State may at the time of signature or when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval, specify the territory or territories to which this Protocol shall apply.2. Any State may at any later date, by a declaration addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, extend the application of this Protocol to any other territory specified in the declaration. In respect of such territory the Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the date of receipt of such declaration by the Secretary General.1. 

3. Any declaration made under the two preceding paragraphs may, in respect of any territory specified in such declaration, be withdrawn by a notification addressed to the Secretary General. The withdrawal shall become effective on the first day of the month following the date of receipt of such notification by the Secretary General.ARTICLE 6Relationship to the ConventionAs between the States Parties the provisions of Articles 1 to 5 of this Protocol shall be regarded as additional Articles to the Convention and all the provisions of the Convention shall apply accordingly.ARTICLE 7Signature and ratificationThe Protocol shall be open for signature by the member States of the Council of Europe, signatories to the Convention. It shall be subject to ratification, acceptance or approval. A member State of the Council of Europe may not ratify, accept or approve this Protocol unless it has, simultaneously or previously, ratified the Convention. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.ARTICLE 8Entry into force1. This Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the date on which five member States of the Council of Europe have expressed their consent to be bound by the Protocol in accordance with the provisions of Article 7.2. 
In respect of any member State which subsequently expresses its consent to be bound by it, the Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the date of the deposit of the instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval.ARTICLE 9Depositary functionsThe Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall notify the member States of the Council of:(a) any signature;(b) the deposit of any instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval;(c) any date of entry into force of this Protocol in accordance with Articles 5 and 8;(d) any other act, notification or communication relating to this Protocol.In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto, have signed this Protocol.Done aT sTrasbourG, This 28Th Day of aPril 1983, in English and in French, both texts being equally authentic, in a single copy which shall be deposited in the archives of the Council of Europe. The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall transmit certified copies to each member State of the Council of Europe.

Protocol No. 7to the Conventionfor the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental FreedomsStrasbourg, 22.XI.1984The member sTaTes of The council of euroPe, signatory hereto,Being resolved to take further steps to ensure the collective enforcement of certain rights and freedoms by means of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms signed at Rome on 4 November 1950 (hereinafter referred to as “the Convention”),Have agreed as follows:ARTICLE 1Procedural safeguards relating to expulsion of aliens1. An alien lawfully resident in the territory of a State shall not be expelled therefrom except in pursuance of a decision reached in accordance with law and shall be allowed:(a) to submit reasons against his expulsion,(b) to have his case reviewed, and(c) to be represented for these purposes before the competent authority or a person or persons designated by that authority.2. 
An alien may be expelled before the exercise of his rights under paragraph 1.(a), (b) and (c) of this Article, when such expulsion is necessary in the interests of public order or is grounded on reasons of national security.ARTICLE 2Right of appeal in criminal matters1. Everyone convicted of a criminal offence by a tribunal shall have the right to have his conviction or sentence reviewed by a higher tribunal. The exercise of this right, including the grounds on which it may be exercised, shall be governed by law.2. This right may be subject to exceptions in regard to offences of a minor character, as prescribed by law, or in cases in which the person concerned was tried in the first instance by the highest tribunal or was convicted following an appeal against acquittal.ARTICLE 3Compensation for wrongful convictionWhen a person has by a final decision been convicted of a criminal offence and when subsequently his conviction has been reversed, or he has been pardoned, on the ground that a new or newly discovered fact shows conclusively that there has been a miscarriage of justice, the person who has suffered punishment as a result of such conviction shall be compensated according to the law or the practice of the State concerned, unless it is proved that the non-disclosure of the unknown fact in time is wholly or partly attributable to him.

ARTICLE 4Right not to be tried or punished twice1. No one shall be liable to be tried or punished again in criminal proceedings under the jurisdiction of the same State for an offence for which he has already been finally acquitted or convicted in accordance with the law and penal procedure of that State.2. The provisions of the preceding paragraph shall not prevent the reopening of the case in accordance with the law and penal procedure of the State concerned, if there is evidence of new or newly discovered facts, or if there has been a fundamental defect in the previous proceedings, which could affect the outcome of the case.3. No derogation from this Article shall be made under Article 15 of the Convention.ARTICLE 5Equality between spousesSpouses shall enjoy equality of rights and responsibilities of a private law character between them, and in their relations with their children, as to marriage, during marriage and in the event of its dissolution. This Article shall not prevent States from taking such measures as are necessary in the interests of the children.ARTICLE 6Territorial application1. Any State may at the time of signature or when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval, specify the territory or territories to which the Protocol shall apply and State the extent to which it undertakes that the provisions of this Protocol shall apply to such territory or territories.2. 
Any State may at any later date, by a declaration addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, extend the application of this Protocol to any other territory specified in the declaration. In respect of such territory the Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of two months after the date of receipt by the Secretary General of such declaration.3. Any declaration made under the two preceding paragraphs may, in respect of any territory specified in such declaration, be withdrawn or modified by a notification addressed to the Secretary General. The withdrawal or modification shall become effective on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of two months after the date of receipt of such notification by the Secretary General.4. A declaration made in accordance with this Article shall be deemed to have been made in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 56 of the Convention.5. The territory of any State to which this Protocol applies by virtue of ratification, acceptance or approval by that State, and each territory to which this Protocol is applied by virtue of a declaration by that State under this Article, may be treated as separate territories for the purpose of the reference in Article 1 to the territory of a State.6. Any State which has made a declaration in accordance with paragraph 1 or 2 of this Article may at any time thereafter declare on behalf of one or more of the territories to which the declaration relates that it accepts the competence of the Court to receive applications from individuals, non- governmental organisations or groups of individuals as provided in Article 34 of the Convention in respect of Articles 1 to 5 of this Protocol.1. 

ARTICLE 7Relationship to the ConventionAs between the States Parties, the provisions of Article 1 to 6 of this Protocol shall be regarded as additional Articles to the Convention, and all the provisions of the Convention shall apply accordingly.ARTICLE 8Signature and ratificationThis Protocol shall be open for signature by member States of the Council of Europe which have signed the Convention. It is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval. A member State of the Council of Europe may not ratify, accept or approve this Protocol without previously or simultaneously ratifying the Convention. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.ARTICLE 9Entry into force1. This Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of two months after the date on which seven member States of the Council of Europe have expressed their consent to be bound by the Protocol in accordance with the provisions of Article 8.2. In respect of any member State which subsequently expresses its consent to be bound by it, the Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of two months after the date of the deposit of the instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval.
ARTICLE 10Depositary functionsThe Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall notify all the member States of the Council of Europe of:(a) any signature;(b) the deposit of any instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval;(c) any date of entry into force of this Protocol in accordance with Articles 6 and 9;(d) any other act, notification or declaration relating to this Protocol.In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto, have signed this Protocol.Done aT sTrasbourG, This 22nD Day of november 1984, in English and French, both texts being equally authentic, in a single copy which shall be deposited in the archives of the Council of Europe. The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall transmit certified copies to each member State of the Council of Europe.
Protocol No. 12to the Conventionfor the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental FreedomsRome, 4.XI.2000The member sTaTes of The council of euroPe, signatory hereto,Having regard to the fundamental principle according to which all persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the equal protection of the law;Being resolved to take further steps to promote the equality of all persons through the collective enforcement of a general prohibition of discrimination by means of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms signed at Rome on 4 November 1950 (hereinafter referred to as “the Convention”);Reaffirming that the principle of non-discrimination does not prevent States Parties from taking measures in order to promote full and effective equality, provided that there is an objective and reasonable justification for those measures,
Have agreed as follows:ARTICLE 1General prohibition of discrimination1. The enjoyment of any right set forth by law shall be secured without discrimination on any ground such as sex, race, colour, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, association with a national minority, property, birth or other status.2. No one shall be discriminated against by any public authority on any ground such as those mentioned in paragraph 1.ARTICLE 2Territorial application1. Any State may, at the time of signature or when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval, specify the territory or territories to which this Protocol shall apply.2. Any State may at any later date, by a declaration addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, extend the application of this Protocol to any other territory specified in the declaration. In respect of such territory the Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of receipt by the Secretary General of such declaration.3. Any declaration made under the two preceding paragraphs may, in respect of any territory specified in such declaration, be withdrawn or modified by a notification addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe. The withdrawal or modification shall become effective on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of receipt of such notification by the Secretary General.1. 

4. A declaration made in accordance with this Article shall be deemed to have been made in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 56 of the Convention.5. Any State which has made a declaration in accordance with paragraph 1 or 2 of this Article may at any time thereafter declare on behalf of one or more of the territories to which the declaration relates that it accepts the competence of the Court to receive applications from individuals, non-governmental organisations or groups of individuals as provided by Article 34 of the Convention in respect of Article 1 of this Protocol.ARTICLE 3Relationship to the ConventionAs between the States Parties, the provisions of Articles 1 and 2 of this Protocol shall be regarded as additional Articles to the Convention, and all the provisions of the Convention shall apply accordingly.ARTICLE 4Signature and ratificationThis Protocol shall be open for signature by member States of the Council of Europe which have signed the Convention. It is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval. A member State of the Council of Europe may not ratify, accept or approve this Protocol without previously or simultaneously ratifying the Convention. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.
ARTICLE 5Entry into force1. This Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date on which ten member States of the Council of Europe have expressed their consent to be bound by the Protocol in accordance with the provisions of Article 4.2. In respect of any member State which subsequently expresses its consent to be bound by it, the Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of the deposit of the instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval.ARTICLE 6Depositary functionsThe Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall notify all the member States of the Council of Europe of:(a) any signature;(b) the deposit of any instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval;(c) any date of entry into force of this Protocol in accordance with Articles 2 and 5;(d) any other act, notification or communication relating to this Protocol.In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto, have signed this Protocol.Done aT rome, This 4Th Day of november 2000, in English and in French, both texts being equally authentic, in a single copy which shall be deposited in the archives of the Council of Europe. The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall transmit certified copies to each member State of the Council of Europe.
Protocol No. 13to the Conventionfor the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms concerning the abolition of the death penalty in all circumstancesVilnius, 3.V.2002The member sTaTes of The council of euroPe, signatory hereto,Convinced that everyone’s right to life is a basic value in a democratic society and that the abolition of the death penalty is essential for the protection of this right and for the full recognition of the inherent dignity of all human beings;Wishing to strengthen the protection of the right to life guaranteed by the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms signed at Rome on 4 November 1950 (hereinafter referred to as “the Convention”);Noting that Protocol No. 6 to the Convention, concerning the Abolition of the Death Penalty, signed at Strasbourg on 28 April 1983, does not exclude the death penalty in respect of acts committed in time of war or of imminent threat of war;Being resolved to take the final step in order to abolish the death penalty in all circumstances,
Have agreed as follows:ARTICLE 1Abolition of the death penaltyThe death penalty shall be abolished. No one shall be condemned to such penalty or executed.ARTICLE 2Prohibition of derogationsNo derogation from the provisions of this Protocol shall be made under Article 15 of the Convention.ARTICLE 3Prohibition of reservationsNo reservation may be made under Article 57 of the Convention in respect of the provisions of this Protocol.ARTICLE 4Territorial application1. Any State may, at the time of signature or when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval, specify the territory or territories to which this Protocol shall apply.2. Any State may at any later date, by a declaration addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, extend the application of this Protocol to any other territory specified in the declaration. In respect of such territory the Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of receipt by the Secretary General of such declaration.1. 

3. Any declaration made under the two preceding paragraphs may, in respect of any territory specified in such declaration, be withdrawn or modified by a notification addressed to the Secretary General. The withdrawal or modification shall become effective on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of receipt of such notification by the Secretary General.ARTICLE 5Relationship to the ConventionAs between the States Parties the provisions of Articles 1 to 4 of this Protocol shall be regarded as additional Articles to the Convention, and all the provisions of the Convention shall apply accordingly.ARTICLE 6Signature and ratificationThis Protocol shall be open for signature by member States of the Council of Europe which have signed the Convention. It is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval. A member State of the Council of Europe may not ratify, accept or approve this Protocol without previously or simultaneously ratifying the Convention. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.ARTICLE 7Entry into force1. This Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date on which ten member States of the Council of Europe have expressed their consent to be bound by the Protocol in accordance with the provisions of Article 6.2. 
In respect of any member State which subsequently expresses its consent to be bound by it, the Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of the deposit of the instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval.ARTICLE 8Depositary functionsThe Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall notify all the member States of the Council of Europe of:(a) any signature;(b) the deposit of any instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval;(c) any date of entry into force of this Protocol in accordance with Articles 4 and 7;(d) any other act, notification or communication relating to this Protocol.In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto, have signed this Protocol.Done aT vilnius, This 3rD Day of may 2002, in English and in French, both texts being equally authentic, in a single copy which shall be deposited in the archives of the Council of Europe. The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall transmit certified copies to each member State of the Council of Europe.
Protocol No. 16to the Convention on the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental FreedomsStrasbourg, 2.X.2013The member sTaTes of The council of euroPe anD oTher hiGh conTracTinG ParTies To The convenTion for The ProTecTion of human riGhTs anD funDamenTal freeDoms, signed at Rome on 4 November 1950 (hereinafter referred to as “the Convention”), signatories hereto,Having regard to the provisions of the Convention and, in particular, Article 19 establishing the European Court of Human Rights (hereinafter referred to as “the Court”);Considering that the extension of the Court’s competence to give advisory opinions will further enhance the interaction between the Court and national authorities and thereby reinforce implementation of the Convention, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity;Having regard to Opinion No. 285 (2013) adopted by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe on 28 June 2013,
Have agreed as follows:ARTICLE 11. Highest courts and tribunals of a High Contracting Party, as specified in accordance with Article 10, may request the Court to give advisory opinions on questions of principle relating to the interpretation or application of the rights and freedoms defined in the Convention or the protocols thereto.2. The requesting court or tribunal may seek an advisory opinion only in the context of a case pending before it.3. The requesting court or tribunal shall give reasons for its request and shall provide the relevant legal and factual background of the pending case.ARTICLE 21. A panel of five judges of the Grand Chamber shall decide whether to accept the request for an advisory opinion, having regard to Article 1. The panel shall give reasons for any refusal to accept the request.2. If the panel accepts the request, the Grand Chamber shall deliver the advisory opinion.3. The panel and the Grand Chamber, as referred to in the preceding paragraphs, shall include ex officio the judge elected in respect of the High Contracting Party to which the requesting court or tribunal pertains. If there is none or if that judge is unable to sit, a person chosen by the President of the Court from a list submitted in advance by that Party shall sit in the capacity of judge.1. 

ARTICLE 3The Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights and the High Contracting Party to which the requesting court or tribunal pertains shall have the right to submit written comments and take part in any hearing. The President of the Court may, in the interest of the proper administration of justice, invite any other High Contracting Party or person also to submit written comments or take part in any hearing.ARTICLE 41. Reasons shall be given for advisory opinions.2. If the advisory opinion does not represent, in whole or in part, the unanimous opinion of the judges, any judge shall be entitled to deliver a separate opinion.3. Advisory opinions shall be communicated to the requesting court or tribunal and to the High Contracting Party to which that court or tribunal pertains.4. Advisory opinions shall be published.ARTICLE 5Advisory opinions shall not be binding.ARTICLE 6As between the High Contracting Parties the provisions of Articles 1 to 5 of this Protocol shall be regarded as additional articles to the Convention, and all the provisions of the Convention shall apply accordingly.
ARTICLE 71. This Protocol shall be open for signature by the High Contracting Parties to the Convention, which may express their consent to be bound by:(a) signature without reservation as to ratification, acceptance or approval; or(b) signature subject to ratification, acceptance or approval, followed by ratification, acceptance or approval.2. The instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.ARTICLE 81. This Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date on which ten High Contracting Parties to the Convention have expressed their consent to be bound by the Protocol in accordance with the provisions of Article 7.2. In respect of any High Contracting Party to the Convention which subsequently expresses its consent to be bound by it, the Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of the expression of its consent to be bound by the Protocol in accordance with the provisions of Article 7.ARTICLE 9No reservation may be made under Article 57 of the Convention in respect of the provisions of this Protocol.
ARTICLE 10Each High Contracting Party to the Convention shall, at the time of signature or when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval, by means of a declaration addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, indicate the courts or tribunals that it designates for the purposes of Article 1, paragraph 1, of this Protocol. This declaration may be modified at any later date and in the same manner.ARTICLE 11The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall notify the member States of the Council of Europe and the other High Contracting Parties to the Convention of:(a) a any signature;(b) the deposit of any instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval;(c) any date of entry into force of this Protocol in accordance with Article 8;(d) any declaration made in accordance with Article 10; and(e) any other act, notification or communication relating to this Protocol.In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto, have signed this Protocol.Done aT sTrasbourG, This 2nD Day of ocTober 2013, in English and French, both texts being equally authentic, in a single copy which shall be deposited in the archives of the Council of Europe. The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall transmit certified copies to each member State of the Council of Europe and to the other High Contracting Parties to the Convention.
European Convention on Human Rights
ENG 
European Court of Human Rights Council of Europe67075 Strasbourg cedex Francewww.ec hr.coe.int
CODE OF PRACTICEISSUED UNDER SECTION 377A OF THE PROCEEDS OF CRIME ACT 2002 (ENGLAND AND WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND)INVESTIGATIVE POWERS OF PROSECUTORS

CODE OF PRACTICEISSUED UNDER SECTION 377A OF THE PROCEEDS OF CRIME ACT 2002 (ENGLAND AND WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND)INVESTIGATIVE POWERS OF PROSECUTORSPresented to Parliament pursuant to section 377A(4) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
Published by TSO (The Stationery Office), part of Williams Lea, and available from:Online www.tsoshop.co.ukMail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail TSOPO Box 29, Norwich, NR3 1GNTelephone orders/General enquiries: 0333 202 5070Fax orders: 0333 202 5080E-mail: customer.services@tso.co.uk Textphone 0333 202 5077TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited AgentsPublished with the permission of the Home Office on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.© Crown Copyright 2016 All rights reserved.You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0.To view this licence, visithttp://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3  or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.Where third-party material has been identified, permission from the respective copyright holder must be sought.Whilst every attempt has been made to ensure that the information in this publication is up to date at the time of publication, the publisher cannot accept responsibility for any inaccuracies.First published 2016ISBN 9780113413966Printed in the United Kingdom by The Stationery Office
ContentsAbbreviations used in this code	1Introduction	1Persons to whom this Code applies	3General provisions relating to all orders and warrants	6Action to be taken before an application is made	6Reasonable grounds for suspicion	7Action to be taken in making an application	8Action to be taken in serving an order or warrant	10Action to be taken in receiving an application for an extension of a time limit	13Record of Proceedings	13Retention of documents and information	14Variation and discharge applications	15Production orders in Civil Recovery InvestigationsDefinition	16Statutory requirements	16Particular action to be taken before an application for a production order	17Particular action to be taken executing a production order	17Particular provisions relating to the handling and retention of documentsproduced or accessed in response to a production order	18Order to grant entry	19Search and seizure warrants in Civil Recovery Investigations	21Definition	21Persons who can apply for a search and seizure warrant	21Statutory requirements	21Particular action to be taken before an application for a search andseizure warrant	23Particular action in making an application for a search and seizure warrant	23Particular action to be taken executing a search and seizure warrant	24Time limit for conducting searches	24Entry other than with consent	24Notice of powers and rights	25Conduct of searches	26Leaving premises	26Seizure of material	27Particular record of proceedings in executing a search and seizure warrant	28
Code of Practice laid before Parliament under section 377A(4) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002Search register	29Specific procedures for seize and sift powers	29Retention	32Rights of owners etc.	32Access to search warrant application documents	32Customer Information Orders in Civil Recovery Investigations	33Definition	33Persons who can apply for a customer information order	33Statutory requirements	33Particular action to be taken before an application for a customerinformation order is made	34Particular actions to be taken when serving notices under a customerinformation order	34Particular record of proceedings under a customer information order	35Account Monitoring Orders in Civil Recovery Investigations	37Definition	37Persons who can apply for an account monitoring order	37Statutory requirements	37Particular action to be taken before an application for an accountmonitoring order	38Particular action to be taken executing an account monitoring order	39Particular record of proceedings under an account monitoring order	39Disclosure Orders in Civil Recovery and Confiscation Investigations	40Definition	40Persons who can apply for a disclosure order	40Statutory requirements in applications for civil recovery and confiscationinvestigations	41Particular action to be taken in making an application	41Providing of information and production of documents	42Interview	42Invitation to interview	43Legal and Financial advice	43Persons who may be present at interviews	46Role of persons who may be present at interviews	47Excluding Persons from the Interview	50Conduct of interviews	51The interviewer’s obligations atthe interview	51Recording interview	53Interviews to be recorded in writing	53Commencement of interviews	55
Objections and complaints by the suspect	56Changing recording media	57Taking a break during interview	57Failure of recording equipment	57Removing recording media from the recorder	58Conclusion of interview	58After the interview	58Recording media security	58Particular record of action taken under a disclosure order	59Obtaining evidence from abroad	61

Officers must be aware of their mandatory obligations under the legislation and act in accordance with these duties. This is an absolute requirement regardless of any interpretation of this Code or any other document or guidance.Abbreviations used in this CodeAFI	Accredited Financial InvestigatorAttorney General	Attorney	General	for	England	and	Wales	andAdvocate General for Northern IrelandCJPA	the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001HMRC	Her Majesty’s Revenue and CustomsNCA	National Crime AgencyPOCA	the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002The relevant Directors	the Director of Public Prosecutions, the Directorof the Serious Fraud Office and the Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern IrelandThe Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (POCA) has been amended since it was enacted. In relation to the statutory provisions referred to in this Code, the following legislation which has amended Part 8 of POCA is of particular relevance:ï the Serious Crime Act 2007;ï the Coroners and Justice Act 2009;ï the Crime and Courts Act 2013;ï the Finance Act 2013; andï the Serious Crime Act 2015Introduction1. This Code is issued by the Attorney General for England and Wales and the Advocate General for Northern Ireland (hereinafter “the Attorney General”) under section 377A of POCA. The Attorney General must make a Code of Practice under that section as to:(a) the exercise by the relevant Directors of functions they have under Chapter 2 of Part 8 of POCA; and(b) the exercise by any other person, who is the relevant authority by virtue of section 357(9) of POCA in relation to a confiscation investigation, of functions that person has under Chapter 2 of Part 8 of POCA in relation to England, Wales and Northern Ireland as the relevant authority.(a) 
2. What that means is that this Code provides guidance as to how, in England, Wales and Northern Ireland the relevant Directors are to use the Part 8 investigatory powers in their role as appropriate officers in civil recovery investigations1, how the relevant Directors are to use their powers to obtain a disclosure order in a civil recovery or a confiscation investigation2, how a person specified by the Secretary of State as a prosecutor under section 357(9) is to use the power to obtain a disclosure order in a confiscation investigation3, and how the relevant Directors use their powers to request assistance in connection with a civil recovery investigation, a detained cash investigation or an exploitation proceeds investigation, in relation to evidence which is overseas4. The powers of investigation are not available for a civil recovery investigation if an interim receiving order or administration order is extant against the relevant property; proceedings for a civil recovery order have been started against the relevant property; or cash is detained under section 295 of POCA5, although they do remain available if a property freezing order has been obtained, but proceedings for a civil recovery order have not started.3. The Code of Practice replaces earlier codes of practice issued under section 377A of POCA on 1st April 2008 in respect of Northern Ireland and 1st June 2015 in respect of England and Wales. The Code should not be regarded as a complete or authoritative statement of the law. Only the courts can give an authoritative interpretation of the legislation, and the contents of this Code may be affected by subsequent judicial decisions and changes to the relevant legislation.4. In this Code, references to statutory provisions are to provisions of POCA, unless otherwise stated.1 See section 378(3)(a).2 See section 357.3 See the Proceeds of Crime (Disclosure Orders: Confiscation Investigations) (Specified Person) Order 2014, SI 2014/3207. The Director of the Serious Fraud Office has been specified as a prosecutor for the purposes of section 357(8)(b) (a confiscation investigation carried out by an AFI).4 See section 375A.5 See section 341(3).
5. This Code includes a section on general provisions relating to all orders and warrants (paragraphs 17 to 54) followed by detailed sections on each of the following topics:ï Production orders (paragraphs 55 to 73);ï Search and seizure warrants (paragraphs 74 to 121);ï Customer information orders (paragraphs 122 to 131);ï Account monitoring orders (paragraphs 132 to 142);ï Disclosure orders (paragraphs 143 to 243); andï Obtaining evidence from abroad (paragraphs 244 to 251).6. There are separate codes of practice issued by the Secretary of State and the Department of Justice in Northern Ireland in respect of the Part 8 investigation powers when they are exercised by law enforcement officers, namely the Director General of the NCA and members of his staff, constables, officers of HMRC, immigration officers and AFIs6. This Code mirrors, in all significant respects, that issued by the Secretary of State and the Department of Justice.Persons to whom this Code applies7. This Code provides guidance to:(a) the relevant Directors in their role as appropriate officers in civil recovery investigations in England, Wales and Northern Ireland;(b) the relevant Directors in their role as relevant authorities in relation to an application for a disclosure order in England, Wales and Northern Ireland;(c) a specified person in their role as relevant authority in relation to an application for a disclosure order in England, Wales and Northern Ireland; and(d) the relevant Directors when making requests for assistance under section 375A in relation to evidence which the Director thinks is overseas in connection with a civil recovery investigation, a detained cash investigation or an exploitation proceeds investigation.6 An AFI is a civilian investigator accredited by the NCA. The AFI will also have to fall within a category given in an order issued by the Secretary of State under section 453 to have access to some or all of the powers of investigation.
8. Anything which a relevant Director is authorised or required to do under, or in relation to, Part 8 of POCA may also be done by a member of the Director in question’s staff, if the member of staff is authorised by that Director (whether generally or specifically) for that purpose. Also, anything which one of the Directors or a member of the Director in question’s staff is authorised or required to do under, or in relation to, Part 8 of POCA, may be done by a person providing services under arrangements made by that Director, if the person providing services is authorised by the Director (whether generally or specifically) for that purpose7. Therefore, this Code also applies to the exercise of functions by a member of a relevant Director’s staff, or to a person providing services under arrangements made by a relevant Director, if the member of staff or the person providing services is authorised as described to perform those functions.9. Appropriate officers conduct investigations under Part 8, and there are 5 kinds of investigation permitted – confiscation investigations, civil recovery investigations, detained cash investigations, money laundering investigations and exploitation proceeds investigations. Who may be an appropriate officer in respect of each kind of investigation is set out in section 378. The relevant Directors are included as appropriate officers, but only in respect of a civil recovery investigation (see section 378(3)(a)). A NCA officer is also an appropriate officer for a civil recovery investigation, but a NCA officer is covered by the Secretary of State’s Code of Practice issued under section 377 rather than this Code. Who may be appropriate officers in respect of each of the other kinds of investigation is also set out in section 378, and varies depending on the investigation concerned. An appropriate officer in relation to confiscation, money laundering, exploitation proceeds and detained cash investigations must be a law enforcement officer, but reference must be had to section 378 to identify which law enforcement officers may be appropriate officers in relation to the particular kind of investigation in question.10. The five powers of investigation in England, Wales and Northern Ireland which may be used for investigations are:(a) production orders,(b) search and seizurewarrants,(c) disclosure orders,(d) customer information orders and(e) account monitoring orders.Production orders, customer information orders and account monitoring orders are applied for and executed by an appropriate officer.7 See section 2C.
11. Search and seizure warrants are also applied for by an appropriate officer. The warrants are executed however by an appropriate person, as defined in section352(5). In the case of a warrant sought for the purposes of a civil recovery investigation, this includes a member of the staff of the relevant Director.12. Applications for disclosure orders are made by the “relevant authority”, as defined in section 357(7). In relation to a civil recovery investigation, the relevant authority is a NCA officer or the relevant Director. In relation to a confiscation investigation, the relevant authority is a “prosecutor”, as defined in section 357(8). Who qualifies as a prosecutor depends on which kind of appropriate officer is carrying out the investigation. The Secretary of State has the power to specify by Order additional persons as prosecutors, who may therefore apply for disclosure orders in confiscation investigations8. Disclosure orders are executed by the appropriate officer however.13. Where a person fails to comply with any provision of the Code, he is not by reason only of that failure liable to any criminal or civil proceedings, but the code is admissible as evidence in such proceedings. A court may take account of any failure to comply with its provisions in determining any questions in the proceedings.14. The Code must form part of any published instructions or guidance  for the persons to whom the Code applies and affected members of the public. The persons to whom the Code applies must make arrangements for the Code (whether in a hard copy form or electronically) to be available to both their staff and members of the public on request.15. If a person to whom the Code applies is also exercising an additional and separate function or power, for example, making an application under Part 2 of POCA for a restraint order in relation to seized property, the appropriate officer should have regard to any connected code.16. Those to whom the Code applies should be aware of the legislation and the detail of the particular provisions which they operate under. They must seek legal advice and/or guidance where necessary in advance of using the powers. This includes the relevant provisions in the Criminal Procedure Rules and Civil Procedure Rules as appropriate.8 See the Proceeds of Crime (Disclosure Orders: Confiscation Investigations) (Specified Person) Order 2014, SI 2014/3207. The Director of the Serious Fraud Office has been specified as a prosecutor for the purposes of section 357(8)(b) (a confiscation investigation carried out by an AFI).
General provisions relating to all the orders and warrantsAction to be taken before an application is made17. The right to respect for private and family life and the protection of property under the European Convention of Human Rights (ECHR) is safeguarded by the Human Rights Act 1998. The powers of investigation may involve significant interference with privacy and property of those whose premises are searched; on whom personal information is obtained; or whose personal information, material or documents are seen and/or seized. The powers therefore need to be fully and clearly justified before they are used. The use of the powers which impact upon individuals’ rights must be proportionate to the outcome being sought. In particular, those exercising the powers must consider at every stage whether the necessary objectives can be achieved by less intrusive means – this may be by approaching the potential respondent to ascertain whether they will provide the required information without the need for a court order or to give them prior notice that an application is to be made. The giving of prior notice of an application may mean that a respondent is ready to comply and allows them the opportunity to make representations about the detail of the order or notice due to the nature of the investigation or what they will be required to produce. In all cases, those exercising the powers must exercise them fairly, courteously, responsibly, respectfully and without discrimination. Under section 149 of the Equality Act 2010, when the relevant Director, their authorised staff or a specified person are carrying out their functions, they also have a duty to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, harassment and victimisation, to advance equality of opportunity between people who share a relevant “protected characteristic” and those who do not share it, and to take steps to foster good relations between those persons.918. With particular reference to search and seizure warrants, if there is reason to believe an action carried out pursuant to the powers covered by this Code might have an adverse effect on relations between law enforcement and the community, the appropriate officer should consult the l o c a l police/community liaison officer and/or any other relevant persons:ï before any action is taken; orï in particularly urgent cases, as soon as practicable after action has been taken.9 In Northern Ireland, under section 75 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998, when the Director of Public Prosecutions, his authorised staff or a specified person are carrying out their functions they have a duty to promote equality of opportunity between persons of different religious belief, political opinion, racial group, age, marital status or sexual orientation; between men and women generally; between persons with a disability and persons without and between persons with dependants and persons without. They must also have regard to the desirability of promoting good relations between persons of different religious belief, political opinion or racial group.
19. The appropriate officer (in the case of an application for a warrant) or appropriate person (in the case of execution of a warrant) should also consider whether this consultation could jeopardize an ongoing (sensitive) wider operation or investigation. In such circumstances consultation may not be advisable.20. The expectation is that the provisions of the Code will apply to all searches carried out under this Code.21. A refusal to allow a search of premises or a vehicle may in some instances constitute an offence, (including but not limited to) of wilful obstruction of an appropriate officer in the exercise of a power10. This would be a criminal matter and is not an issue for, or subject to, this Code. Appropriate officers should be aware of other legislation and codes applicable in these circumstances.22. The appropriate judges to grant these powers are, in relation to confiscation investigations, a judge entitled to exercise the jurisdiction of the Crown Court, in Northern I reland, a Crown Court judge and in relation to a civil recovery investigation, a judge of the High Court. Before  a judge can grant any of the Part 8 orders or warrants, they will have to be satisfied that the statutory requirements are met. For each order or warrantto be granted, there is a statutory requirement11 that there must be reasonable grounds for suspecting that:ï in relation to a confiscation investigation, the person who is the subject of the investigation has benefited from their criminal conduct;ï in relation to a civil recovery investigation, (a) the person who is the subject of the investigation holds recoverable property or associated property, or has at any time held recoverable property or associated property, or (b) (except in the case of a customer information order) the property which is the subject of the investigation is recoverable property or associated property.12Reasonable grounds for suspicion23. Reasonable suspicion can never be supported on the basis of personal factors alone without reliable supporting intelligence or information or some specific behaviour by the person concerned. For example, a person’s race, religion or age cannot be used alone or in combination with another personal factor as the reason for establishing suspicion. Reasonable suspicion cannot10 See section 89 of the Police Act 1996 (in relation to constables), section 66 of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998, section 453A of POCA (in relation to AFIs) and section 31 of the Commissioners for Revenue and Customs Act 2005 (in relation to officers of HMRC).11 Except in relation to an application for a search and seizure warrant where a production order has been granted but not complied with, but the statutory requirement will have applied in relation to the granting of the production order (see section 352(6)(a)).12 Because of the nature of the order, in the case of a customer information order, point (c) is not applicable, and in the case of an application for an account monitoring order, only point (a) is applicable.
be based on generalisations or stereotypical images of certain groups or categories of people being more likely to be involved in criminal activity. Reasonable suspicion should normally be linked to accurate and current intelligence or information. It can sometimes exist without specific information or intelligence and on the basis of some level of generalisation stemming from the behaviour of a person. However, reasonable suspicion cannot be founded retrospectively. Appropriate officers should therefore be able to explain the basis for their suspicion by reference to intelligence or information about, or some specific behaviour by, the person concerned.24. In respect of each order or warrant to be granted, there is a statutory requirement that there must be reasonable grounds for believing that the material or information is likely to be of substantial value (whether or not by itself) to the investigation. The appropriate officer must be satisfied that the material or information will progress the investigation.25. There is also a statutory requirement that there must be reasonable grounds for believing that it is in the public interest that the material or information is obtained or accessed by the appropriate officer. The appropriate officer should make sure that the public interest in obtaining the order outweighs the disadvantages to the person against whom the order is being made. For example, an application for an account monitoring order against a bank should not normally be sought unless the appropriate officer considers that this may lead to the identification of monies greater than the anticipated cost to the bank in complying with the order13, or that the appropriate officer suspects that the information will be of substantial benefit with regards to the serious nature of the investigation. The appropriate officer must satisfy themselves that all of these statutory requirements are satisfied before making the application.Action to be taken in making an application26. All the applications for the powers of investigation may be made to   a judge in chambers without notifying the respondent. In deciding whether the application should be without notice, the appropriate officer must consider the benefit of not notifying the respondent of the contemplated order or warrant. An obvious and probably most common reason would be so as not to alert the person connected to an investigation that such is ongoing. Providing notification of the proceedings might enable the person to move material o r i n f o r m a t i o n and thereby frustrate the investigation. However, where an order is directed at a financial institution (who would be the respondent), the institution should normally be notified of the intention of making an application for an investigation order and given the opportunity to be represented at the application hearing.27. An application in respect of a civil recovery investigation should be made to a judge of the High Court in accordance with any relevant civil procedure rules and Practice Direction.13 The appropriate officer is under no obligation to divulge the anticipated cost he or she has decided.
28. Appropriate officers should familiarise themselves as to the requirements in POCA, but the following should be included in an application for an order or warrant:ï the name of the person who is under investigation or (if possible) who holds o r o w n s property which is under investigation and confirmation that any information sought is for the purposes of the investigation. If the application is for an order against a different person to the main focus of the investigation, he or she must also be named o r s p e c i f i e d in the application and there must be an explanation of the person’s connection to the investigation. In respect of applications for a disclosure order, it may not be possible to name each potential recipient of a notice and so they should be named as far as practicable in the evidence in support of the application;ï the grounds on which the application is made; andï confirmation that none of the material or information sought is or consists of items subject to legal privilege or excluded material (with the exception of a lawyer’s client’s name and address requested under a disclosure order14). This does not apply to customerinformation orders and account monitoring orders as the type of information requested will not be that which could be subject to legal privilege or could be excluded material.29. The information and evidence produced in support of an application should show that there are reasonable grounds for suspicion directly relating to the relevant matter under investigation. Appropriate officers should seek to limit the scope of what they request in an application to matters directly relevant to their investigation. Approriate officers should be aware that their application and any information and evidence produced in its support will be subject to analytical scrutiny by the judge.30. Where information appears to justify an application, the appropriate officer should take reasonable steps to check the information is accurate, recent, and not provided maliciously or irresponsibly. An application may not be made on the basis of information from an anonymous source if corroboration has not been sought.31. Where there is any sensitive information and there are concerns that disclosure would create a real risk of serious prejudice to an important public interest, legal advice should be sought about the need for disclosure of that information. There may be the possibility of a public interest immunity application to the court so that the sensitive information need not be disclosed. The appropriate officer should be in a position to deal with any questions the judge may have about the accuracy of information provided  or14 See section 361(1).
any other related matters.32. The person applying must be ready to satisfy the judge that they are an appropriate officer (see section 378) permitted to apply for the order or warrant15.33. Appropriate officers should seek reasons (if not already given) from the judge for the grounds on which a decision is made, whether or not an application for an order or warrant is approved or rejected.Action to be taken in serving an order or warrant34. In all cases, the investigatory powers should be exercised fairly, courteously, responsibly and with respect for the persons and property of those concerned and without discrimination.35. In deciding the method of service of the order or notice, the appropriate officer (in the case of a disclosure order or a customer information order), should take into account all the circumstances of the investigation, including the possible need to prove that service was effected, and the person or bodyon whom the order or notice is served. Search and seizure warrants are executed by an “appropriate person”16 who should also have regard to these matters when executing the warrant.36. When serving the order or notice under the order, or executing the warrant, a covering letter must be provided which includes the following information (unless it is already  included in the order or the notice):ï the name of the person who is the subject of the order, warrant or notice or the name by which he or she is known;ï a warning in plain language that failure without reasonable excuse to comply with the requirement may be an offence and could result in prosecution, or could lead to contempt of court proceedings;ï in the case of a disclosure order, a statement setting out the effect of section 359(1) and (3), and in the case of a customer information order, a statement setting out the effect of section 366(1) and (3); namely, that a warning be given in plain language that failure without reasonable excuse to comply with the requirement, or knowingly or recklessly providing a false or misleading statement for the purpose of purported compliance, may be an offence and could result in prosecution;15 This could be by means of a certificate signed by the relevant Director.16 Section 352(5).
ï a statement that the warning given does not constitute a criminal caution, nor has the consequences of one;ï a general description of the investigation in connection with which the requirement is made (it is not necessary to specify the name of the person or property subject to the investigation on the order, although this information should be given to the judge as part of the application process);ï that the subject of the order, warrant or notice should seek legal advice or ask the appropriate officer about any doubts or concerns they may have, or for guidance on complying with the order, warrant or notice;ï a statement to the effect that disclosure of information about the investigation or falsifying, concealing, destroying or otherwise disposing of, or causing or permitting the falsification, concealment, destruction or disposal of documents which are relevant to the investigation may be an offence under section 342 (offences of prejudicing investigation) punishable by up to five years imprisonment;ï the right to apply for a variation or discharge of the order or notice (not applicable in search and seizure warrants).The person should also be informed that if anyone contacts them about the investigation they should report this to the appropriate officer or the appropriate person.37. When serving a notice under a disclosure order or a customer information order, the appropriate officer must inform the respondent of his or her right to refuse to comply with any requirement imposed on them unless the appropriate officer has, if required to do so, produced evidence of his authority to issue the notice17. The evidence of the authority could include the actual order.38. Where it appears to the appropriate officer or appropriate person that the recipient of an order, warrant or notice has genuine difficulty in reading or understanding English, he or she should attempt to serve a copy on a person known to the recipient who, in the opinion of the appropriate officer or person, is able to explain or translate what is happening. If this is not practicable the appropriate officer or appropriate person should serve the order or warrant and attempt to ensure that the person understands what has occurred (e.g. by serving a multi-lingual explanation or engaging an interpreter or translator).17 Sections 357(6) and 363(7).
39. Sections 359(1) and 366(1) provide that an offence is committed if, without reasonable excuse, a person or financial institution fails to comply with a requirement imposed by a disclosure or customer information order. Sections 359(3) and 366(3) provide that it is an offence to knowingly or recklessly make a false or misleading statement in purported compliance with a disclosure order or customer information order. The other orders are treated as orders of the court against the named person and therefore attract contempt proceedings if they are not complied  with.40. What in law amounts to a reasonable excuse will depend on the facts of each particular case and will be a matter for decision by a court. But the fact that a person has already been questioned in connection with the same or a connected investigation, that the question relates to activities outside the jurisdiction or that a truthful answer to a question would tend to incriminate the interviewee or some other person is unlikely, in itself, to amount to a reasonable excuse.41. Section 449A enables members of staff of the relevant Director to be identified by means of a pseudonym when authorised to carry out functions under POCA. An application may be made or an order or warrant may be served using a pseudonym. A certificate signed by the relevant Director is sufficient to identify a person as a member of staff of that Director and the member of staff may not be asked any question for the purposes of any proceedings or application under POCA which is likely to reveal his or her true identity. Section 449A does not extend to persons providing services under arrangements made by the relevant Director, or to persons exercising functions as a result of being specified in an order made by the Secretary of State.42. No document may be removed or accessed and no information sought which is subject to legal professional privilege (with the one limited exception in respect of a disclosure order). A respondent has the right to withhold material and information sought which is subject to legal professional privilege. The definition of legal privilege evolves through case law, and legal advice should be sought where required on the scope of legal privilege. The current case law broadly defines two categories of legal privilege. The first is legal advice privilege which attaches to communications passing between lawyer and client created for the purpose of giving and receiving legal advice. The second is litigation privilege which attaches to communications and documents which come into existence for the sole or dominant purpose of either giving or obtaining legal advice with regard to contemplated litigation or collecting evidence for use in litigation. However, such communications made in the furtherance of a criminal purpose are not privileged.1. 
43. Where legal professional privilege is asserted in respect of material or items, the appropriate officer may consider whether it is appropriate to use the “seize and sift” powers under Part 2 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001, or refer the matter to independent counsel, if present with the agreement of the occupier.44. None of the powers of investigation permit access to excluded material. Excluded material has the same definition as in section 11 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) or in relation to Northern Ireland, article 13 of the Police and Criminal Evidence (NI) Order 1989 “PACE (NI)” and includes journalistic material and medical records18.45. Aside from the legal privilege and excluded material provision, requirements for information made under the powers of investigation take precedence in spite of any restriction on the disclosure of information, however imposed19. They therefore take precedence over any contractual duties of confidentiality and the common law duty of confidence.Action to be taken on receiving an application for an extension of a time limit46. It is for the appropriate officer to set the time limit for replies to requirements made under disclosure orders and customer information orders, and this should be reasonable with regards to the circumstances of the case. Where the subject of one of these orders asks for more time to comply with a requirement made under one of these orders, the appropriate officer should carefully consider the request. When a decision has been made, the appropriate officer should normally set this out and the reasons for it in a letter to the subject of the order. The circumstances in which it would be suitable for appropriate officers to consider an extension will vary from case to case but may include the need to obtain legal or other professional advice, difficulty in obtaining requested information and/or documents and unavailability. The letter conveying the appropriate officer’s decision should normally be served in the same way as the original notice under the order was served.47. Where a solicitor acting on behalf of the subject of the order makes the application for an extension of time, the letter should be served on the solicitor and may also be served on the subject.48. Time limits for compliance with a production order and an account monitoring order are set out on the face of the order – see sections 345(5) and 370(6) and(7). Therefore, they cannot be extended unless the subject of the order applies to the court for a variation of the order. If the appropriate officer receives a request for an extension of the time limit to comply with a production order or an account monitoring order, he or she should direct the18 Section 379.19 Sections 348(4), 361(6), 368 and 374.
subject of the order to the court. An appropriate officer should request a reasonable time limit when making their application for a production order or an account monitoring order in the first place. The appropriate officer should liaise, where possible, with the subject of the order when seeking a time period for compliance in order to minimise applications to the court for extensions of time.Record of Proceedings49. The appropriate officer or appropriate person should keep or cause to be kept a written record of the exercise of the powers conferred by the provisions of Chapter 2 of Part 8 of  POCA.50. The written record must, in relation to each requirement, include:ï a copy of the order or warrant and copies of notices given under an order;ï a copy of the application for the order or warrant;ï the date on which the order, warrant or notice was served together with any proof of service or the date on which the warrant was executed;ï the date of receipt of, and reason for any request for, an extension of the time allowed to comply with the order or notice;ï the decision in respect of any such request and the date on which it was notified to the subject of the order or notice or their solicitor;ï the date and place that the information or documents were received in response to the order; andï a copy of any receipts provided in accordance with the provisions of this Code.Retention of documents and information51. If documents, material or information are provided which were not required to be provided under the terms of the order or notice, no account must be taken of that document or information in the investigation and it should be returned to the person who provided it.52. Appropriate officers and appropriate pe r s on s should follow established local procedures on the retention and return of documents, material and information. Intelligence that arises during the appropriate officer’s investigation may be passed to the NCA, police, HMRC and/or other departments and agencies (provided t h e a p p r o p r i a t e o f f i c e r i s s a t i s f i e d t h a t there is a legal basis in place either in statute or1. 
common law for the passing of information between those bodies for that purpose).Variation and discharge applications53. Where an appropriate officer applies to the court to vary or discharge an order or warrant made under Chapter 2 of Part 8 of POCA, they should, as far as is practicable, follow the same procedure as for the original application.54. There is no requirement for the same appropriate officer to make the variation or discharge application but if it is a different officer, that officer should be in a position to explain the genuine change of circumstances. The respondent should be notified of an application to vary or discharge an order and be given the opportuntity to be represented at the hearing.1. 
Production Orders in Civil Recovery Investigations55. Persons to whom this part of the Code applies should familiarise themselves with the introduction section which sets out general instructions relating to all the orders and warrants.Definition56. A production order is an order which may be served on any person  or institution, for example a financial institution, requiring the production of, or allowing access to, material within the time specified in the order; this might include documents such as bank statements – see section 345(4).Statutory requirements57. An application for a production order should be made to a court by an appropriate officer and should state that20:ï a person specified in the application is subject to a civil recovery investigation, or that property specified in the application is subject to a civil recovery investigation;ï the order is sought for the purposes of that investigation, and concerns material (or material of a description) specified in the application and that a person specified in the application appears to be in possession or control of the material;ï the reasonable grounds for suspecting that the person specified in the application—o holds recoverable property or associated property,o has, at any time, held property that was recoverable property or associated property at the time; oro the property specified in the application as being subject to the investigation is recoverable property or associated property;ï the reasonable grounds for believing that the person specified in the application as appearing to be in possession or control of the relevant material is in possession or control of it;ï the reasonable grounds for believing:o that the material is likely to be of substantial value (whether or not by itself) to the investigation for the purposes of which the order is sought; ando it is in the public interest for the material to be produced, having regard to the benefit likely to accrue to the investigation if the material is obtained, and the circumstances under which  the20  See sections 345, 346.
person specified in the application as appearing to be in possession or control of the material holds it.58. The person named in the order should then either produce the material, or provide access to it, within a period of time, as directed by the order. Section 345(5) provides seven days as the normal period, unless in the particular circumstances the judge making the order considers it appropriate to set a different period.Particular action to be taken before an application for a production order59. The appropriate officer should ascertain, as specifically as is possible in the circumstances, the nature of the material concerned and, where relevant, its location.60. The appropriate officer should also make enquiries to establish what, if anything, is known about the likely owner(s), occupier(s) or person(s) in control of the premises where the material is believed to be located and the nature of the premises themselves; and to obtain any other information relevant to the application. This may not be necessary if the premises are owned, occupied or controlled by professional bodies or financial institutions.61. The appropriate officer should consider whether the application should seek production of the material or access to it. In most circumstances the appropriate officer should seek production, so material can be retained. There are occasions however where, for example, he or she may simply want sight of information contained in larger material, e.g. an entry in a register.62. The seven day time limit for the production of material applies unless it appears to the judge that a shorter or longer period would be appropriate. Reasons which the appropriate officer might advance to the judge for changing the seven day period are that the investigation may be prejudiced unless there is a shorter time limit, or that it would not be reasonably practicable for the subject of the production order to comply with the seven day time limit due to the nature or amount of documentation required. There will be cases when the best practice is to contact the subject of the production order (e.g. a financial institution) before the application is made to discuss a reasonable time limit.Particular action to be taken executing a production order63. When a production order is served on a person, business or institution under section 345(4)(a), the order or the covering letter must, in addition to the matters specified in paragraph 36, state:ï that the order was made under section 345(4)(a);ï 
ï the material or class of material required to satisfy the production order; andï the period of time within which such documents must be produced.64. Where an order is made under section 345(4)(b) (for access to material), the order or covering letter must, in addition to the matters specified in paragraph 36, state:ï that the order was made under section 345(4)(b) ;ï the material or class of material required to satisfy the production order; andï the appropriate officer’s right of access to such material within the period stated in the order.65. Section 350 deals with service of a production order on a government department. Where a production order is served on a government department, it must be served as if the proceedings were other civil proceedings in relation to the department. This means that a p p r o p r i a t e officers should look at the list of government departments published by the Cabinet Office and the Office of the First Minister and deputy First Minister in Northern Ireland21 under section 17 of the Crown Proceedings Act 1947 in order to find the correct address for service. A list is set out in annex 2 of Practice Direction 6622 and in Northern Ireland, the Judicial Review Practice Note 1/2008 as revised on 10 October 201323. A production order served on a government department may require any officer of the department (whether named in the order or not) who may for the time being be in possession or control of the material to comply with it. If the order does so require, then the person on whom it is served must take all reasonable steps to bring it to the attention of the officer concerned, and any other officer of the department who is in receipt of the order must also take all reasonable steps to bring it to the attention of the officer concerned. If the order is not brought to the attention of the officer concerned within the period stated in the order, the person on whom it is served must report the reasons for the failure to a judge of the court which made the order.Particular	provisions	relating	to	the	handling	and	retention	of documents produced or accessed in response to a production order66. A production order should be served on the person named in the21 See further, the Crown Proceedings (NI) Order 198122 See link at http://www.justice.gov.uk/courts/procedure- rules/civil/contents/form_section_images/practice_directions/pd66_pdf_eps/pd66-list-of-authorised- government-departments.PDF23See link at https://www.courtsni.gov.uk/en- GB/Judicial%20Decisions/Practice%20Directions/Documents/PN%201-2008/j_j_PN%201-2008%20-%20revised%2010%20October%202013.htm
order. If the order is made against a company or other legal persons and there are no directions for service, the appropriate officer should direct the order to a person in authority and with responsibility for the material.67. When executing a production order, an appropriate officer should ask for the material specified in the production order to be produced.68. An appropriate officer may remove any material covered by the production order, except where the production order is made under section 345(4)(b) and only allows access to, rather than removal of, the material.69. An appropriate officer may photograph or copy or have photographed or copied any material that has been removed or accessed. If a copy of the material is sufficient, it should be copied on site and the original returned. If this is not practicable and the order was for production rather than providing access, the material can be taken away and copied and the original returned as soon as possible.70. Where an appropriate officer requires material that is contained in a computer (for example a computer printout), to be accessed or produced, it is to be made available in a visible and legible form in accordance with  section349. The appropriate officer should ensure that care is taken when the person produces the material so that the material on the computer is not, for example, deleted or corrupted.71. In cases where an appropriate officer serves a production order in person they should complete, unless it is impracticable to do so, a list of the articles or documents removed or accessed and give a copy of it and (if appropriate, usually where an order to grant entry is made) a receipt to the owner or occupier and the subject of the order, if present, before leaving the premises. In any event, the appropriate officer should make or have made a record of the articles removed and or accessed in compliance with a production order. A copy of any such record should be given to the subject of the order and the owner or occupier within seven days of the removal of or access to the material.Order to grant entry72. An appropriate officer should consider at the application stage if he  or she considers the right to enter premises under section 347 is necessary in order to satisfy a production order to provide access to material on any premises. It might be used, for example, to enable an appropriate officer to be granted entry to a building in circumstances where a production order had been made in respect of material in a particular company’s office in that building.1. 
73. An order granting entry differs from a search and seizure warrant in that the order to grant entry is to require any person who appears to the appropriate officer to be entitled to grant entry to the premises to allow him to enter the premises to obtain access to the material. It does not include the power to search the premises.1. 
Code of Practice laid before Parliament under section 377A(4) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002Search and Seizure Warrants in Civil Recovery Investigations74. Persons to whom this part of the Code applies should familiarise themselves with the introduction section which sets out general instructions relating to all the orders and warrants.Definition75. A search and seizure warrant is a warrant authorising an appropriate person (to—a) enter and search the premises specified in the application for the warrant, andb) seize and retain any material found there which is likely to be of substantial value (whether or not by itself) to the investigation for the purposes of which the application is made.Persons who can apply for a search and seizure warrant76. An application should be made by an appropriate officer. The person who is carrying out the investigation will normally make the application to the court. The search and seizure warrant should be executed by an appropriate person24. It may be the case that the same officer is both an “appropriate officer” and an “appropriate person” and so can undertake both roles.Statutory requirements77. A search and seizure warrant may be granted under section 352 if either of the requirements for the issuing of the warrant is fulfilled25. The requirements are that a production order has already been made and has not been complied with and there are reasonable grounds for believing that the required material is on the premises specified in the application for the warrant, or that section 353 (requirements where production order not available) is satisfied.78. Section 353 refers to two sets of conditions for granting a search and seizure warrant in the absence of a production order – if either is satisfied, section 353 applies.ï The first set of conditions is that there are reasonable grounds for believing the required material is likely to be of substantial value to the investigation and that it is in the public interest for the material to be24 See section 352(5)(b) as to who is an appropriate person for a civil recovery investigation (but where a production order is not available, see section 353(10)(b)).25  Section 352(1), (6).
obtained having regard to the likely benefit to the investigation, and it would not be appropriate to make a production order because—o it is not practicable to communicate with—ï any person against whom the production order could be made, orï any person who would be required to comply with an order to grant entry, oro the investigation might be seriously prejudiced unless immediate access to the material is secured.The first set of conditions might be satisfied, for example, if the person who owns the material, or who controls access to the premises on which the material is held, is abroad and therefore it is not possible to communicate with that person.ï The second set of conditions is that there are reasonable grounds for believing that there is required material on the premises which falls within subsection (7)26, there are reasonable grounds for believing that it is in the public interest for the material to be obtained having regard to the likely benefit to the investigation and—o it is not practicable to communicate with any person entitled to grant entry to the premises,o entry will not be granted without a warrant, oro the investigation might be seriously prejudiced unless immediate entry to the premises is secured.The second set of conditions might be satisfied, for example, where it is not possible to describe the material (for the purposes of a production order) and access will not be gained without a warrant (e.g. to the residence of the suspect).26 Material falls within subsection (7) if it cannot be identified at the time of the application but it relates to the person or property specified in the application or to certain related questions, and is likely to be of substantial value (whether or not by itself) to the investigation for the purposes of which the warrant is sought.
79. "Premises" has the same meaning as in section 23 of PACE27 and article 25 of PACE (NI) and includes any place and, in particular, includes any vehicle, vessel, aircraft or hovercraft, any offshore installation, any renewable energy installation28, any tent or moveable structure.80. The search and seizure warrant does not include a power to stop a person, make an arrest or to search a person. The legislation and this Code only apply to searches of premises. Th is Code doe s not ap ply to s earch es c onducted w ith co nse nt wi th out a se arch and seizur e warr ant.Particular action to be taken before an application for a search and seizure warrant81. The appropriate officer should at all times bear in mind that a search and seizure warrant is the most invasive of the powers of investigation.82. The appropriate officer should consider why he needs a search and seizure warrant rather than a production order with an order to grant entry.83. The appropriate officer should ascertain as specifically as is possible in the circumstances the nature of the material to be specified in the application and its location.84. The appropriate officer should also make reasonable enquiries to establish what, if anything, is known about the likely owner or occupier, or person in control, of the premises and the nature of the premises themselves; whether they have been previously searched and if so how recently; and obtain any other information relevant to the application.Particular action in making an application for a search and seizure warrant85. An application for a search and seizure warrant should state:ï that a person specified in the application is subject to a civil recovery investigation;ï the name (if any) and address of the premises to be searched and the object of the search;ï the material which is sought, or that there are reasonable grounds for believing that there is material falling within section 353(7) on the premises;27 See section 379.28 A renewable energy installation is not explicitly included in the PACE (NI) definition of premises
ï which of the requirements under section 352(6) apply to the application;ï if relying upon satisfying section 353:o how subsection (2)(b) of that section applies; ando which of the conditions in either subsection (3) or (5) apply to the application; andï the name of the appropriate officer or the appropriate person, subject to the provisions in POCA relating to pseudonyms of members of staff of a relevant Director.86. If an application for a search and seizure warrant is refused, no further application may be made for a warrant to search those premises in the investigation unless supported by additional grounds which subsequently come to light.Particular action to be taken executing a search and seizure warrant87. If the appropriate officer who made the application is a different person from the appropriate person authorised to execute the warrant, the appropriate officer should explain the background and decision to apply for the warrant to the appropriate person. The appropriate person will then have the relevant information which will help when executing the warrant.88. Authorised persons may only attend execution of the warrant if they are accompanying the appropriate person.Time limit for conducting searches89. Searches carried out under a warrant in a civil recovery investigation must be conducted within one calendar month of the date of the issue of the warrant29. The warrant should be returned to the issuing court not more than four months after the date that it was granted.90. Where the extent or complexity of a search means that it is likely to take a long time to complete, the appropriate person may wish to consider whether the additional powers of seizure under Part 2 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (CJPA) may appropriately be used.Entry other than with consent91. Before entering the premises, the appropriate person must first attempt to communicate with the owner or occupier, or any other person entitled  to29 Section 356(4).
grant access to the premises, by explaining the authority under which entry is sought to the premises, showing the warrant and asking the owner, occupier or person entitled to grant access to allow entry, unless:ï the premises to be searched are known to be unoccupied;ï the o w n e r o r occupier and any other person entitled to grant access are known to be absent; orï there are reasonable grounds for believing that to alert the owner, occupier or any other person entitled to grant access by attempting to communicate with them would frustrate the object of the search or endanger the person concerned or other people.92. Before a search begins, the appropriate person must identify him or herself (subject to the provision in section 449A relating to pseudonyms of members of staff of the relevant Director) and show an official form of identification, state the purpose of the search and the grounds for undertaking it. The appropriate person does not need to comply with this provision if the circumstances detailed in  paragraph 92 apply.Notice of powers and rights93. The appropriate person must, unless it is impracticable to do so, provide the owner of or occupier of, or other person entitled to grant access to the premises with a copy of the warrant and in addition to the matters specified in paragraph 36, a notice30:ï summarising the extent of the powers of search and seizure conferred in POCA; andï stating that a copy of this code is available to be consulted and giving a contact point at which it can be obtained.94. If the owner, occupier or person entitled to grant access is present, copies of the notice mentioned above, and of the warrant must, if practicable, be given to the owner, occupier or person e n t i t l e d t o g r a n t a c c e s s before the search begins, unless the appropriate person reasonably believes that to do so would frustrate the object of the search or endanger those conducting the search or other people. If the o w n e r , occupier or person entitled to grant access is not present, copies of the notice and of the warrant must be left in a prominent place on the premises or appropriate part of the premises and endorsed with the name of the appropriate person (or the pseudonym authorised under section 449A) and the date and time of the search. The warrant itself must be endorsed  to30 If this information is on the warrant then there is no need for it to be also detailed and served on a separate notice.
 Code of Practice laid before Parliament under section 377A(4) of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002show that this has been done.Conduct of searches95. Searches should be conducted at a reasonable time of day, for example in the case of domestic premises outside normal sleeping hours and in the case of business premises during normal business hours, unless this might frustrate the purpose of the search. If a search will take place at an unreasonable hour, the appropriate person should record their reasons for doing so in writing.96. Premises should be searched only to the extent necessary to achieve the object of the search, having regard to the size and nature of whatever is sought. No search may continue once the appropriate person is satisfied that whatever is being sought is not on the premises. This does not prevent the issue of further search warrants in respect of the same premises if additional grounds come to light. Examples would be when, as a result of new information, it is believed that articles previously not found or additional articles are on the premises.97. Searches should be conducted with due consideration for the property and privacy of the o w n e r o r occupier of the premises searched, and with no more disturbance than necessary. The owner, occupier or person entitled to grant access must be asked whether he or she wishes a friend, neighbour or other person to witness the search. That person must be allowed to do so unless the appropriate person has reasonable grounds for believing that the presence of the person asked for would seriously hinder the investigation, or endanger persons present. A search need not be unreasonably delayed for this purpose. A record of the action taken under this paragraph, including the grounds for refusing a request from the owner, occupier or person entitled to grant access, must be made on the premises search record (see below). This requirement also relates to business and commercial properties if practicable, as well as private addresses.98. A person is not required to be cautioned prior to being asked questions that are solely necessary for the purpose of furthering the proper and effective conduct of a search. Examples would include questions to discover the identity of the owner, occupier or person entitled to grant access to specified premises, to find a key to open a locked drawer or cupboard, or to otherwise seek co- operation during the search.Leaving premises99. The appropriate person should, before leaving the premises, be satisfied that they are secure either by arranging for the owner or occupier or person entitled to grant access or their agent to be present or by any other appropriate means.1. 
Seizure of material100. An appropriate person may seize:ï material covered by the warrant (being either material specifically mentioned or where there were reasonable grounds for believing that there was material falling within section 353(7) on the premises);ï anything covered by the powers in Part 2 of the CJPA which allow an appropriate person to seize property from premises where it is not reasonably practicable to determine on the premises whether he is entitled to seize it and retain it for sifting or examination in secure conditions elsewhere; andï anything that the appropriate person has the power to seize not covered by the warrant which is discovered during the course of the search (for example seizure of cash under section 294). However, this is incidental to the search powers and a warrant should not be applied for to search for material other than that specified in the application. Regard should be had to the codes relevant to the exercise of the other powers.101. A search must not continue after it appears that there is no more material covered by the warrant on the premises, even if the appropriate person suspects that there are other items which they may want to seize.102. Appropriate persons should be aware of section 59 of the CJPA which allows persons with a relevant interest in material which has been seized to make an application to a judicial authority31 for the return of the material. Appropriate persons should also be aware of the subsequent duty to secure seized property in sections 59 to 61 of the CJPA.103. Under section 356, an appropriate person may take copies of any seized material. Material seized under a warrant may be retained for so long as it is necessary to retain it (as opposed to copies of it) in connection with the investigation for the purposes of which the warrant was issued. But if an appropriate officer has reasonable grounds for believing that—(a) the material may need to be produced for the purposes of any legal proceedings, and       (b) it might otherwise be unavailable for those purposes, it may be retained until the proceedings are concluded.3231 See section 64 of the CJPA for the meaning of “appropriate judicial authority”: in relation to the exercise of the power of seizure under section 352(4) POCA, whether exercised alone or in conjunction with section 50 of the CJPA, it means the High Court.32 Section 356 (10)
104. Where an appropriate person considers that information which is held in a computer and is accessible from the premises specified in the warrant is relevant to the investigation, they may require the information to be produced from the computer in a form which can be taken away (for example, a computer printout or a removable computer disk)33. Care should be taken to ensure that the person producing the material in this form does not delete or corrupt evidence from the computer, either deliberately or accidentally.Particular record of proceedings in executing a search and seizure warrant105. Where premises have been searched under a warrant issued under Chapter 2 of Part 8, the appropriate person should make or have made a record of the search, at the time of the search, unless there are exceptional circumstances that would make this impracticable. If a written record is not made at the time then the appropriate person should do so as soon as is reasonably practicable thereafter and also set out the reasons for the delay in making the record. There may be situations when it is not practicable to obtain all of the information necessary to complete a record, but the appropriate person should make every reasonable effort to do so, and if necessary, complete a partial record. The record should include:ï the address of the premises searched (and if relevant and possible the part of those premises searched);ï Where a vehicle is searched, the location of that vehicle;ï the date, time and duration of the search;ï the warrant under which the search was made (a copy of the warrant should be appended to the record or kept in a place identified in the record);ï the name of the appropriate person, subject to the provisions in POCA relating to pseudonyms of members of staff of a relevant Director;ï the names and dates of birth of any people on the premises if they are known34;ï the names and details of any witnesses;33 Section 356(5).34 When considering whether to request and make a record of someone’s personal details, the appropriate person should be aware of the need for proportionality to avoid any unjustifiable interference with a person’s right to private and family life under article 8 of the ECHR..
ï any grounds for refusing the owner’s, occupier’s or the person who is entitled to grant access’s request to have someone present during the search as set out in paragraph 9735;ï either a list of any material seized or a note of where such a list is kept and, if not covered by a warrant, the grounds for their seizure;ï details of any damage to property or injury to person caused during the search, and the circumstances in which it was caused;ï confirmation that the premises were left secured and by what means; andï any other relevant information.106. The search and seizure warrant must be endorsed by the appropriate person to show:ï whether any material was seized;ï the date and time at which it was executed;ï subject to the provisions relating to pseudonyms of members of the staff of the relevant Director, the name of the appropriate person who executed it; andï whether a copy of the warrant, together with a copy of the Notice of Powers and Rights, was handed to the owner, occupier or person entitled to grant access; or whether it was endorsed and left on the premises together with the copy notice and, if so, where.Search register107. The record of the search should be maintained in a suitable form, i.e. the record should be easily accessible, retrievable and subject to reasonable rules for storage, in particular in relation to the length of time before the record is destroyed.108. Unless it is impracticable to do so, or it would jeopardise a wider ongoing operation or investigation, a copy of the record should be given immediately to the person in charge of the premises searched. If a record is not made at the time, the person should be informed how they can apply for a copy of the record once it is made.Specific procedures for seize and sift powers109. Part 2 of the	CJPA provides persons who are lawfully on any premises and exercising powers of search and seizure with further limited35
powers to seize material from premises so that they can sift through it or otherwise examine it elsewhere. These powers may be exercised for the reasons stated in section 50 of the CJPA; appropriate persons should refer to and have regard to this provision. All appropriate persons conducting searches under POCA are permitted to use these powers. Appropriate persons should be careful that they only exercise these powers where it is essential to do so and that they do not remove any more material than is absolutely necessary. The removal of large volumes of material, much of which may not ultimately be retainable, may have serious implications for the owners, particularly where they are involved in business. Appropriate persons should always give careful consideration to whether removing copies or images of relevant material or data would be a satisfactory alternative to removing the originals. Where originals are taken, appropriate persons should always be prepared to facilitate the provision of copies or images for the owners where that is reasonably practicable.110. Property seized under section 50 of the CJPA must be kept securely and separately from any other material seized under other powers (section 53(2) and(5) of the CJPA). Section 51 of the CJPA is not relevant as the search and seizure powers under Chapter 2 of Part 8 POCA do not extend to seizing material from a person. An initial examination under section 53 of the CJPA to determine what material may be retained in accordance with POCA must be carried out as soon as reasonably practicable, allowing the person from whom the material was seized, or a person with an interest in  the material, an opportunity of being present or represented. The appropriate person should ensure that he or she has the facilities for the sift to be conducted in suitable surroundings and that persons from whom the material was seized or who have an interest in the material or their representative can be present.111. All reasonable steps should be taken to accommodate an interested person’s request to be present, provided the request is reasonable and subject to the need to prevent harm to, interference with, or unreasonable delay to the investigatory process. If an examination proceeds in the absence of an interested person who asked to attend or their representative, the appropriate person who exercised the search and seizure warrant must give that person a written notice of why the examination was carried out in those circumstances. If it is necessary for security reasons or to maintain confidentiality, appropriate persons may exclude interested persons from decryption or other processes which facilitate the examination but do not form part of it.112. It is the responsibility of the appropriate person to ensure that, where appropriate, property is returned in accordance with sections 53 to 55 of the CJPA. Material which is not retainable (i.e. because it is legally privileged material, excluded material or falls outside the terms of the warrant) must be separated from the rest of the seized property and returned as soon as reasonably practicable after the examination of all the seized property has been completed. Delay is only warranted if very clear and compelling reasons1. 
exist; for example, the unavailability of the person to whom the material is to be returned or the need to agree a convenient time to return a very large volume of material. Legally privileged or excluded material which cannot be retained must be returned as soon as reasonably practicable and without waiting for the whole examination to be completed. As set out in section 58 of the CJPA, material must be returned to the person from whom it was seized, except where it is clear that some other person has a better right to it.113. Where an appropriate person involved in the investigation has reasonable grounds to believe that a person with a relevant interest in property seized under section 50 of the CJPA intends to make an application under section 59 for the return of any legally privileged or excluded material, the appropriate officer must be informed and the material seized must be kept secure in accordance with section 61.114. The responsibility for ensuring property is properly secured rests ultimately with the appropriate person and the appropriate officer, even if there is a separate person delegated with this specific task. Securing involves making sure that the property is not examined, copied or put to any other use except with the consent of the applicant or in accordance with the directions of the appropriate judicial authority. Any such consent or directions must be recorded in writing and signed by both the applicant or judicial authority and the appropriate person.115. Where an appropriate person exercises a power of seizure conferred by section 50 of the CJPA, that appropriate person must at the earliest opportunity and unless it is impracticable to do so, provide the occupier of the premises or the person from whom the property was seized with a written notice:ï specifying what has been seized in reliance on the powers conferred by that section;ï specifying the grounds on which those powers have been exercised;ï setting out the effect of sections 59 to 61 of the CJPA which cover the grounds on which a person with a relevant interest in seized property may apply to the appropriate judicial authority for its return and the duty to secure property in certain circumstances where such an application is made;ï specifying the name and address of the person to whom notice of an application to the appropriate judicial authority in respect of any of the seized property must be given; andï specifying the name and address of the person to whom an application may be made to be allowed to attend the initial examination of the property.ï 
116. If the owner or occupier is not present but there is some other person there who is in charge of the premises, the notice must be given to that person. If there is no one on the premises to whom the notice may appropriately be given, it must either be left in a prominent place on the premises or attached to the exterior of the premises so that it will easily be found.Retention117. Anything which has been seized under either POCA or the CJPA may be retained only for as long as is necessary in connection with the investigation for the purposes of which the warrant was issued.118. Property should not be retained if a photograph or copy would be sufficient - appropriate officers and appropriate persons should be aware of the safeguards applied by section 356 and section 63 of the CJPA.Rights of owners etc.119. If property is retained under POCA or the CJPA, the o w n e r o r occupier of the premises on which it was seized or the person who had custody or control of it immediately prior to its seizure should on request be provided with a list or description of the property within a reasonable time.120. That person or their representative should be allowed supervised access to the property to examine it or have it photographed or copied, or must be provided with a photograph or copy, in either case within a reasonable time of any request and at their own expense, unless the appropriate officer has reasonable grounds for believing that this would prejudice the investigation or any proceedings. A record of the grounds should be made in any case where access is denied.Access to search warrant application documents121. If any person affected by a search and seizure warrant seeks access to the documents supporting the application for the search and seizure warrant, the appropriate officer or the appropriate person is expected to consider the request within 14 days. Access may be refused, for example, on the basis that allowing access to some or all of the documents would:ï prejudice the prevention or detection of crime;ï prejudice the apprehension or prosecution of offenders; orï be contrary to any public interest in maintaining the confidentiality of that information.ï 
Customer Information Orders in Civil Recovery Investigations122. Persons to whom this part of the Code applies should familiarise themselves with the introduction section which sets out general instructions relating to all the orders and warrants.Definition123. A customer information order compels a financial institution covered by the application to provide any customer information it has relating to the person specified in the application on receipt of a written notice from an appropriate officer asking for that information. Customer information is defined at section364. A financial institution means a person carrying on a business in the regulated sector36. Regulated sector is defined at Schedule 9 to POCA.Persons who can apply for a customer information order124. An application can be made by an appropriate officer.Statutory requirements125. The application should state:ï a person specified in the application is subject to a civil recovery investigation;ï that the order is sought for the purposes of that investigation;ï the financial institutions, or a description of financial institutions, from which the customer information is to be obtained. A description of financial institutions may include all financial institutions but would usually be specifically targeted, such as those financial institutions within a geographical area;ï the reasonable grounds for suspecting that the person specified in the application:o holds recoverable property or associated property, oro has, at any time, held property that was recoverable property or associated property at the time;ï the reasonable grounds for believing:o that customer information which may be provided in compliance with the order is likely to be of substantial value (whether or not by36 Section 416(4).
itself) to the investigation for the purposes of which the order is sought; ando it is in the public interest for the customer information to be provided, having regard to the benefit likely to accrue to the investigation if the information is obtained.Particular action to be taken before an application for a customer information order is made126. The appropriate officer must carefully consider his existing evidence and information so as to limit the number or scope of financial institutions. This may include researching NCA’s intelligence system and the Police National Computer. They must consider what benefit the customer information they may obtain may have, either in itself or as the lead to other avenues of investigation. They must also consider whether the information they wish to gain could not be acquired as effectively and efficiently from material which could be obtained by way of a production order. The appropriate officer should consider the cost both to their employer and the financial institutions in complying with the order.127. The appropriate officer should particularly consider the proportionality of requesting the customer information, against the believed benefit to the investigation. They must also consider the broader issues of law enforcement such as the benefit to the community of removing the suspected proceeds from circulation.Particular action to be taken when serving notices under a customer information order128. Section 363(5) requires a financial institution to provide any customer information which it has relating to the person specified in the application if it is given notice in writing by an appropriate officer. Section 363(6) gives the appropriate officer power to require the financial institution to provide the information in a particular manner, and at, or by, a particular time. The appropriate officer is expected to impose a reasonable time limit depending on the nature of the institution and the information which is requested. There will be cases where the best practice is to contact the financial institution before the notice is served to discuss a reasonable time  limit.129. A notice given under a customer information order must include the following:ï the name of the financial institution;ï the name of the person(s) (or other identifying factor) about whom customer information is sought;ï the financial institution’s right to refuse to comply with	anyï 
requirement made of it unless the appropriate officer has, if asked to do so, produced evidence of their authority;ï the period of time within which the customer information must be provided;ï the manner in which such information must be provided;ï the place at or to which the information is to be provided;ï where the appropriate officer believes that the customer information includes information in relation to accounts held in any other name which it appears to the appropriate officer that the specified person may have used, that other name;ï where the appropriate officer thinks that the customer information includes information in relation to accounts held in the name of any company or limited liability partnership, which the specified person has or in which it appears to the appropriate officer that the specified person has or had an interest, the name and all known addresses of that company or limited liability partnership;ï all addresses known by the appropriate officer to have been used by the specified person possibly relating to accounts that may have been or are held by the financial institution;ï the date of birth or approximate age of that person if an individual, or any known identification information in respect of a company or limited liability partnership;ï such other information as the appropriate officer considers would assist the respondent in complying with the requirement; andï the financial institution’s right not to have information furnished used in evidence against it in criminal proceedings other than in the circumstances specified in section 367(2).Particular record of proceedings under a customer information order130. The appropriate officer should keep a copy of the customer information order and all the notices issued to financial institutions under a customer information order. He or she must also keep a record of all the information supplied in response to the notices.1. 
131. The appropriate officer s hould consider the customer information he or she has obtained and consider whether a production order or account monitoring order would be the next step to obtain further information and material to support the investigation.1. 
Account Monitoring Orders in Civil Recovery Investigations132. Persons to whom this part of the Code applies must familiarise themselves with the introduction section which sets out general instructions relating to all the orders and warrants.Definition133. An account monitoring order is an order that requires a specified financial institution to provide account information on a specified account for a specified period, up to 90 days in the manner and at, or by, the times specified in the order. Account information is information relating to an account held at a financial institution. This would most commonly be transaction details. See paragraph 123 about what is a financial institution. There is no bar to an appropriate officer making a repeat application for an account monitoring order immediately after an account monitoring order has expired.Persons who can apply for an account monitoring order134. Under section 370, an application may be made by an appropriate officer.Statutory requirements135. The application should state that :ï a person specified in the application is subject to a civil recovery investigation;ï the order is sought for the purposes of that investigation;ï the order is sought against the financial institution specified in the application in relation to account information that the appropriate officer wishes to obtain. The application must also state that the order is sought in relation to account information37 about the specified person;ï the reasonable grounds for suspecting that the person specified in the application holds recoverable property or associated property;ï the reasonable grounds for believing that account information which may be provided in compliance with the order is likely to be of substantial value (whether or not by itself) to the investigation for the purposes of37 Account information is information relating to an account or accounts held at the financial institution specified in the application by the person so specified (whether solely or jointly with another): section 370(4).
which the order is sought, and that it is in the public interest for the account information to be provided, having regard to the benefit likely to accrue to the investigation if the information is obtained.136. The application for an account monitoring order may specify information relating to all accounts held by the person specified in the application for the order at the financial institution so specified, a particular description, or particular descriptions, of accounts so held, or a particular account, or particular accounts, so held. The order will set out the manner and deadline by which the financial institution must produce account information and the period for which the order should last (but this may not exceed a 90 day period).Particular action to be taken before an application for an account monitoring order137. The appropriate officer has to consider the benefit of obtaining information from an account to his investigation, and whether this information could be as easily obtained by using a production order.138. The appropriate officer should also consider what account information he or she should request. If, for example, the appropriate officer requires information on certain transactions, they should consider whether they could meaningfully limit the information they require to amounts over a certain threshold or identity of the source of the deposit or destination of a transaction.139. The provision of account information will be for so long as the court has set out in the order (although no longer than 90 days, beginning with the day on which the order is made) and be provided at or by the time or times stated in the order. A reasonable time limit to suggest to the judge might be that the information should be provided within 24 hours on all transactions unless it appears that it would not be reasonably practicable for the subject of the account monitoring order to comply with this time limit. I t i s best practice to contact the subject of the account monitoring order (i.e. the relevant financial institution) before the application is made to discuss types of transaction and the reporting process.140. Appropriate officers should consider the time period they wish the account monitoring order to cover. The appropriate officer should not treat the 90 day maximum as the standard time limit. They should carefully consider and justify to the judge the requirement for the time period requested.1. 
Particular action to be taken executing an account monitoring order141. When an account monitoring order is served on a financial institution, the covering letter, in addition to the matters specified in paragraph 36 should include the following (unless it is already included in the order):ï the name of the financial institution;ï the identity of the person(s) who hold the account to be monitored, including as much identity information as is known by the appropriate officer;ï the accounts in relation to which the information is required, whether this is a specific account or a general description of accounts;ï the account information required (in as specific detail as possible, for example, a general description of the nature of the transactions);ï the period for which the account monitoring order will have effect;ï the period of time within which such information must be provided to the appropriate officer (e.g. within 24 hours of a particular transaction taking place);ï the manner in which such information must be provided;ï such other information as the appropriate officer considers would assist the respondent in complying with the requirements of the account monitoring order; andï the financial institution’s right not to have information furnished used in evidence against it in criminal proceedings other than in the circumstances specified in section 372(2).Particular record of proceedings under an account monitoring order142. The appropriate officer should keep a record of all the account information supplied in response to the order and a copy of the actual order and notices.1. 
Disclosure	Orders	in	Civil	Recovery	and	Confiscation Investigations143. Persons to whom this part of the Code applies should familiarise themselves with the introduction section which sets out general instructions relating to all the orders and warrants.Definition144. A disclosure order under section 357 is an order authorising an appropriate officer to give notice in writing to any person requiring him or her to answer questions, to provide information or to produce documents with respect to any matter relevant to the investigation in relation to which the order is sought. This Code does not provide guidance on the use of disclosure notices under any other legislation.145. Once a disclosure order has been made, the appropriate officer may use the powers set out in section 357(4) throughout the investigation. Thus, unlike the other orders which have to be applied for separately on each occasion, a disclosure order gives continuing powers for the purposes of the investigation. The appropriate officer should serve a notice on any person t h e y wish to question or to ask to provide information or documents.146. Under section 357(6), where a person is given a notice under a disclosure order, that person is not bound to comply with any requirement imposed by the notice unless evidence of the authority to give the notice is provided. A copy of the disclosure order should therefore be given to the person.Persons who can apply for a disclosure order147. An application should be made by the relevant authority, as defined in section357(7). In relation to a civil recovery investigation to which this Code applies, this is a relevant Director. A member of NCA’s staff is also a relevant authority for the purposes of disclosure orders in civil recovery investigations. Members of NCA’s staff are bound by the code of practice issued by the Secretary of State under section 377, and not by this Code.148. In relation to a confiscation investigation, the relevant authority is a prosecutor, as defined in section 357(8). Who is a prosecutor in relation to a confiscation investigation depends on who has carried out the investigation, and who qualifies as a prosecutor in that instance, and regard should be had to section 357(8) to determine who that is. The Director of the Serious Fraud Office is a person who has been specified by the Secretary of State under section 357(9) as a prosecutor, in relation to a confiscation investigation1. 
carried out by an AFI38. In relation to a confiscation investigation, the relevant authority may only make an application for a disclosure order, if requested to do so by the appropriate officer.Statutory requirements in applications for civil recovery and confiscation investigations149. The relevant authority has to satisfy the judge that:ï a person or pr ope r t y specified in the application is subject to a civil recovery investigation, or;ï a person specified in the application is subject to a confiscation investigation which is being carried out by an appropriate officer;ï the order is sought for the purposes of that investigation;ï there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that, in the case of a civil recovery investigation, the person specified in the application holds recoverable property or associated property, or has held property that was recoverable property or associated property at the time, or the property specified in the application for the order is recoverable property or associated property;ï there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that, in the case of a confiscation investigation, the person specified in the application for the order has benefited from his criminal conduct;ï there are reasonable grounds for believing that:o the person the application specifies as appearing to be in possession or control of the material so specified is in possession or control of it;o the material is likely to be of substantial value (whether or not by itself) to the investigation for the purposes of which the order is sought; ando it is in the public interest for the material to be produced or for access to it to be given, having regard to the benefit likely to accrue to the investigation if the material is obtained, and to the circumstances under which the person the application specifies as appearing to be in possession or control of the material holds it.Particular action to be taken in making an application150. An application for a disclosure order should state:ï the identity of	the person who is subject to a	confiscation38 See the Proceeds of Crime (Disclosure Orders: Confiscation Investigations) (Specified Person) Order 2014, SI 2014/3207.
investigation , or the identity of the person or details of the property which is subject to a civil recovery investigation;ï that the order is sought for the purposes of that investigation;ï whether the appropriate officer is likely to require answers to questions and/or information and/or documents;ï if applicable and practicable, the name of the person or persons against whom the power may be used;ï the grounds on which the application is made (including details of the investigation); andï why a disclosure order is required in preference to the other powers of investigation.Providing of information and production of documents151. Production of documents or information in response to a disclosure order must follow, so far as relevant, the processes set out for production orders in paragraphs 55 to 73 above. The appropriate officer should give notice in writing to anyone whom he wishes to provide information or documents. In addition to the general requirements at paragraph 36 this notice should include, where applicable;ï whether the appropriate officer wants the respondent to provide information under section 357(4)(b) and a description of that information;ï whether the appropriate officer wants the respondent to produce documents under section 357(4)(c), and the documents or class of documents required.152. In respect of requests for information under section 357(4)(b) or documents under section 357(4)(c), the appropriate officer should keep a copy of the disclosure order together with all the notices requesting information and/or documents under the disclosure order. The appropriate officer should also keep a record of all the documents and information submitted in response to the notices. Receipts should be sent to the supplier of the material if requested. This paragraph also applies to documents produced at an interview.Interview153. The disclosure order also contains a power to ask questions. The preferred course of asking questions is to conduct a formalised interview in accordance with the procedure set out below.1. 
Invitation to interview154. The appropriate officer should send the interviewee a notice served under the disclosure order which should set out:ï the right of the appropriate officer to carry out the interview under section 357(4)(a);ï the purpose of the interview, which may be as detailed as the appropriate officer thinks necessary;ï the interviewee’s right not to have statements made by them used in evidence in criminal proceedings against t h e m other than in the circumstances specified in section 360(2);ï the interviewee’s right to be accompanied at any interview by a solicitor and/or a qualified accountant;ï the interviewee’s right, if they are a juvenile39, or are mentally vulnerable, have a mental disorder40 or have a learning disability, to be accompanied at any interview by an appropriate adult;ï details of the place at which the interview is to take place; andï where attendance is not required at once, the time and date of the interview.Legal and Financial advice155. In this Code, a solicitor means a solicitor who holds a current practising certificate, and in England and Wales only: a trainee solicitor, a duty solicitor representative or an accredited representative included on the register of representatives maintained by the Legal Aid Agency. A qualified accountant means a person who is a member or fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, or the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland, or the Institute of Chartered Accountants in Ireland, or the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants or who would, for the purposes of the audit of company accounts be regarded by virtue of section 1221 of the Companies Act 2006 as holding an approved overseas qualification.39 If anyone appears to be under the age of 18 then he or she must be treated as a juvenile for the purposes of this Code in the absence of clear evidence to show that he or she is older.40‘Mentally vulnerable’ applies to anyone who, because of their mental state or capacity, may not understand the significance of what is said, of questions or of their replies. ‘Mental disorder’ is defined in the Mental Health Act 1983, section 1(2) as ‘any disorder or disability of mind’. . For Northern Ireland, see article 3 (1) of the Mental Health (NI) Order 1986. Where the person conducting the interview has any doubt about the mental state or capacity of an interviewee, that person should be treated as mentally vulnerable and an appropriate adult should be called.
156. In urgent cases, a person who is not suspected of any unlawful conduct may be prepared to answer questions without the presence of a solicitor and/or qualified accountant. If a person to be interviewed requests access to legal or financial advice before complying with a requirement to be interviewed in a notice served under a disclosure order, the appropriate officer must normally consent and set a reasonable time limit for obtaining such advice. In the exceptional cases set out below, the appropriate officer can refuse such a request depending on the circumstances of the case and the information or material which is being requested.157. A person who requests legal and/or financial advice may not be interviewed or continue to be interviewed until they have received such advice unless:(a) the person conducting the interview has reasonable grounds for believing that:(i) the consequent delay would be likely to lead to interference with or harm to evidence connected with the investigation; or(ii) the delay would alert another person whom the person conducting the interview thinks might have information relevant to the investigation and alerting that person would prejudice the investigation;(b) a solicitor and/or qualified accountant has been contacted and has agreed to attend but the appropriate officer considers that awaiting their arrival would cause unreasonable delay to the process of investigation;(c) the solicitor and/or qualified accountant whom the person has nominated:(i) cannot be contacted; or(ii) has previously indicated that they do not wish to be contacted; or(iii) having been contacted, has declined to attend and the person being interviewed declines to consult another solicitor and/or qualified accountant; or,(d) the person who wanted legal and/or financial advice changes his or her mind.(e) there is an urgent need to avert serious adverse consequences for the life, liberty or physical integrity of a person;(a) 
(f) there is an urgent need to prevent the destruction, alteration, interference or harm to evidence connected with the investigation; or(g) the particularly identified solicitor and/or qualified accountant is suspected of being involved in criminality. In these circumstances, the person should be allowed to choose another solicitor and / or qualified accountant to represent them.Such a decision to proceed with the interview should usually be with the authorisation of a senior appropriate officer and recorded in writing.158. In a case falling within paragraph 1 5 7 (a), once sufficient information has been obtained to avert the risk of interference or harm to evidence or of alerting another person so as to prejudice the investigation, questioning should cease until the interviewee has received legal or financial advice.159. In a case falling within paragraph 157 (d), the interview may be started or continued without further delay provided that the person has given his or her agreement in writing to being interviewed without receiving legal or financial advice and that the person conducting the interview has inquired into the person's reasons for the change of mind and has given authority for the interview to proceed. Confirmation of the person's agreement, his or her change of mind and his or her reasons (where given) should be recorded in the written interview record at the beginning or re- commencement of interview.160. In England and Wales, if a solicitor wishes to send a non-accredited or probationary representative to provide advice on his behalf, then that person is also recognised as a ‘legal adviser’ and must be admitted to the interview unless the appropriate officer considers that this will hinder the investigation.161. In exercising his discretion as to whether to admit a legal adviser who is not a solicitor, the person conducting the interview should take into account in particular whether the identity and status of the non-accredited or probationary representative have been satisfactorily established; whether they are of suitable character to provide legal advice (a person with a criminal record is unlikely to be suitable unless the conviction was for a minor offence and is not recent); and any other matters in any written letter of authorisation provided by the solicitor on whose behalf the person is attending.162. If the person conducting the interview refuses access to a non- accredited or probationary representative or a decision is taken that such a person should not be permitted to remain at an interview, they must forthwith notify a solicitor on whose behalf the non-accredited or probationary representative was to have acted or was acting, and give them an opportunity to make alternative arrangements. The interviewee must also be informed.1. 
Persons who may be present at interviews163. Interviews should be conducted in private with at least two members of staff present at all times. Only persons whose presence is sanctioned by this Code should be present. It is up to the interviewee to arrange the presence of any solicitor and/or qualified accountant. When doing so they must ensure that the person he or she selects is available to attend. Where the provisions of this Code require the presence of an appropriate adult or an interpreter and no such person attends with the interviewee the person conducting the interview should, before commencing or restarting any interview, secure the attendance of such a person.164. The person conducting the interview may be accompanied by a person to assist in handling documents and carrying out such other support tasks as will assist the person conducting the interview to perform his duties. Such a person has no power to require the interviewee to do anything and need not disclose their name or address provided a record of these is made by the person conducting the interview.165. If the person conducting the interview has any suspicion, or is told in good faith, that a person is or appears to be (without clear evidence to the contrary):ï under eighteen years of age;ï has a mental disorder; orï is mentally vulnerable or has a learning disability such that they are incapable of understanding the significance of what is said, of questions or of their replies,that person must not be interviewed unless an appropriate adult is present. The appropriate adult166. In this Code the appropriate adult means:(a) in the case of a juvenile:(i) his or her parent or guardian (or, if the juvenile is in care a member of staff of the care authority/agency or voluntary organisation. The term ‘in care’ is used in this Code to cover all cases in which a juvenile is ‘looked after’ by a local authority under the terms of the Children Act 1989 or the Children (NI) Order 1995);(ii) a social worker;(i) 
(iii) failing either of the above, another responsible adult aged 18 or over who is not a member of staff of the Agency or any law enforcement or prosecuting body.(b) in the case of a person who has a mental disorder, is mentally vulnerable or has a learning disability:(i) a relative, guardian or other person responsible for his or her care and custody;(ii) someone who has experience of working in the field of mental health and/or learning disability but who is not a member of staff of the appropriate officer’s employer or any law enforcement or prosecuting body (such as an approved m e n t a l h e a l t h p r o f e s s i o n a l as defined by the Mental Health Act 1983 or the Mental Health (NI) Order 1986, a specialist social worker or a community psychiatric nurse); or(iii) failing either of the above, some other responsible adult aged 18 or over who is not a member of staff of the appropriate officer’s employer or any law enforcement or prosecuting body.167. A person, including a parent or guardian, must not be an appropriate adult if they are suspected of involvement in the unlawful conduct to which the investigation relates, are involved in the investigation or have received admissions from the juvenile prior to attending to act as the appropriate adult. If the parent of a juvenile is estranged from the juvenile, they must not be asked to act as the appropriate adult if the juvenile expressly and specifically objects to their presence.168. In the case of people who suffer from a mental disorder, are mentally vulnerable or have a learning disability, it may be more satisfactory if the appropriate adult is someone experienced or trained in their care rather than a relative lacking such qualifications. But if the person prefers a relative or objects to a particular person their wishes should, if practicable, be respected.169. A person must always be given an opportunity, when an appropriate adult is called to the interview, to consult privately with a solicitor and/or a qualified accountant in the absence of the appropriate adult if they wish to do so. A solicitor or qualified accountant present in that capacity may not be the appropriate adult.Role of persons who may be present at interviewsSolicitor and Qualified Accountant
170. The main role of any solicitor or qualified accountant is to observe that the interview is conducted in a fair and proper manner. They may not answer questions on behalf of the interviewee but they may intervene:ï to seek clarification of questions put during the interview;ï to challenge a question put by the appropriate officer which he or she considers improper;ï to challenge the manner in which a question is put;ï if the interviewee may have a reasonable excuse for failure to comply with the disclosure order, to advise him or her whether or not to reply to a question; orï to give the interviewee advice.171. Any request for legal or financial advice and the action taken on it should be recorded on the record and/or taped. If a person has asked for legal or financial advice and an interview is begun in the absence of a solicitor or qualified accountant (or the solicitor or qualified accountant has been required to leave an interview), a note should be made in the interview record.172. The solicitor or qualified accountant may read any documents shown to, or produced by, the interviewee at the interview.Appropriate Adult173. Where the appropriate adult is present at an interview, he or she should be informed that they are not expected to act simply as an observer, and that the purposes of their presence are, first, to advise the person being questioned and to observe whether or not the interview is being conducted properly and fairly, and secondly, to facilitate communication with the person being interviewed.Person to assist in case of physical disability174. Appropriate officers should have regard at all times, and to consider the needs of any person who appears to be blind, visually impaired, deaf, unable to read or speak or has difficulty orally because of a speech impediment and take action accordingly.175. A person who is blind or seriously visually impaired may be accompanied by his guide dog. The person conducting the interview should ensure that the person who is blind or seriously visually impaired has his or her solicitor, relative, the appropriate adult or some other person likely to take an interest in him or her (and not involved in the investigation) available to help in the checking of any documentation. Where1. 
this Code requires written consent then the person who is assisting may be asked to sign instead if the interviewee so wishes.176. An interviewee who is seriously physically impaired may be accompanied by an able-bodied adult aged 18 or over to provide such physical assistance, as the interviewee requires. Such a person may take no part in the interview and has none of the rights of an appropriate adult.Interpreters177. A person should not be interviewed in the absence of a person capable of acting as interpreter:ï if they have difficulty in understanding English and the person conducting the interview cannot speak the person’s own language; orï if they are deaf or have difficulty with hearing or speaking,unless the interviewee agrees in writing that the interview may proceed without an interpreter.178. An interpreter should also be present if a juvenile is interviewed and the appropriate adult appears to be deaf or there is doubt about his or her hearing or speaking ability, unless he or she agrees in writing that the interview should proceed without one.179. The interpreter should be provided at the appropriate officer’s expense. The person conducting the interview should ascertain, as far as is practicable, that the interpreter and interviewee understand each other and this should be noted on the interview record. An appropriate adult may not act as the interpreter.180. Action taken to call an interpreter under this section and any agreement to be interviewed in the absence of an interpreter should be recorded in writing and or taped.181. Whenever possible, interpreters should be drawn from the National Register of Public Service Interpreters (NRPSI) or the Council for the Advancement of Communication with Deaf People (CACDP) or the Directory of British Sign Language/English Interpreters.182. The appropriate officer should make sure that a foreign language interpreter makes a note of the interview at the time in the person’s language for use in the event of the interpreter being called to give evidence, and certify its accuracy. A sign language interpreter should also make a note of the interview and certify its accuracy. The appropriate officer should permit sufficient time for an interpreter to note each question asked and answered. The person should be permitted to read the record or have it read to them and sign it as correct or indicate the respects in which they consider it inaccurate.1. 
Foreign languages187. In the case of a person making a statement to an appropriate officer other than in English:ï the interpreter should record the statement in the language it is made;ï the person should be invited to sign it;ï an official English translation should be made in due course188. The interviewer should make sure the interpreter is allowed to read the interview record and certify its accuracy in the event of the interpreter being called to give evidence.Excluding Persons from the Interview189. The person conducting the interview may exclude from the interview a person whose presence is authorised41 only if they have reason to believe that the person is personally involved in the matter under investigation or that the person has, by improper conduct, hindered the proper conduct of the interview. Before excluding any person the personconducting the interview should state their reason and note this on the interview record. What amounts to improper conduct will depend on the circumstances of each case. It would almost always be improper conduct for a person to prompt the interviewee, to provide the interviewee with written answers to the questions, to answer questions on behalf of the interviewee or to interrupt the interview for any reason other than to make a proper representation.190. Exclusion of any person from an interview is a serious matter which may be subject to comment in court. The person conducting the interview should therefore be prepared to justify their decision.191. If the person conducting the interview has excluded a person from the interview room, they should adjourn the interview. The interviewee should then be informed that they have the right to seek another person to act in the same role as the person who was excluded. If the interviewee wishes the interview to continue, then the interviewer should record this decision and continue with the interview.192. If the person conducting the interview considers that a solicitor or qualified accountant is acting in such a way as to hinder the proper conduct of the interview, they should cease questioning the interviewee, and whilst the tape recorder is still operating, speak to the solicitor or qualified accountant. After speaking to the solicitor or qualified accountant, the person conducting the interview should decide whether or not the interview should continue in the presence of that solicitor or qualified accountant. If41 Persons whose presence is authorised are a solicitor, a qualified accountant, an appropriate adult, a person providing assistance and an interpreter.
they decide that it should not, the interviewee should be given the opportunity to consult another solicitor or qualified accountant before the interview continues and that solicitor or qualified accountant should be given an opportunity to be present at the interview.193. The removal of a solicitor or qualified accountant from an interview is a serious step and, if it occurs, the person conducting the interview must consider whether the incident should be reported to the Law Society, t h e  L a w S o c i e t y o f N o r t h e r n I r e l a n d , Legal Complaints Service, General Council of the Bar or the Institute of Legal Executives (as appropriate). In the case of a qualified accountant the matter should be reported to their professional body, such as the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales and the Institute of Chartered Accountants in Northern Ireland.Conduct of interviews194. As far as practicable interviews should take place in interview rooms which are adequately heated, lit and ventilated. People being questioned or making statements should not be required to stand.195. Breaks from interviewing should be made at recognised meal times. Short breaks for refreshment should also be provided at intervals of approximately two hours, subject to the interviewer's discretion to delay a break if there are reasonable grounds for believing that it would prejudice the outcome of the investigation.196. Any decision to delay a break in an interview should be recorded, with reasons, and duration, in the interview record.197. Where an interview is adjourned for any reason and is to be resumed at the same place later the same day it should be sufficient for the person conducting the interview to inform the interviewee of the time of resumption and no notice in writing requiring attendance at that time should be necessary. The details of the adjournment must be noted in the interview record.198. Where an interview is adjourned for any reason and is to be resumed either at a different place or on a different day the person conducting the interview should serve another notice under the disclosure order on the interviewee requiring them to attend at that place on that day.The interviewer’s obligations at the interview199. At the beginning of the interview and immediately following any break, the person conducting the interview should then caution the interviewee as follows:‘You are required by law to answer all the questions I put to you
unless you have a reasonable excuse for not doing so. If you fail, without reasonable excuse, to answer a question or if you knowingly or recklessly make a statement which is false you will be committing an offence for which you may be prosecuted. Do you understand?’The person conducting the interview must also inform the interviewee that this is not a criminal caution and any responses will not be used to incriminate the interviewee.200. The person conducting the interview should, if asked to do so, produce evidence of their authority to require the interviewee to answer questions under the disclosure order.201. The person conducting the interview may ask such further questions as appear to them to be necessary to ascertain the entitlement of any person to be present.202. The person conducting the interview should ask the interviewee whether they suffer from any condition which may impair their ability to understand what is taking place or if they are due to take any medication before the time at which the appropriate officer estimates that the interview will end. The interviewee should be free to take medication during a routine break in the interview. When a break is to be taken during the interview, the fact that a break is to be taken, the reason for it and the time should be recorded.203. The person conducting the interview should remember that it may be necessary to show to the court that nothing occurred during a break or between interviews which influenced the person’s recorded evidence. After a break or at the beginning of a subsequent interview, the person conducting the interview should consider summarising the reason for the break and that nothing happened and confirming this with the person.204. The person conducting the interview should pursue all reasonable lines of enquiry, whether these assist or undermine the investigation. What is reasonable will depend on the particular circumstances. The person conducting the interview should keep this in mind when deciding what questions to ask in an interview.205. The person conducting the interview should offer the interviewee the opportunity to ask any questions to clarify the purpose, structure and conduct of the interview.206. The person conducting the interview should not try to obtain answers or elicit a statement by the use of oppression.187. 
207. Before concluding the interview, the person conducting the interview should ask the interviewee if they have any complaint to make about anything which has taken place at the interview.208. If a question and answer record has been taken of the interview because it was not tape-recorded, the person conducting the interview should afford the interviewee the opportunity to read the record. If the interviewee is for any reason unable to read the note or if the interviewee declines to do so the person conducting the interview should read, or cause it to be read aloud. The person conducting the interview should invite the interviewee to comment on the note and will add to it any comments made. The interviewee should be invited to sign the note. The person conducting the interview should then record the time in the presence of the interviewee. If the interviewee is unable for any reason to sign the note they may authorise any person present at the interview to sign it on their behalf. Where the interviewee refuses to sign the note, or to have it signed on their behalf, the person conducting the interview should record that fact and any reason given for the refusal on the note and have the note countersigned by a senior officer.209. Whenever this Code requires a person to be given certain information, they do not have to be given it if they are incapable at the time of understanding what is said to them, or are violent or likely to become violent or are in urgent need of medical attention, but they should be given it as soon as practicable.Recording interviews210. Interviews should be recorded by recording media (but see paragraph 227). Recording media is any removable, physical audio recording medium (such as magnetic type, optical disc, or solid state memory) which can be played and copied – it includes audio tapes, recordable discs and video tapes. A record of certain matters arising from the interview should also be made contemporaneously. The matters to be recorded in the note are listed at the end of this section.211. Recording of interviews should be carried out openly to instil confidence in its reliability as an impartial and accurate record of the interview.212. One form of record that shall be the master record should be sealed before it leaves the presence of the interviewee. A second form of record will be used as a working copy.Interviews to be recorded in writing213. The person conducting the interview may authorise that the interview is not recorded where it is not reasonably practicable to do so. This could be due to failure of the equipment or lack of a suitable interview room or recorder187. 
if the person conducting the interview has reasonable grounds for considering that the interview should not be delayed until the failure has been rectified or a suitable room or recorder becomes available.214. In such cases the interview should be recorded in writing. In all cases, the person conducting the interview should make a note in specific terms  of the reasons for not recording.215. The written record should be made and completed during the interview, unless this would not be practicable or would interfere with the conduct of the interview, and should constitute either a verbatim record of what has been said or, failing this, an account of the interview which adequately and accurately summarises it.216. If a written record is not made during the interview it should be made as soon as practicable after its completion.217. Written interview records should be timed and signed by the maker.218. If a written record is not completed during the interview the reason should be recorded in the record of interview.219. Unless it is impracticable, the interviewee should be given the opportunity to read the record of interview and to sign it as correct or to indicate how they consider it inaccurate. If the interviewee cannot read or refuses to read the record or sign it, the person conducting the interview should read it to them and ask whether they would like to sign it as correct or make their mark or to indicate how they consider it inaccurate. The appropriate officer should certify on the interview record itself what has occurred.220. If the interviewee is unable for any reason to sign the note they may authorise any person present at the interview to sign it on their behalf.221. If the appropriate adult or the interviewee’s solicitor is present during the interview, they should also be given an opportunity to read and sign the interview record or any written statement taken down during the interview.222. A written record should be made of any comments made by the interviewee, including unsolicited comments, which are outside the context of an interview but which might be relevant. Any such record should be timed and signed by the maker. When practicable, the interviewee should be given the opportunity to read that record and to sign it as correct or to indicate how they consider it inaccurate.223. If the interviewee cannot read or refuses to read the written record of comments or sign it, the appropriate officer should read it to them and ask whether they would like to sign it as correct or make their mark or to indicate how they consider it inaccurate. The person conducting the interview should certify on the written record itself what has occurred.187. 
224. When an interviewee agrees to read the record and other comments and sign them as correct, they should be asked to endorse the record and comments with, for example, ‘I agree that this is a correct record of what was said’ and add their signature or mark. If the person does not agree with the record or comments, the appropriate officer should record the details of any disagreement and ask the interviewee to read these details and sign them to the effect that they accurately reflect their disagreement. Any refusal to sign should be recorded.Commencement of interviews225. When the interviewee is brought into the interview room the person conducting the interview should without delay, but in the sight of the interviewee, load or start the recorder with clean recording media and set it to record. The recording media should, if possible, be unwrapped or otherwise opened in the presence of the interviewee.226. The person conducting the interview should:ï inform the interviewee that he or she is the appropriate officer or has delegated authority (under section 2C);ï give his or her name and that of any other persons present (subject to the provision on pseudonyms of members of staff of the relevant Director under section 449A);ï inform the interviewee of the purpose for which any person accompanying the person conducting the interview is present;ï ask the interviewee to state his full name and address and date of birth;ï ask any person present with the interviewee to state their name, business address42 and capacity in which he or she is present;ï state the date, time of commencement and place of the interview;ï state that the interviewee has the opportunity to request legal and/or financial advice;ï state and obtain the confirmation of the reasons under paragraph 139 et seq for there being no legal representation if this be the case;ï inform the interviewee:42 If persons present do not have a business address (e.g. a parent), they should provide a home address.
(a) of their right to consult in private at any time with any solicitor, qualified accountant or appropriate adult present with them at any interview;(b) of their right to be questioned fairly;(c) of their right to be given an opportunity at the end of the interview to clarify anything they have said or to say anything further if they wish; and(d) of their right to be allowed a break in any interview which lasts for more than two hours;(e) that the interview is being recorded;(f) that they will be given a notice about what will happen to the recording media; and(g) of the likely length of the interview.(h) For the purpose of voice identification the appropriate officer should ask the interviewee, and any other people present, to identify themselves.(i) If the interviewee is deaf or is suspected of having impaired hearing, the appropriate officer or the person assisting should make a written note of the interview, at the same time as the recording.(j) If the interviewee indicates that they want to tell an appropriate officer about matters not directly connected with the case and that they are unwilling for these matters to be recorded, the person should be given the opportunity to tell the appropriate officer at the end of the interview.Objections and complaints by the suspect227. If the interviewee raises objections to the interview being recorded either at the outset or during the interview or during a break in the interview, the person conducting the interview should explain the fact that the interview is being recorded and that the provisions of this Code require that the interviewee’s objections should be recorded. When any objections have been recorded or the interviewee has refused to have their objections recorded, the person conducting the interview has the option of turning off the recorder. If the person conducting the interview decides to do so,they should say that they are turning off the recorder, give their reasons for doing so and then turn it off. The person conducting the interview should then make a written record of the interview. If, however, the person conducting the interview reasonably considers that they may proceed to put questions to the interviewee with the recorder still on, the person conducting the interview may do so.187. 
Changing recording media228. When the recorder indicates that the recording media have only a short time left to run, the person conducting the interview must tell the interviewee that the recording media are coming to an end and round off that part of the interview. If the person conducting the interview wishes to continue the interview but does not already have a second set of recording media, they should obtain a set. The interviewee should not be left unattended in the interview room. The person conducting the interview should remove the recording media from the recorder and insert the new recording media, which, if practicable, should be unwrapped or otherwise opened in the interviewee’s presence. The recorder should then be set to record on the new recording media. Care should be taken, particularly when a number of sets of recording media have been used, to ensure that there is no confusion between them. This may be done by marking the recording media with an identification number immediately after they are removed from the recorder.Taking a break during interview229. When a break is to be taken during the course of an interview and the interview room is to be vacated by the interviewee, the fact that a break is to be taken, the reason for it and the time should be recorded on the recording media. The recording media should then be removed from the recorder and the procedure for the conclusion of an interview as set out in paragraph 234 below followed.230. When a break is to be a short one and both the interviewee and the person conducting the interview are to remain in the interview room, the fact that a break is to be taken, the reasons for it and the time should be recorded on the recording media. The recorder may be turned off. There is, however, no need to remove the recording media and when the interview is recommenced the recording should be continued on the same recording media. The time at which the interview recommences should be recorded on the recording media.Failure of recording equipment231. If there is a failure of equipment, which can be rectified quickly, for example by inserting new recording media, the appropriate procedures set out in this code must be followed. When the recording is resumed the person conducting the interview must explain what has happened and record the time the interview recommences. If, however, it will not be possible to continue recording on that particular recorder and no replacement recorder or recorder in another interview room is readily available, the interview may continue without being recorded on recording media.187. 
Removing recording media from the recorder232. Where recording media are removed from the recorder in the course of an interview, they should be retained and the procedure as set out in paragraph234 below followed.Conclusion of interview233. The person conducting the interview should inform the interviewee that they have no further questions and offer the interviewee an opportunity to clarify anything they have said and to say anything further they wish. Any solicitor, qualified accountant or appropriate adult present at the interview along with the interviewee, should be given the opportunity to ask the interviewee any question the purpose of which is to clarify any ambiguity in an answer given by the interviewee or to give the interviewee an opportunity to answer any question which they have refused previously to answer.234. At the conclusion of the interview, including the taking and reading back of any written statement, the time should be recorded and the recorder switched off. The master recording media should be sealed with a master label. The person conducting the interview should sign the label and ask the interviewee and any appropriate adult and other third party present during the interview to sign it also. If the interviewee or the appropriate adult refuses to sign the label, the person conducting the interview should sign it and note on the label that the interviewee has refused to do so.235. The interviewee should be handed a notice which explains:ï How the recording will be used; andï the arrangements for access to it.After the interview236. Where the interview is not subsequently used in civil recovery proceedings, the recording media should nevertheless be kept securely in accordance with the provisions below.Recording media security237. A second recording will be used as a working copy. The master recording is either the two recordings used in a twin deck/drive machine or the only recording in a single deck/drive machine. The working copy is either the second/third recording used in a twin/triple deck/drive machine or a copy of the master recording made by a single deck/drive machine.238. An appropriate officer has no authority to break the seal on a master recording media, which may be required for civil recovery proceedings. The appropriate officer should make arrangements for master recordings to be kept securely and their movements accounted for. If it is necessary to gain access187. 
to the master recording media, the appropriate officer must arrange for its seal to be broken in the presence of another member of staff of the appropriate officer’s employer. The interviewee or his legal adviser must be informed of the intention to break the seal on the master recording media and given a reasonable opportunity to be present. If the interviewee or his legal representative is present, they should be invited to reseal and sign the master recording media. If either refuses or neither is present another member of staff of the appropriate officer’s employer must do this.239. When the master recording seal is broken, a record should be made of the procedure followed, including the date, time, place and persons present. Where the interview is not subsequently used in proceedings, the recording media should nevertheless be kept securely.240. Where no court proceedings result, it is the responsibility of the appropriate officer to establish arrangements for the breaking of the seal on the master recording media, where this becomes necessary.Particular record of action taken under a disclosure order241. In addition to the general provisions on taking records, the appropriate officer should also keep copies of notices in writing issued under a disclosure order (see section 357(4)) together with full details of their issue and response.242. The record of an interview should contain the following, as appropriateï a copy of the invitation to interview letter;ï the date and place and time of the interview;ï the time the interview began and ended, the time of any breaks in the interview and, subject to the provisions relating to pseudonyms of members of staff of the relevant Director, the names of all those present;ï any request made for financial or legal advice, and action taken on that request;ï that the person conducting the interview told the interviewee everything he was required to tell him or her under this code;ï the name of person(s) excluded from the interview room, and the reason for that decision; andï the presence of an interpreter, and the reason for this.ï 
243. In respect of interviews conducted under the authority of section 357(4)(a), the record of the interview should be held with a transcript of the interview. Documents produced at the interview should also be listed on a note of the action taken under disclosure order. Receipts should be given to the interviewee and this should also be recorded.187. 
Obtaining evidence from abroad244. Section 375A makes provision for evidence to be obtained from overseas if a person or property is subject to a civil recovery investigation, a detained cash investigation or an exploitation proceeds investigation. This process should be used to obtain relevant evidence.245. A judge may request overseas assistance as a result of an application by an appropriate officer or a person subject to the investigation if the judge thinks there is relevant evidence in a country or territory outside the United Kingdom. Alternatively, the relevant Director may request overseas assistance, directly and without making an application to a judge, if they believe that there is relevant evidence in a country or territory outside the United Kingdom.246. The appropriate officer should ensure that there is material supporting his or her belief that there is relevant evidence overseas.247. “Relevant evidence” depends on the type of investigation for which evidence is being requested:ï in relation to a civil recovery investigation, evidence is relevant for the purposes of identifying recoverable property or associated property, and includes whether property is or has been recoverable property or associated property, who holds or has held property, what property a person holds or has held, or the nature, extent or whereabouts of property;ï in relation to a detained cash investigation, evidence is relevant for the purposes of investigating the derivation of cash or whether cash is intended by any person to be used in unlawful conduct;ï in relation to an exploitation proceeds investigation, evidence is relevant if it relates to whether a person is a qualifying offender, whether they have obtained exploitation proceeds from a relevant offence, the value of any benefits derived by a person from a relevant offence, or the available amount in respect of a person.248. Requests for assistance may be sent by a judge, or the relevant Director to the Government of the country or territory concerned, or any authority recognised by the Government of the country or territory concerned as being appropriate for receiving requests, or a court or tribunal which is specified within the request and which exercises jurisdiction in the place where the evidence is to be obtained.249. Alternatively, a request may be sent to the Secretary of State who should forward the request to the court, tribunal, Government or authority in the country or territory concerned.187. 
250. In the case of urgency, a request may be sent via the International Criminal Police Organisation (Interpol or Europol) or any person competent to receive it under any provisions adopted under the EU Treaties, for onward transmission to a court, tribunal, Government or authority in the country or territory concerned.251. Section 375B(3) provides that evidence obtained by means of a request for assistance cannot be used for any purpose other than for the purposes of the investigation for which it was obtained or for the purposes of certain proceedings (or any proceedings arising out of such proceedings). However, the court, tribunal, government or authority that received the request and provided the evidence can consent to the use of the evidence for other purposes.187. 


24/03/2025 Covert policing - Guidance overview https://www.college.police.uk/guidance/covert-policing/covert-policing-guidance-overview PageCovert policing - Guidance overviewThis page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published14 July 2015 Covert policing 0 mins readThere are currently two modules of APP that sit within the covert area of policing:  undercover policing assisting offender debriefingTagsCovert policing
JOURNAL OF AFFAIRSCORNELL POLICY GROUPIssue XXII, Fall 2024. Cornell University
Table of ContentsFALL 2024 CORE EXECUTIVE BOARD MEMBERS	3FALL 2024 EDITORS	4FALL 2024 CENTER DIRECTORS	5EDITOR’S NOTE	7DOMESTIC POLICY	8Pre-Release Earnings Program: Providing Incarcerated Individuals a Financial Safety Net for Reintegration	Amani Agrawal 9De-escalating the War on Terror: Governing “Secret Wars” and Expanding Veteran Treatment	Rachel Baron 13The Right to Read: Combatting Book Bans in the Federal Prison System	Elizabeth Fine 17Federally Mandating Insurance for Firearms	Celia Holden 20Cutting the Head off the Snake: Decentralizing the House of Representatives	Cole Laudenslager 23Reducing Recidivism Rates Through Mandatory Rehabilitation Programs	Pari Patel 27Banning Checkpoint Stops to Reduce Racial Profiling and Enhance Privacy	Avery Prince 31Family First: A Call for Mandatory Paid Family Leave	Emily Snider 34Guaranteeing Flexibility for Employees on Election Day	Samuel Stille 37ECONOMIC POLICY	40A Structure to Dig On: Transitioning to Underground Direct Current Power	Carson Appel 41Using Shared Appreciation Mortgages to Improve Homeownership Trends	Nathaniel Cain 45Future-Proofed! Federal Automatic IRA for an Easy Retirement	Simone Chan 48Community Development Financial Institutions and Economic Growth in New York’s I-90 Corridor	an Gilenson 51Expanding the Internal Revenue Code to Foster Employee Ownership in Private Equity and Venture Capital Pranav Jaganathan 55 Pathways to Mobility: Affordable Public Transportation for Low-Income NYC Residents	Aryan Shah 58EDUCATION POLICY	62Eliminating Mandated Seniority-Based Teacher Layoffs in New York State to Ensure Educational Equity	Reagan Allvin 63Revamping Federal Mentorship Programs to Address ‘Hidden Curricula’ in Higher Education	Danielle Berkowitz 66Combatting the School-to-Prison Pipeline: Removing Police Presence from New York City Public Schools..Jaiden Fisher-Dayn 69 How Universal Pre-K Threatens Child Care Accessibility: A Case for Mixed Delivery	Claudia Nesin 73Securing Financial Futures: A Proposal for Financial Literacy Education	Ben Nusbaum 77Incorporating Culturally Responsive Teaching into School to Increase Academic Success	Sejal Sekhar 81Addressing the Special Education Teacher Shortage: Retention, Job Satisfaction, and Burnout	Abigail Silverman 84Excellence, Equity, and Enrichment: Spreading the Schoolwide Enrichment Model in Broward County	Sanshray Singh 88ENVIRONMENTAL & TECHNOLOGY POLICY	91Agricultural Solutions to Water Resource Issues in the American Southwest	William Dignam 92Unlocking the Potential of New York City’s Vacant and Underutilized Lots	Noah Duguma 95Growing Towards Equity: Tackling Food Desserts and Emissions through Community Gardens	Alix Kerebel 98Regulating Personalized Pricing in the Big Data Era: Toward a Fair Market Framework	Thej Khanna 101Unmasking the Digital Deception: Combatting Deepfake Misinformation in Politics	Kashyap Rajesh 105Dual-Use Solar for New York: a Win-Win for Energy Development and Agriculture	Harrison Sachs 109Essential Car Service: Renewing America’s Commitment to Rural Communities Through EV Charging	Jack Turner 112Building Resilience through a Climate Change Superfund	Connor Weiss 115FOREIGN POLICY	118Foreign Doctors Can Save Italy’s Vulnerable Healthcare System	Zaki Ahmad 119
Instability and Insecurity in Pakistan: Addressing Police Brutality and Corruption	Zain Ali 124Restoring ASEAN Principles: Why Expelling Myanmar Could End the Junta’s Oppressive Reign	Naina Kalra 129Mexico President Claudia Sheinbaum Must Reform Her National Guard	Jorge Mariño 133Breaking the Cycle: Strengthening Police Response to Domestic Violence in Kyrgyzstan	Olivia Pham 136HEALTHCARE POLICY	141Care for Colorectal Cancer: Establishing Self-Service FIT Kiosks to Diminish Racial Inequities	Arjun Anugole 142Addressing Florida’s Hidden Epidemic in Polypharmacy	Tanirika Choudhry 146Creating an International Recruitment Program to Increase Clinical Specialist Return to Ireland	Zoë O'Halloran 150Audit for Equity: Enhancing Accountability Across New Jersey’s Harm Reduction Services	Kimia Shahriyar 153
FALL 2024 CORE EXECUTIVE BOARD MEMBERSGary Wu ‘26, Co-PresidentGary is a junior studying Policy Analysis and Management with minors in Business and Law & Society. He joined the Economics Center his freshman year and has since served as the Economics Center Director and now Co- President of CPG. Gary’s policy interests lie in the intersection of law, economics, data privacy, and the healthcare industry. Outside of CPG, Gary’s a Senior Research Assistant for the Labor Dynamics Institute and is conducting an independent research project as a Rawlings Cornell Presidential Scholar. After his undergrad, Gary plans on attending law school with a focus on healthcare and data privacy law.Isabel Lee ‘26, Co-PresidentIsabel is a junior studying Health Care Policy with a minor in Philosophy. She was an Environment and Technology analyst for Spring 2023 and served as the center’s director the following 2023-2024 school year. As for her policy interests, Isabel is interested in the intersection between healthcare and technology policies, especially regarding EMS health technology.Keten Abebe ‘27, Director of Internal AffairsKeten is sophomore at the Jeb E. Brooks School of Public Policy majoring in Public Policy. She is also pursuing three minors respectively in International Relations, Inequality Studies and Law and Society. She joined CPG in Fall 2023 as an analyst for the Foreign Policy Center and currently serves as CPG’s Director of Internal Affairs. Keten’s policy interests lie in the field of International Affairs, specifically within sustainability, human rights advocacy, international law, and the intersection between racial/gender disparities and policy. Outside of CPG, Keten is the Vice President of New Member Development for the Black Ivy Pre-Law Society, an Institute of Politics and Global Affairs Scholar, a Brooks School course assistant and a Cornell Tradition’s Fellow. She also conducts legal review and sustainable development projects as a Research Analyst for Regenerative Africa Consulting.Ava Boris ‘27, Director of External AffairsAva is a Sophomore studying Public Policy and International Relations at Cornell University. As a member of CPG Ava serves as an analyst for the Healthcare Center and the Director of External Affairs for the organization. Ava has focused her studies on understanding national security issues through the lens of gender and interpersonal relationships. Outside of CPG Ava is a member of Kappa Alpha Theta and Pi Lambda Sigma. She also is a teaching assistant for PUBPOL 2301: Introduction to Policy Analysis.Lilia Mitra ‘26, Advocacy DirectorLilia is a junior studying Health Care Policy in the Brooks School of Public Policy. She joined CPG in Fall 2023 as an analyst in the Healthcare Center and now serves as Advocacy Director. Lilia’s policy interests include eliminating health disparities, protecting access to reproductive care, and improving public education. Outside of CPG, Lilia is a member of Phi Delta Epsilon and Tri Delta and works as an LSC organic chemistry tutor.Grace Chen ‘24, New Member EducatorGrace is a senior, majoring in Policy Analysis and Management in the Brooks School of Public Policy. She joined CPG in Fall 2021 as an analyst for the Economic Center and has previously served as the Economic Center Director and the Co-President. Grace’s policy interests lie within the economic analysis of social welfare programs, policing and racial discrimination, and education. Outside of CPG, Grace is in Social Business Consulting, Asian American InterVarsity, and is a pre-doctorate fellow for Professor Daniela Scur in Dyson. She also loves to dance, bake, and blog.Sahithi Jammulamadaka ‘25, New Member EducatorSahithi is a senior, majoring in Policy Analysis and Management in the Brooks School of Public Policy. She joined CPG as an analyst for the Economic Center in Spring 2022. She previously served as Assistant Center Director for the Economics Center before her current role as one of the New Member Educators. Her policy interests lie in
education and housing policy, specifically in researching creative financing opportunities in those fields. Outside of CPG Sahithi is in International Business Consulting, Cornell Undergraduate Economic Review, a teaching assistant for both PUBPOL 2301 and INFO 1200, and a member of a dance team.Franklin Zheng ‘25, Senior AdvisorFranklin is a senior studying Information Science with minors in International Relations and German Studies. He joined CPG in Fall 2021 as an analyst in the Center for Environmental and Technology Policy and served as the Editor-in-Chief from 2022 to 2024. Outside of CPG, Franklin conducts research on global police force violence in the Gender and Security Sector Lab and works on artificial intelligence integration in the open-source intelligence cycle at USCENTCOM.FALL 2024 EDITORSHenry Han ‘26, Editor-in-ChiefHenry is a junior, majoring in Industrial and Labor Relations at the ILR School. He joined CPG in Fall 2023 as an analyst for the Center of Environmental and Technology Policy and now serves as the Editor-in-Chief after previously serving as Assistant Center Director of Environmental and Technology Policy. Henry is interested in labor, electoral, and agriculture policies, pursuing these interests as a research fellow with the Worker Institute on the Labor Action Tracker and serving as Junior Representation on the ILR Student Government Association. Henry is also the Director of Publications for the Scheinman Conflict Resolution Club.Rachel Baron ‘27, Associate EditorRachel is a junior studying Government, with a minor in International Relations. She has been with CPG’s Domestic Center since Fall 2023, and now serves as Associate Editor and Assistant Center Director of Domestic Policy. She’s interested in a wide range of policy topics, all centered around how domestic policy can affect human rights on a global scale. Beyond CPG, Rachel is an undergraduate scholar for the Institute of Policy and Global Affairs, an editor for the Cornell International Affairs Review, a brother of Phi Alpha Delta, and a sister in Delta Delta Delta.Austin Grattan ‘26, Associate EditorAustin is a junior studying Health Care Policy with a minor in LGBT Studies. He joined CPG in Fall 2023 as an analyst in the Healthcare Center and now serves as Associate Editor in Chief. Austin’s policy interests include health insurance access, medical education, social determinants of health, and LGBTQ+ health disparities. Outside of CPG, Austin is a member of Alpha Iota Gamma and is a TA for PUBPOL 1111. After graduation, Austin plans to pursue a PhD and eventually be a fellow at a think tank, work in the government, or enter academia.Isabela Wilson ‘26, Associate EditorIsabela is a junior pursuing a Bachelor of Arts in Government with minors in International Relations, Law & Society, and East Asian Studies with a focus on the Korean peninsula. She joined Cornell Policy Group in Fall 2023 as a Foreign Policy Analyst and currently serves as an Associate Editor and Assistant Center Director of Foreign Policy. Her policy interests include South Korean policy with focuses on immigration, education, and the Korean diaspora. Outside CPG, she is also involved in The Cornell International Affairs Review and Pi Lambda Sigma (POLIS).
FALL 2024 CENTER DIRECTORSElliot Serna ‘27, Center Director for Domestic PolicyElliott is a student at Cornell University’s Jeb E. Brooks School of Public Policy studying Public Policy with a minor in Urban and Regional Studies. Elliott serves as Center Director of CPG’s Domestic Policy Center, supporting the Center’s work at the fore of all topics touching US domestic policy. Outside of CPG, Elliott is a student researcher working on housing policy research with the Brooks School’s Senior Associate Dean of Public Engagement, Dr. Jamila Michener, and economics replication work with Cornell’s Labor Dynamics Institute, with a particular research interest in community development and administrative reform.Rachel Baron ’27, Assistant Center Director for Domestic PolicyRachel is a junior studying Government, with a minor in International Relations. She has been with CPG’s Domestic Center since Fall 2023, and now serves as Associate Editor and Assistant Center Director of Domestic Policy. She’s interested in a wide range of policy topics, all centered around how domestic policy can affect human rights on a global scale. Beyond CPG, Rachel is an undergraduate scholar for the Institute of Policy and Global Affairs, an editor for the Cornell International Affairs Review, a brother of Phi Alpha Delta, and a sister in Delta Delta Delta.Alice Lee ‘26, Center Director for Economic PolicyAlice is a junior, majoring in Policy Analysis and Management with an intended minor in Applied Economics. She joined CPG as an economic policy analyst in Fall 2023, and now serves as the Economic Center Director. Alice’s policy interests include housing rights, racial disparities in economic mobility, and social welfare programs in general.Nathaniel Cain ‘27, Assistant Center Director for Economic PolicyNathaniel is a sophomore, majoring in Policy Analysis and Management. He joined CPG in Fall 2023, and he is most interested in consumer protection policy, macroeconomic policy, and housing policy. Outside of CPG, he is the Head Teaching Assistant for the introductory public policy course at Cornell, a research assistant within the ILR School, a member of a student consulting organization, and a DJ for WVBR.Sejal Sekhar ‘27, Center Director for Education PolicySejal is a sophomore, majoring in Public Policy in the Jeb E. Brooks School of Public Policy with plans of minoring in Business and Law & Society. She joined CPG in Fall 2023 and is interested in researching educational inequalities and creating policies that address them. Outside of CPG, Sejal is a brother of Cornell's Kappa Alpha Pi Pre-Law Fraternity, a board member of Community Partnership Funding Board, and a dancer on Cornell's competitive Bhangra Team.Danielle Berkowitz ‘27, Assistant Center Director for Education PolicyDanielle Berkowitz is a sophomore studying public policy at the Jeb E. Brooks School of Public Policy, with intended minors in Law and Society and Business. She joined CPG in the Fall 2023 as an analyst for the Education Center and now serves as Assistant Education Center Director. Danielle's policy interests focus on addressing education inequality, specifically advancing equitable resource access and creating policies that effectively support underrepresented communities.Krislyn Michel ‘27, Center Director for Environmental & Technology PolicyKrislyn Michel is a Public Policy major with an interest in specializing in environmental, data/technology, and social policy. She is also pursuing two minors respectively in Inequality Studies alongside Law and Society. She joined CPG in Fall 2023 and is interested in equitable approaches pollution, environmental racism, and consumer data protection. Outside of CPG, she is a member of various student dance groups, a campaign fellow for Students4NY,
and serves as a student ambassador for the Jeb E. Brooks School of Public Policy. In her free time, she enjoys thrifting, analyzing film and media, attending concerts, and cooking.Jack Turner ’26, Assistant Center Director for Environmental & Technology PolicyJack is a junior majoring in Public Policy, and joined CPG in Fall 2023. He is most interested in the intersection of transportation and infrastructure policy aimed at improving mobility for all. Outside of CPG, Jack loves to spend time outdoors, especially on a bike or through running. He is especially passionate about long-distance running and can frequently be found at the Cornell Running Club which he is the Co-VP of, or working in Rhodes Hall on a CUSD project teamBingsong Li ‘26, Center Director for Foreign PolicyBingsong Li is a junior studying Government and Information Science. Joining CPG as a foreign policy analyst in Spring 2022 and becoming Center Director in Spring 2023, Bing is fascinated by the intersection between foreign policy and technology. Bing conducts computational social sciences research in Bowers CIS and can also be found in Cornell Writing Centers, POLIS, and the Translator Interpretor Program.Olivia LaBonte ‘26, Co-Assistant Center Director for Foreign PolicyOlivia is a junior, majoring in Government in the College of Arts and Sciences. She joined CPG in Fall 2023 as an analyst for the Center of Foreign Policy and now serves as the Co-Assistant Center Director for Foreign Policy.Olivia is interested in human rights, atrocity prevention, and security policy. Outside of CPG, she is a member of the Cornell University Parole InitiativeKrystlove Yeboah ‘27, Co-Assistant Center Director for Foreign PolicyKrystlove is Co-Assistant Center Director for Foreign Policy. She is a sophomore in the College of Arts and Sciences majoring in Government and Sociology. Outside of CPG, she is a Research Fellow for the Brooks School of Public Policy’s Center for Global Democracy and a Student Career Advisor. Her policy interests include civic engagement and economic development in Sub-Saharan AfricaKaitlyn Z Varriale ‘25, Center Director for Healthcare PolicyKaitlyn is a senior, majoring in Healthcare Policy in the Brooks School of Public Policy. She joined CPG in Fall 2022 as an analyst for the Center of Healthcare Policy and now serves as the Healthcare Center Director. Kaitlyn is interested in pioneering and managing a more equitable, efficient, and high-quality healthcare system and strategically pairing health justice and optimal operations through an administrator’s lens.Zoë O'Halloran ‘27, Assistant Center Director for Healthcare PolicyZoë O'Halloran is a sophomore in the Jeb E. Brooks School of Public Policy studying Health Care Policy on a pre- medical track. She joined CPG in Spring 2024 as a Healthcare Policy Analyst and now serves as the Assistant Center Director for the Healthcare Policy Center. Zoë’s policy interests include the regulation of pharmaceutical development and international healthcare policy. Outside of CPG, Zoë is the Treasurer of the Cornell Chapter of The Diabetes Link and a member of a pre-professional chemistry fraternity. She is also an undergraduate research student in the Shaw Lab.
EDITOR’S NOTE:Dear Reader,On behalf of the Cornell Policy Group, I am excited to publish the twenty-second edition of the Journal of Affairs, the successor of the former Roosevelt Review.I have had the pleasure of editing and crafting this journal during my first semester as editor-in-chief after two years under the previous editor-in-chief, Franklin Zheng. With his guidance and under new executive leadership, Cornell Policy Group wrote thirty-nine policy proposals ranging from a variety of policy fields, including but not limited to agriculture and electoral reform. Each analyst presented original, innovative solutions based on rigorous research to niche and broad-ranging issues, with each center presenting proposals personal to the analysts. Our incoming class of new analysts, the most selective class of Cornell Policy Group, has only added to the originality and new perspectives we continually seek to add to our ever-evolving group. We have added three associate editors to the editing process to oversee these new proposals and people to strengthen writing quality and standardization. With the help of our new member educators leading the new analyst training program, we can teach our new class critical writing and professional practices within and beyond Cornell Policy Group.After a successful semester of effective restructuring with additional members, I have complete faith that our group is ready to continue our success. I am confident all of our members will thrive as we continue to formulate solutions to problems in a constantly changing world. I extend my most sincere gratitude to everyone who has supported the Cornell Policy Group and this publication. I look forward to continuing my role as editor-in-chief for another semester as we prepare the twenty-third edition in Spring 2025. I hope you enjoy our policy proposals from this semester.Sincerely,Henry Han Editor-in-Chief
DOMESTIC POLICY    Director: Elliott Serna Assistant Director: Rachel BaronAnalysts: Amani Agrawal, Elizabeth Fine, Celia Holden, Cole Laudenslager, Pari Patel, Avery Prince, Emily Snider, and Samuel Stille
Pre-Release Earnings Program: Providing Incarcerated Individuals a Financial Safety Net for ReintegrationBy Amani Agrawal, aa2747@cornell.eduTo reduce recidivism and foster equitable reintegration, New York State should implement a Pre-Release Earnings Program to provide incarcerated individuals with liveable wages for their work in prison, and thus an accessible financial safety net upon their release.
Background      The United States incarcerates 1.2 million people in state and federal prisons, of which 33,793 are incarcerated in New York State (NYS).1 In the US, two- thirds of these incarcerated individuals also work, performing jobs similar to those of unincarcerated individuals.2 However, the legal protections afforded to these workers differ significantly based on their incarcerated status. The Thirteenth Amendment of the US Constitution protects unincarcerated individuals from unethical labor practices yet explicitly omits those “held in confinement due to criminal conviction.”2 The Fair Labor Standards Act further permits unethical practices via their definitions of employees and employers.3 Consequently, incarcerated workers face harsh working conditions, with more than 76 percent of inmates reporting they are forced to either work or face solitary confinement.2      In US prisons, inmates are assigned either industry or non- industry work. The former refers to jobs that involve manufacturing signs or furniture, while the latter refers to prison support jobs in the maintenance sector.4 In NYS, non- industry jobs, which pay less than
industry jobs at an hourly wage between $0.10 to $0.33, are the most common.3 These wages come from less than one percent of the state’s correctional budget.2 Additionally, non-industry wages in NYS are significantly lower than the nationwide incarcerated average of $0.86 per hour.5      Such non-industry wages lead to financial instability that drastically affects incarcerated individuals during incarceration and reintegration. With their current meager wages, the 95 percent of incarcerated individuals returning to their communities lack financial safety, increasing their risk of recidivism, as full-time incarcerated workers earn approximately $2000 annually — far below the $35,000 needed to cover a modest cost of living in NYS.6,7 Therefore, the NYS non-industry wages are insufficient for most prisoners supporting their families.Policy Idea      NYS should implement a pre-release earnings program that provides individuals incarcerated for non-violent crimes with living wages in the form of state minimum wage. This program would be implemented after an individual is granted parole, limiting the program’s scope while increasing
its financial feasibility. Focusing on non-violent offenders prioritizes lower-risk individuals, making the initiative affordable and appealing to the public. The American Correctional Association and the Department of Corrections and Community Supervision (DOCCS) must ensure fair wages by aligning prison labor pay with living costs.      Additionally, non-violent inmates granted parole would be required to establish mandatory savings accounts — with a minimum of 80 percent of inmates’ total wages, considering their minimal financial responsibilities— which they can access upon release. While some may argue that incarcerated individuals do not deserve higher wages due to their criminal record, fair pay reduces reoffending rates and supports successful reintegration, ultimately enhancing public safety.Policy Analysis      Empirical evidence supports financial stability’s role in reducing recidivism rates.9 Research at the University of Southern California (USC) reveals that economic stability is directly correlated to reduced recidivism as criminal behavior is closely linked to income levels.9 Beyond USC, College Bound Dorchester, a Boston-based      
non-profit, has given those with a criminal record in Richmond, California, a $400 weekly stipend.10 Over the next seven years, the city saw a decrease of over 50 percent in its homicide rate, with research suggesting a causal link to the stipend program.10 Both USC’s research and the Dorchester program exemplify the correlation between financial stability and reduced recidivism.      Additionally, investing in living wages for incarcerated individuals could be cost-effective as studies show that a one percent increase in economic freedom is correlated with a 0.47 percent decrease in recidivism.11 With annual housing costs at $60,000 to$70,000 per inmate, reducing recidivism and lowering the number of inmates is cost-effective.12,13 Moreover, since incarcerated individuals’ wages are subject to deductions that prisons retain with federal, non-incarcerated taxpayer money, paying inmates a livable wage could reduce the financial burden on taxpayers, shrink the excessive profit margins of private prisons, and reduce recidivism rates.3 Reducing private prison profits is crucial because it removes the financial incentive for companies to keep incarceration rates high.14 In turn, the justice system can refocus on rehabilitation and public safety.      Further, international examples support this approach. In Norway, where recidivism rates lie at 20 percent, prisons provide incarcerated individuals with wages competitive with civilian wages.15 Incarcerated individuals are given spending freedom, exercising responsibility that translates to future reintegration. Implementing a savings account program in NYS,
would provide a similar financial foundation, directly contributing to reduced recidivism and smoother reintegration.15Highlightsï 32,613 individuals are incarcerated in New York State (NYS), with two-thirds of them working in industry and non-industry jobs.1 The Thirteenth Amendment and the Fair Labor Standards Act jointly enable prison labor practices that do not meet the ethical labor standards that are upheld for non-incarcerated individuals.2ï Incarcerated individuals rely on their wages to support their families and have limited financial ability to do so with an average hourly wage between $0.10 and$0.33.3ï Studies show a clear link between financial stability and reduced recidivism rates, with Norway’s implementation of fair wages for incarcerated individuals resulting in one of the lowest global recidivism rates.15ï Implementing a pre-release earnings program will provide incarcerated individuals with living wages and a financial safety net following their release. Such economic stability would lead to successful reintegration and decreased recidivism.Implementation      Successfully implementing a pre-release earnings program in NYS requires collaboration with the
Department of Corrections and Community Supervision (DOCCS), the American Correctional Association (ACA), and a shift in funding. DOCCS should play a central role in structuring, implementing, and monitoring the program.16 First, DOCCS would need to work closely with policymakers to establish fair wage standards by categorizing industry and non- industry jobs. They should specify eligibility criteria, limiting the program to those incarcerated for non-violent crimes and who havebeen granted parole.17 This criterion ensures focus on individuals statistically less likely to reoffend, making the program safer and more justifiable in the eyes of the public. Second, DOCCS should establish an efficient payroll system that is integrated into NYS’s correctional system and should coordinate with third-party labor agencies to conduct periodic inspections, ensuring wage disbursement accuracy and policy compliance.Additionally, collaboration with the ACA, a professional organization aiming to improve the justice system, and the NYS Department of Labor would align inmate work policies with industry standards, standardizing practices across facilities.18,19      The proposed program requires investing in inmate livable wages through reallocations within the $3.02 billion state correctional budget.20 This investment could prove to be controversial. Yet, by reallocating resources and exploring federal grants, the state’s budget would not be immensely burdened. Such resources would come from less essential, non-rehabilitative administrative functions and such grants would be those aimed at      
reducing recidivism like those provided by the Second Chance Act.21 Approximately 20 to 30 percent of the 16,300 non-violent criminals in NYS will be granted parole and paid $15 an hour for 30 hours of weekly work.21 Given that they work for an average of two months before their release, the program’s cost ranges from $12.62 million to $18.92 million, representing only .42 percent to .63 percent of the NYS’s current correctional budget.20,22      Introducing the proposed program as law would require support from key lawmakers on criminal justice, labor, and budgeting committees. Such support could be gained by highlighting the potential to reduce the state’s $3 billion correctional budget through lower recidivism rates and improved post-release employment. Presenting concrete data on the success of pre-release programs in other countries, such as Norway, where the recidivism rate sits at 20%, along with testimonies from stakeholders would make a compelling case for the program.15      In the initial years following the program’s implementation, its success should be monitored, by the DOCCS and independent research organizations, to identify any necessary adjustments. Quantitative data, including data collection on recidivism rates, post-release employment rates, and earnings of participants, should be analyzed to assess the program’s effectiveness. Qualitative data from participants, correctional staff, and employers will also be essential to understanding the program’s impact on individual lives.      Implementing a pre-release earnings program in NYS addresses the urgent need for financial
stability among incarcerated individuals and is a critical step towards reducing recidivism, fostering successful societal reintegration, and promoting a more equitable justice system.Works Cited[1] Data Collaborative for Justice. Prison Population: New York State Trends. July2023. https://datacollaborativeforjus tice.org/wp- content/uploads/2023/07/PrisonPop. pdf.[2] American Civil Liberties Union. Captive Labor: Exploitation of Incarcerated Workers, p.5. https://www.aclu.org/publication s/captive-labor-exploitation- incarcerated-workers.[3] Princeton Legal Journal. The Economic Impact of Prison Labor for Incarcerated Individuals and Taxpayers. https://legaljournal.princeton.edu/th e-economic-impact-of-prison-labor- for-incarcerated-individuals-and- taxpayers/.[4] ILR Cornell. Subminimum Wages in New York StatePrisons. https://www.ilr.cornell.ed u/carow/carow- policy/subminimum-wages-new- york-state- prisons#:~:text=While%20NYS%2 0is%20not%20among,%240.10%20 and%20%240.33%20per%20hour.[5] Bureau of JusticeStatistics, Prisoners in 2021, NCJ 303158 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice,2022), https://bjs.ojp.gov/sites/g/file s/xyckuh236/files/media/document/ p21st.pdf.[6] Hughes, Timothy A., Doris James Wilson, and Allen J. Beck. Reentry Trends in the United States.U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2002. Available
at: https://bjs.ojp.gov/content/pub/pdf/r eentry.pdf.[7] Economic Policy Institute. “EPI Updates Family Budget Calculator with Data on the Cost of Living in Every County and Major Metropolitan Area.” March 6, 2018. https://www.epi.org/press/epi- updates-family-budget-calculator- with-data-on-the-cost-of-living-in- every-county-and-major- metropolitan-area/.[8] New York StateAssembly. Annual Report on Wage Standards in Correctional Facilities. March 18, 2024, p, 1-8. https://nyassembly.gov/write/upl oad/postings/2024/pdfs/20240318_ 0109548.pdf.[9] USC Suzanne Dworak-Peck School of Social Work. Ensuring Financial Stability for Ex-Convicts Reduces Rates ofRecidivism. https://dworakpeck.usc. edu/news/ensuring-financial- stability-for-ex-convicts-reduces- rates-of- recidivism#:~:text=These%20servic es%20foster%20economic%20stabi lity,extent%20employment%2C%E 2%80%9D%20she%20sai.[10] Edelman, Daniel Munczek. “Cash for Leaving Prison: A New Solution to Recidivism?” Stanford Social Innovation Review, 2017. https://doi.org/10.48558/NNZZ- FR30.[11] West VirginiaUniversity. Economic Freedom and Recidivism: Evidence from US States. http://busecon.wvu.edu/phd_ economics/pdf/14-34.pdf.[12] Vera Institute of Justice. The Price of Prisons: What Incarceration Costs Taxpayers. New York: Vera Institute of Justice, 2017. Vera Institute of Justice. https://www.vera.org/publications/p[1] 
rice-of-prisons-what-incarceration- costs-taxpayers.[13] New York State Department of Corrections and Community Supervision. DOCCS 2020 Budget and Operations Report. Albany: New York State, 2020. Pages 1-4. https://doccs.ny.gov/system/files/do cuments/2021/08/community- supervision-legislative-report-2020- final.pdf.[14] Carl, Riley. “Private Prisons, Public Benefits? Examining Prison Privatization in the US and UK.” Harvard International Review, January 18, 2022. https://hir.harvard.edu/us-uk-prison- privatization/.[15] Denny, Meagan. 2016. “Norway's Prison System: Investigating Recidivism and Reintegration.” Bridges: A Journal of Student Research 10, no. 10: Article 2. Available at: https://digitalcommons.coastal.edu/ bridges/vol10/iss10/2.[16] 
New York State Department of Corrections and Community Supervision. “Re-Entry Services.” Accessed October 26, 2024. https://doccs.ny.gov/re-entry- services.[17] United States Sentencing Commission. Recidivism Among Federal Violent Offenders. Accessed November 25, 2024. https://www.ussc.gov/research/rese arch-reports/recidivism-among- federal-violent- offenders#:~:text=Over%2060%20 percent%20(63.8%25),during%20th e%20follow%2Dup%20period.[18] American Correctional Association. “About Us.” Accessed October 26, 2024. https://www.aca.org/ACA_Member/ACA/ACA_Member/AboutUs/Abo utUs_Home.aspx.[19] New York State Department of Labor. "Labor Standards." Accessed November 25, 2024. https://dol.ny.gov/labor-standards-0.[20] 
New York State Assembly. Annual Report on Wage Standards in Correctional Facilities. March 18, 2024.https://nyassembly.gov/write/upload/postings/2024/pdfs/20240318_010 9548.pdf.[21] Council of State Governments Justice Center. “The Second Chance Act (SCA).” Accessed September 8, 2024. Page 20.https://csgjusticecenter.org/?post_ty pe=publication&p=235894o[22] New York State Department of Corrections and Community Supervision. Under Custody Report for 2021. Albany, NY: New York State Department of Corrections and Community Supervision, April 2022.https://doccs.ny.gov/system/files/do cuments/2022/04/under-custody- report-for-2021.pdf.
De-escalating the War on Terror: Governing “Secret Wars” and Expanding Veteran TreatmentBy Rachel Baron, rlb399@cornell.eduAmidst ongoing struggles to fund veteran rehabilitation needs at home, taxpayer dollars are instead funding secret proxy wars abroad. Heightened human rights and reporting standards are needed to limit violence abroad and divert funding toward American veteran care programs.
Background      Known as “secret wars,” at least 23 American proxy wars have been conducted as part of the War on Terror, the post 9/11 military campaign launched against international terrorist organizations.1 Codified in 2016 but in use since 2004, 10 U.S.C. §127e is a section of the U.S. Code that allows funding of up to one hundred million dollars annually for foreign militaries, militias, or individuals to conduct military operations that align with American counterterrorism goals.2 This support has been used to train, arm, and pay the salaries of non- American military actors.2      §127e is legally founded in the 2001 Authorization for the Use of Military Force (AUMF), which enables counterterrorist actions against groups responsible for or associated with the September 11th attacks, including al-Qaeda, the Taliban, al-Shabaab, and ISIS. However, §127e has been used by the Department of Defence (DoD) to falsely justify operations against unassociated groups, including Boko Haram and the Islamic State - Sinai Province.3      Congress is unable to exercise effective oversight §127e operations. The DoD reports its operations to few congressional offices, does not produce many required reports, and does not report
to either foreign relations committee.4 Further, §127e operations are exempt from Leahy law, a provision that prevents support for military units that violate human rights.4      As the War on Terror continues, veterans at home are left with little support. In January 2023, over thirty-five thousand veterans were unhoused, an increase of 7.4% from the year prior.5 Iraq and Afghanistan veterans have been diagnosed with mental disorders at a rate of 58.1%, including a 23% rate of PTSD.6,7 Although the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) provides rehabilitation programs, they do not have sufficient funding to successfully address these crises.8Policy Idea      The US Congress should amend 10 U.S.C §127e to require§127e operations to be subject to DoD Leahy law and mandate annual audits of Leahy law compliance. Funding provided to any operation found to violate Leahy law should be immediately terminated and diverted to the VA for rehabilitation programs of veterans who have served in Iraq or Afghanistan. In addition to current reporting to the Appropriations and Armed Services Committees, Congress should double their reporting requirements, mandating
DoD reports of §127e operations to all congressional offices at least 30 days prior to new initiatives. In order to ensure accountability and compliance, the DoD should also be held responsible for creating a biannual report to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the House Foreign Affairs Committee. Failure to adhere to reporting requirements would be grounds for funding removal and reallocation to the VA.Policy Analysis      The DoD Leahy law prohibits DoD assistance of foreign military units that have committed a gross violation of human rights, including torture, extrajudicial killing, disappearances, and rape.9 However, exemption of §127e operations from these regulations, combined with the use of force beyond what is authorized under the 2001 AUMF, essentially nullifies Leahy law. Although most details remain confidential, §127e operations have already violated Leahy law prohibitions, including the secret employment of a Cameroonian military unit known for torture and extrajudicial killings.10 Holding §127e operations to Leahy law standards recommits American resources to complying with international and human rights law and prevents unnecessary military engagements.      
      Additionally, diverting funding to VA rehabilitation programs would help alleviate immense fiscal shortcomings that prevent veterans from accessing the care they are entitled to. Veterans of the Iraq and Afghanistan wars are entitled to lifelong free or low-cost medical treatment, which is estimated to cost the U.S. $600 billion to $1 trillion over the next 40 years.11 However, the VA is extremely underfunded: in July 2024, the VA reported a nearly $15 billion shortfall to Congress, $12 billion of which is needed for healthcare provisions.8 Reallocating funding for §127e operations would enhance the VA’s ability to provide healthcare treatment for veterans and deliver on their promises.      Lastly, enhancing reporting requirements for §127e operations ensures stricter congressional oversight of secretive US-sponsored violence, which subsequently holds the DoD accountable to public opinion and the law. In 2021, 68% of Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America members want to repeal or reform the 2001 and 2002 AUMFs, and 62% of Americans viewed the Afghanistan and Iraq wars as not worth fighting.12,13,14 Oversight ensures that the DoD cannot use§127e funding for operations not authorized for attack under the 2001 AUMF.Highlightsï 10 U.S.C. §127e currently allows the United States Department of Defense (DoD) to fund secret proxy wars across the world, subject to neither human rights standards nor effective reporting requirements.1,2,4ï 
The rehabilitation needs of veterans who served in Iraq and Afghanistan include healthcare costs of up to $1 trillion over the next 40 years, and the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is already operating on a funding shortfall.8,11ï Requiring §127e operations to be subject to both Leahy law and increased congressional reporting standards would reduce American human rights violations and general involvement in proxy wars, which would, in turn, deescalate the unending and unpopular War on Terror. Defunding §127e operations that violate Leahy law or are otherwise stopped due to congressional oversight and diverting such funding to the VA would help alleviate the financial strains caused by veteran rehabilitation needs and ensure all veterans may access the healthcare they are entitled to.Implementation      The Senate and House Armed Services Committees should introduce bills to amend 10 U.S.C.§127e and then refer them to each chamber’s Committee on Veterans’ Affairs and Committee on Foreign Affairs. This bill should hold all ongoing and future §127e operations to Leahy law standards, require an audit of ongoing §127e operations to be submitted to Congress, mandate biannual reports to the three committees in both chambers, update reporting requirements for new §127e operations, and require any funding
withheld from §127e operations to be directed to the VA.      To gain bipartisan support for successful bill passage, several hearings should be organized in each committee. These hearings should include DoD and military personnel witnesses that oversee and lead §127e operations, as well as testimony from investigatory organizations that may detail operative human rights violations. These hearings may be closed to the public in order to ensure witness honesty and transparency, avoid prioritization of media appearance from members of Congress, and prevent DoD backlash to witnesses. Strategic messaging surrounding the bill should emphasize the importance of congressional oversight and veteran rehabilitation in the country, both sufficiently bipartisan topics.15 Media outreach should serve to create public awareness and pressure congressmembers to reform DoD funding. This media campaign may be led by members of Congress in relevant committees, such as the Chairs of the Committees on Armed Services, and should emphasize visibility in national news outlets and social media.      Should opposition to the bill persist by pro-military members of Congress, non-governmental organizations should organize a grassroots lobbying campaign.Advocacy and research groups that have shown sufficient interest in human rights vetting and veterans’ rights, including Amnesty International, Veterans of Foreign Wars, and the Brennan Center for Justice may work to spread awareness of §127e operations, promote lobbying efforts by constituents, and publicly pressure
Congress members to support human and veteran rights.2,16,17      Upon the bill’s successful passage, a DoD report on all current§127e operations should be submitted to the House and Senate Committees on Armed Services, Veterans’ Affairs, and Foreign Affairs. In order to preserve security interests, closed hearings should be scheduled in each committee for expert witnesses from the DoD to testify on the reports, specify whether or not each operation adheres to an application of Leahy law, and present the operations’ budgets. As required under the updated code and subject to the required notice of these committees, all operations determined to violate Leahy law will be directed to be safely and promptly terminated within 30 days. All remaining funds dedicated to each canceled operation will be added to the VA’s budget in the next appropriations bill. Once in the hands of the VA, the money can be distributed between rehabilitation programs, providing veterans with the care they need and preventing future violence.Works Cited[1] Star, Morning. “Documents Reveal U.S. Involved in 23 Secret Wars around the World.” People’s World, July 7, 2022. https://www.peoplesworld.org/articl e/documents-reveal-u-s-involved- in-23-secret-wars-around-the- world/. [2] Katherine Yon Ebright. “What Can a Secretive Funding Authority Tell Us About the Pentagon’s Use of Force Interpretations?” Brennan Center for Justice. Accessed October 18, 2024. https://www.brennancenter.org/our- work/analysis-opinion/what-can-
secretive-funding-authority-tell-us- about-pentagons-use-force.[3] Morgan, Wesley. “Behind the Secret U.S. War in Africa.” Politico, July 2, 2018. https://www.politico.com/story/201 8/07/02/secret-war-africa-pentagon- 664005.[4] Katherine Yon Ebright. “Secret War How the U.S. Uses Partnerships and Proxy Forces to Wage War Under the Radar.” The Brennan Center for Justice, November 3, 2023. https://www.brennancenter.org/our- work/research-reports/secret-war.[5] Sage, Debra. “Veteran Homelessness Increased by 7.4% in 2023.” VA News, December 15,2023.https://news.va.gov/126913/veteran-homelessness-increased-by-7-4-in- 2023/.[6] Public Health. “VA.Gov.” Accessed October 18, 2024. https://www.publichealth.va.gov/epi demiology/reports/oefoifond/health- care-utilization/.[7] “Afghanistan/Iraq Veterans.”Accessed October 18, 2024. https://www.research.va.gov/topics/ oef-oif.cfm#research2.[8] Quigley, Aidan. “Massive Veterans Budget Gap Rips Hole in Appropriations Process.” Roll Call, July 26, 2024.https://rollcall.com/2024/07/26/mas sive-veterans-budget-gap-rips-hole- in-appropriations-process/.[9] U.S. Department of State. “About the Leahy Law.” U.S. Department of State, January 20, 2021. https://www.state.gov/key- topics-bureau-of-democracy- human-rights-and-labor/human- rights/leahy-law-fact-sheet/.[10] Turse, Nick, and Alice Speri. “Even After Acknowledging Abuses, the U.S. Continued to Employ Notorious Proxy Forces in
Cameroon.” The Intercept, March 9, 2022.https://theintercept.com/2022/03/09/ cameroon-military-abuses-bir- 127e/.[11] Harvard Kennedy School. “Current and Projected Future Costs of Caring for Veterans of the Iraq and Afghanistan Wars.” Accessed October 18, 2024. https://www.hks.harvard.edu/center s/mrcbg/publications/fwp/2011-06.[12] Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America. “Repeal AUMFs.” August 1, 2024. https://iava.org/priorities/repeal- aumf.[13] Newport, Frank. “American Public Opinion and the Afghanistan Situation.” Gallup (blog), August 27, 2021.https://news.gallup.com/opinion/pol ling-matters/354182/american- public-opinion-afghanistan- situation.aspx.[14] Nadeem, Reem. “A Look Back at How Fear and False Beliefs Bolstered U.S. Public Support for War in Iraq.” Pew Research Center, March 14, 2023. https://www.pewresearch.org/politi cs/2023/03/14/a-look-back-at-how- fear-and-false-beliefs-bolstered-u-s- public-support-for-war-in-iraq/.[15] House Committee on Veterans Affairs. “VA Committee Leaders Unveil Bipartisan Veterans Package,” May 14, 2024. https://veterans.house.gov/news/doc umentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=64 57.[16] VFW. “Advocacy.” Accessed November 25, 2024. https://www.vfw.org/advocacy.[17] “Letter to Congress on the Implementation of Leahy Law on Nigerian Security Forces.” Amnesty International USA, January 18, 2019.https://www.amnestyusa.org/blog/le
tter-to-congress-on-the- implementation-of-leahy-law-on- nigerian-security-forces/.
The Right to Read: Combatting Book Bans in the Federal Prison SystemBy Elizabeth Fine, egf25@cornell.eduBook bans within the federal prison system are inconsistent across correctional facilities and lack transparency. Congress should mandate that the Federal Bureau of Prisons publish a list of banned titles and a justification for their restriction.
Background      US federal and state prison systems manage a population of 1.2 million inmates with disproportionately low literacy rates. However, many prisoners and academics emphasize how reading while incarcerated aids in emotional development and decreases feelings of isolation.1,2 Even though the large prison population may benefit from access to literature, the widespread use of prison book bans has not attracted the same attention as the over 10,000 individual book bans schools imposed across the nation during the 2023-2024 school year.4 Among the states’ leading prison book bans is Florida, which alone bans 22,825 titles in its state prisons.5      Despite such frequent applications, only 28 states keep official records of the book titles banned behind state bars, and only 15 provide the associated reasons for doing so.6 Among states that do provide documentation, the practice is not standardized. Pennsylvania and North Carolina expunge and rebuild their lists annually, Oregon conducts the same process every three years, and Illinois publishes separate “banned” and “disapproved” book lists without defining the difference between the two.6 New York established a Facility Media Review Committee that sends monthly reports of
updated banned titles to a Central Office Media Review Committee to facilitate consistency across state correctional facilities.7 Federally, the Department of Justice currently mandates: “The Warden may not establish an excluded list of publications. This means the Warden shall review the individual publication prior to the rejection of that publication.”8 This specific prohibition of a federal banned book list presents a promising opportunity to set new standards in the federal justice system. Yet, the inconsistency in book banning and the absence of sufficient documentation of the practice obscures the literary censorship experienced by inmates and warrants policy intervention.Policy Idea      Congress should require the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) to publish a centralized list of books banned from federal prison facilities by title with a justification for the bans. The BOP would specify the procedure and relevant criteria when adding new titles to the list, working through a committee process to regularly update the titles included and the reasons for their prohibition. This list would be readily available to mailroom managers in federal correctional facilities to evenly enforce bans while less authority is centralized
among individual staffers. The review committee would similarly oversee an appeals process for restricted materials through which prisoners can file for a reversal of a ban that restricted their access to a title.Policy Analysis      Centralized lists of banned books promote proper standards of consistency and accountability across the many facilities within the federal prison system while safeguarding the security interests that motivate bans. The current BOP policy explicitly prohibits creating a central list of bans which may have resulted from arguments that lists indirectly promote increased censorship as books would not be re-reviewed each time they are received.8 This approach, however, ignores the importance of transparency in the censorship that already occurs. Inconsistent applications of bans across facilities make tracking book bans more complex, and the inmates’ experiences vary. Mailroom staffers responsible for designating books as permissible or restricted are included in the correctional industry’s high turnover rates in which 63% of staffers leave the prison correctional field in less than 2 years.6 This turnover presents problems for consistency in book      
bans not only across facilities but over time as well.      Implementing a centralized banned titles list would standardize the enforcement of the practice within federal facilities irrespective of staff changes. Such legislation would be an incremental and alternative approach compared to previously introduced policies targeting access to literature in prisons, including the Prison Libraries Act of 2023, which sought to strengthen relationships between prisons and library services through grant programs.9 Working toward a more transparent book-banning process would provide a foundation for future collaborations with libraries and nonprofits and expand prisoners’ opportunities to read without the same costs for implementation associated with similar proposals.Highlightsï Only 28 states keep official records of the book titles banned in their prisons, and only 15 provide the reasoning for restriction.6ï The inconsistency in book banning and the absence of sufficient documentation of the practice obscures the literary censorship experienced by inmates and warrants policy intervention.ï The Federal Bureau of Prisons should publish and maintain centralized lists of banned books to promote consistency and accountability across the many facilities within the federal prison system while safeguarding the security interests that motivate bans.ï Such legislation would be an alternative approach to
previously introduced policies targeting access to literature in prisons but without the same costs for implementation, including the Prison Libraries Act of 2023, which sought to strengthen relationships between prisons and library services through grant programs.9Implementation      Congress should mandate the BOP to centralize book ban lists in the federal prison system.10 While Congress can present numerous challenges, reforming thefederal prison system is currently on the national agenda, and policymakers have demonstrated their willingness to support change. In July of 2024, President Joe Biden signed the Federal Prison Oversight Act, which mandates independent oversight of the BOP through facility inspections, complaints, and inquiry systems and prohibits BOP resistance to any investigative efforts.11 The Federal Prison Oversight Act was referred to the House Committee on Oversight and Accountability and the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, making policymakers on these committees important supporters of the proposed book ban list policy.11      Critics of book bans in schools would help strengthen the policy’s likelihood of passing.Representative Jamie Raskin of Maryland and Senator Brian Schatz of Hawaii previously introduced resolutions to condemn school book bans and both would likely help garner valuable support to mandate a prison book ban list.12 PEN America, a well-known non-profit organization that informed Raskin and Schatz’s proposed resolutions,
would inform this effort through their extensive existing research on prison book bans.      The policy will likely face opposition from those fighting for stricter book bans and others advocating for the elimination of bans altogether. Content-motivated book bans across all federal facilities remain to maintain security, good order, and discipline.13 These priorities should not be completely abandoned, as many restricted titles include sexual content, violence, or anti-authority messages that threaten the security and safety of correctional staff and inmates. While many bans are rooted in valid security concerns, calls for stricter book bans ignore the lack of transparency surrounding the practice and its expansion would be irresponsible without sufficient information on its current use. To protect inmates’ access to reading materials while recognizing the security concerns that motivate bans in the first place, mandating lists of banned titles provides an incremental solution that balances the two concerns while addressing the current lack of transparency and providing information that can inform future advocacy efforts.      Upon the policy’s passage, the BOP would form and continually update the list. Given there are no existing lists in the federal prison system on previously banned books, the titles will be added on a case-by-case basis beginning from the activation of the policy based on the existing standards for prohibited titles.8 The BOP should give 30 days of advanced notice to all facilities and detail the new procedures to promote widespread compliance.The established BOP committee
would regularly update included titles, the reasons for their prohibition, and report to the Director of the BOP. Mailroom staff across all facilities would be able to access the up-to-date titles online, and the list will be made publicly available to optimize transparency and dissuade prohibited titles from being repeatedly received. With proper implementation, a centralized and continuous list of banned book titles in the federal prison system will tackle the current inconsistencies in literary censorship across facilities.Works Cited[1] Carson, E. Ann. 2023. “Prisons Report Series: Preliminary Data Release.” Bureau of Justice Statistics. https://bjs.ojp.gov/library/publicatio ns/prisons-report-series- preliminary-data-release.[2] Howard University School of Law. 2021. “Banning the Caged Bird: Prison Censorship Across America.” Thurgood Marshall Civil Rights Center. (8). https://thurgoodmarshallcenter.how ard.edu/sites/tmcrc.howard.edu/files/2021- 10/HU8108%20%28Prison%20Cen
sorship%20Report%20Update%29v 1-revised.pdf.[3] Stanistreet, Paul. 2023. “‘Read Your Way Out’: How reading can reduce a prison sentence.” UNESCO Institute for Lifelong Learning. https://thelifelonglearningblog.uil.u nesco.org/2023/04/23/read-your- way-out-how-reading-can-reduce-a- prison-sentence/.[4] Meehan, Kasey, and Sabrina Baêta. 2024. “Memo on School Book Bans from PEN America.” PEN America. https://pen.org/memo-on-school- book-bans-2023-2024-school-year/.[5] Marquis, Moira. 2023. “How Prison Book Bans Dwarf All Other Censorship.” Time. https://time.com/6329800/prison- book-bans-censorship-essay/.[6] Marquis, Moira, and Juliana Luna. 2023. “Reading Between the Bars.” PEN America. https://pen.org/report/reading- between-the-bars/#without.[7] New York State Corrections and Community Supervision. 2022. “New York.” The Marshall Project. (3-4).https://www.documentcloud.org/do cuments/23606996-new-york.[8] Kane, Thomas R. 2011. “Federal Bureau of Prisons Program
Statement.” The Marshall Project. https://www.documentcloud.org/do cuments/23606976-federal.[9] Prison Libraries Act of 2023, H.R.2825, 118th Congress (2023). https://www.congress.gov/bill/118t h-congress/house-bill/2825.[10] Federal Bureau of Prisons. 2019. “Legal Resource Guide to the Federal Bureau of Prisons.” Federal Bureau of Prisons. https://www.bop.gov/resources/pdfs/legal_guide_march_2019.pdf.[11] Federal Prison Oversight Act, H.R.3019, 118th Congress (2024). https://www.congress.gov/bill/118t h-congress/house-bill/3019.[12] Raskin, Jamie. “As Nationwide Book Bans top 10,000, Raskin, Schats Introduce Bicameral Resolution Condemning Book Bans.” Press release. September 25, 2024.https://raskin.house.gov/press- releases?ID=C37729D0-25CB- 4245-8375-3C826A795C19.[13] “Censorship and Banned Book Lists in Correctional Facilities.” n.d. National Institute of Corrections. https://nicic.gov/resources/nic- library/hot-topics/censorship-and- banned-book-lists-correctional- facilities.[1] 
Federally Mandating Insurance for FirearmsBy Celia Holden, cmh434@cornell.eduTo mitigate inaction from the federal government, firearm insurance should be mandated for all gun owners in the United States to incentivize owners to take adequate safety measures.
Background      In the US, the gun death rate is considerably higher than in most other developed nations (10.6 per 100,000 compared to 1-2 per100,000 in 2016), and active shooter incidents in the US have risen from 3 in 2000 to 61 in 2021.1 Furthermore, a 2023 survey found that 61% of Americans believe accessing a firearm is too easy.2 However, despite public opinion, the federal government has continued to enact and enforce more lenient gun policies. For example, in 2023, a federal judge in Virginia overturned a statute that prevented people aged 18-21 from purchasing firearms.3 More recently, the Supreme Court overturned a ban on bump stocks, which are devices that allow semiautomatic rifles to fire faster.4 It is evident that not only are guns becoming easier for Americans to access, but the firearms themselves are becoming more powerful as well. Taking action against these rapidly changing dynamics is long overdue, and Americans cannot continue to wait for the federal government to catch up. Private insurance companies should supplement the government’s gun safety measures by further incentivizing or requiring gun safety practices with firearm purchases.Policy Idea      The federal government will shift gun control to a semi- privatized system where all gun
owners are required to insure their firearms, similar to requirements on car insurance or health insurance.Americans who currently own firearms are required to purchase firearm liability insurance, which would protect gun owners in the case of hunting or shooting accidents, lost or stolen firearms, and personal legal defense.5 However, the policy would include stronger requirements for aspiring gun owners looking to purchase their first firearm after a certain date. These requirements would include a mandatory 30-day waiting period between applying for gun insurance and being able to purchase the desired firearm and a mandatory gun safety course. Gun insurance wouldn’t replace the need for government gun control, but would supplement its current shortcomings.Policy Analysis      Although gun insurance does not cover intentional shootings, insurers are more incentivized to determine an individual’s risk level when selling an insurance plan. Recently, New Jersey and San Jose, California have passed laws that require gun owners to purchase liability insurance. According to San Jose Mayor Sam Liccardo, gun insurance with risk-adjusted premiums would promote safe gun ownership through gun safety classes, gun safes, and child locks.6 Risk- adjusted premiums could also
prevent high-risk individuals from purchasing a firearm, as insurance companies could raise prices or refuse to cover individuals they deem risky.7      Since gun insurance is a relatively new policy, there is not much data on the effectiveness of these mandates. Instead, we can evaluate the specific safety measures that insurers would incentivize or require. For example, in response to a mass shooting in 1989, Canada introduced gun laws such as mandatory waiting periods for gun purchases and mandated safety training courses.8 As a result, Canada’s gun death rate began steadily decreasing throughout the 1990s, falling from 5.0 per 100,000in 1989 to 3.3 per 100,000 in 1999, with the gun death rate estimate in Canada being 2.17 per 100,000 between 2016-2020. The US had a rate of 14.6 per 100,000 in 2021.9,10,1 Furthermore, a regression analysis on the effects of Canada’s Bill C-17, which required background checks, safety courses, and a 28-day waiting period showed that the passage of Bill C-17 was associated with a decrease in suicide and homicide rates in Canada, supplementing earlier gun regulations.11 The relationship between requiring waiting periods and safety courses and gun death rates suggests that implementing similar policies could reduce intentional gun deaths in the US. If gun insurance were mandated, aspiring and current firearm owners
would be strongly incentivized or required to take individual measures to improve our gun death rates.Highlightsï In the US, the gun death rate is considerably higher than in most other developed nations (10.6 per 100,000 compared to 1-2 per 100,000).1 If gun insurance were mandated, aspiring and current firearm owners would be strongly incentivized or required to take individual measures to improve our gun deathrates.ï The federal government should shift gun control to a semi-privatized system where all gun owners are required to insure their firearms, similar to requirements on car insurance or health insurance.ï Practices that insurance companies would be required to implement under this policy, including waiting periods and gun safety courses, have been shown to lower gun deaths in Canada.10 However, it is important to note that these practices were viewed as supplemental to prior gun control policies.Implementation      To enact this policy, the federal government would have to mandate that a certain level of insurance coverage be required to purchase a firearm. The mandate would pass through Congress, which could face opposition with a Republican House of Representatives and Senate. To
mitigate opposition, proposing a system with minimum statutes that other states could amend and add more protections to could appeal to them. Furthermore, it could garner support from Republicans because firearm regulation would be determined by private entities rather than the federal government.      Insurance companies and gun safety advocacy groups should aim to approach both Republican representatives who have voted for gun safety bills in the past and Democratic representatives who are passionate about gun safety.Potential points of contact for sponsoring or supporting a bill include Representatives Maria Salazar (R-FL), Tony Gonzales (R- TX), Mike Thompson (D-CA), and Sylvia Garcia (D-TX), who have supported or initiated gun control initiatives in the past.12,13,14 Also, the House Judiciary and Oversight and Accountability Committees could be key actors in implementing this policy, having supported similar policies in the past.15,16After passing through the House of Representatives, the policy must pass through the Senate. While a conservative Senate may pose challenges for this policy, a 2021 bipartisan gun safety bill sponsored by Marco Rubio (R-FL) has been signed into law, strengthening many existing gun control policies.17      To gain support, companies that sell firearm insurance, such as Prime Insurance and Lockton Affinity Outdoors, should collaborate with gun safety advocacy groups to join in lobbying efforts and public awareness campaigns – including advertisements, social media postings, and public demonstrations to garner support for the policy. In these campaigns, insurance
companies and advocacy groups should not market this policy as a restriction on Second Amendment rights, but rather as a promotion of responsible firearm ownership to appeal to centrist and conservative Americans as well as gun control activists. Before pushing this policy to the federal level, these interest groups should target states that have been successful in the past with passing gun reforms, such as New York and California, to mandate firearm insurance statewide.      While there are concerns about this policy not being able to adequately mitigate gun violence, San Jose Mayor Sam Liccardo explains that gun liability insurance will incentivize safety measures that will address gun deaths as a public health issue and from a harm reduction standpoint.18 Success at local and state levels would provide useful data on the policy’s effectiveness for federal policymakers who may be on the fence. Policy research centers and state government agencies could compare gun death rates in the state before and after implementation, which researchers could use to determine the effectiveness of these policies. As the US faces comparably high gun death statistics, it is more important than ever to implement creative solutions to combat gun deaths. Placing a share of the responsibility on the private sector would be an effective way to promote safe gun ownership and use.Works Cited[1] Gramlich, John. “What the Data Says about Gun Deaths in the U.S.” Pew Research Center, April 26, 2023.https://www.pewresearch.org/short-
reads/2023/04/26/what-the-data- says-about-gun-deaths-in-the-u-s/.[2] Schaeffer, Katherine. “Key Facts about Americans and Guns.” Pew Research Center, July 24, 2024.https://www.pewresearch.org/short- reads/2024/07/24/key-facts-about- americans-and-guns/.[3] Hansen, Claire. “Federal Judge OKs Handgun Sales to 18-year- olds” U.S. News, May 11, 2023. https://www.usnews.com/news/nati onal-news/articles/2023-05- 11/federal-judge-oks-handgun- sales-to-18-year-olds.[4] Figueroa, Ariana. “U.S. Supreme Court Overturns Ban on Bump Stocks.” Washington State Standard, June 14, 2024. https://washingtonstatestandard.com/2024/06/14/u-s-supreme-court- overturns-ban-on-bump-stocks- used-in-las-vegas-mass-shooting/.[5] “Personal Firearm Liability Insurance.” Lockton Outdoor, November 8, 2024. https://locktonaffinityoutdoor.com/p ersonal-firearm-liability/.[6] Shniderman, Adam B. “Gun Insurance Mandates and the Second Amendment.” South Carolina Law Review, February 1, 2024. https://sclawreview.org/article/gun- insurance-mandates-and-the- second-amendment/[7] Horstman, Celli, and Corinne Lewis. “The Basics of Risk Adjustment.” The Commonwealth Fund, April 11, 2024.
https://www.commonwealthfund.or g/publications/explainer/2024/apr/b asics-risk-adjustment.[8] Masters, Jonathan. “U.S. Gun Policy: Global Comparisons.” Council on Foreign Relations, June 10, 2022.https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/u s-gun-policy-global- comparisons#chapter-title-0-3.[9] Hung, Kwing. “Firearm statistics - updated tables”, January 2006.https://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/rp- pr/csj-sjc/crime/rr06_2/rr06_2.pdf.[10] Toigo, Stephanie, Nathaniel J. Pollock, Li Liu, Gisèle Contreras, Steven R. McFaull, and Wendy Thompson. “Fatal and Non-Fatal Firearm-Related Injuries in Canada, 2016–2020: A Population-Based Study Using Three Administrative Databases.” Injury Epidemiology 10, no. 1 (February 14, 2023). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40621-023- 00422-z.[11] Bridges, F. Stephen. “Gun Control Law (Bill C-17), Suicide, and Homicide in Canada.” Psychological Reports 94, no. 3(June 2004): 819–26.https://doi.org/10.2466/pr0.94.3.819-826.[12] Wilson, Kristin, Annie Grayer, and Clare Foran. “These Are the 14 House Republicans Who Voted to Pass Federal Gun Safety Legislation” CNN, June 24, 2022. https://www.cnn.com/2022/06/24/p
olitics/house-republicans-gun- bill/index.html.[13] “Gun Violence Prevention.” Representative Mike Thompson, March 22, 2024. https://mikethompson.house.gov/iss ues/gun-violence-prevention.[14] “Gun Control.” Representative Sylvia Garcia, August 30, 2022. https://sylviagarcia.house.gov/issue s/gun-violence-prevention.[15] Macagnone, Michael. “House Judiciary Committee Advances Gun Control Ill.” Roll Call, June 3, 2022.https://rollcall.com/2022/06/02/hous e-judiciary-committee-debates-gun- control-bill-amid-recent-deadly- shootings/.[16] “Gun Control.” The Committee on Oversight and Accountability Democrats, January 31, 2024. https://oversightdemocrats.house.go v/investigations/gun-control.[17] Congress.gov. "Text - S.2938 - 117th Congress (2021-2022): Bipartisan Safer Communities Act." June 25, 2022.https://www.congress.gov/bill/117t h-congress/senate-bill/2938/text.[18] Martin, Michel. “San Jose Mayor: Gun Liability Insurance Law Will Alleviate Taxpayers, Promote Safety.” National Public Radio, January 29, 2022. https://www.npr.org/2022/01/29/10 76730054/san-jose-mayor-gun- liability-insurance-law-will- alleviate-tax-payers-promote-saf.[1] 
Cutting the Head off the Snake: Decentralizing the House of RepresentativesBy Cole Laudenslager, cdl83@cornell.eduTo decentralize power from the House of Representatives leadership while promoting bipartisanship and legislative productivity, the House should radically revise its rules through a novel rules package that places power in the hands of bipartisan committees.
Background      House leadership sets the legislative agenda primarily by deciding which items members can vote on. As such, modern legislative clogging stems from House Leadership’s reluctance to advance bills that lack saliency or anger intraparty minority factions.1      One instance of the saliency issue is Republican Congressman Greg Steube’s Federal Disaster Tax Relief Act, which would provide tax relief to natural disaster victims.2,3 After Speaker Mike Johnson failed to place Steube’s bill on the agenda, Steube forced a vote via discharge petition—a rarely used tactic whereby a House majority signs a petition to consider a bill immediately.4 While Steube’s bill would substantially affect millions of Americans, it lacked the salience of other popular issues such as immigration, foreign aid, and the economy prior to the focusing events of hurricanes Helene and Milton. For this reason and given negative partisanship, it was tabled by House leadership.5,6,7,8 Experts note that committee leadership follows this poor example and colludes with House leadership.9      The 118th Congress’ repeated battles with continuing resolutions highlight fringe minorities’ contributions to this inaction. Former Speaker Kevin
McCarthy was ousted for passing a bipartisan resolution, preventing a government shutdown despite sizable Republican opposition.10,11 Although the ouster was aided by loosened procedural rules, these rules themselves were the byproduct of threats against McCarthy by the Freedom Caucus, the most conservative caucus.12 Speaker Johnson faced similar pressures over continuing resolutions and his push for Ukraine aid.13,14 The Ukraine bill notably failed the Hastert Rule, stating that a majority of the majority party, should agree to a bill before being brought to the floor.15,16      This current system provides a target to be blamed, House leadership, who is discouraged from bringing bipartisan legislation to the floor by threats of retribution.Additionally, the diminished power of individual members prevents them from passing important bills lacking political saliency.Policy Idea      The House should pass a rules package that shifts agenda- setting powers from leadership to committees. It is desirable to give individual members more power, but not so much that the legislative process is abused. As such, committees are the primary focus of this proposal.      
First, committees would possess equal numbers of majority and minority party members. A bill would need to pass two 50% vote thresholds to (1) initiate the vetting process and (2) release the bill from the committee. If a bill is truly subpar, it would require bipartisan agreement to kill it in committee.      After being released, bills would automatically be placed on the House calendar in order of receipt, eliminating the primary source of leadership’s agenda- setting powers. Finally, the vote threshold for future rules package adjustments would be increased to a two-thirds majority, thus hindering future undoings of these reforms.Policy Analysis      Precedence for this proposal can be found both domestically and abroad. In the 1910s progressive Republicans, angered by the centralization and abuse of power under Speaker Joe Cannon, transferred agenda-setting powers from leadership to committees.17 The Rules Committee, controlling all aspects of the House floor, became bipartisan instead of possessing a majority party supermajority.18 This arrangement produced a record of bills passed and increased bipartisan interactions.19 The era of decentralized House rules largely ended when Democrats bypassed      
the aforementioned Rules Committee in the 1960s. Decentralization’s demise was finalized when the Democratic- majority House passed a rules package restoring centralization. This vote's narrow and partisan nature underscores the necessity of this proposed rules package’s supermajoritarian safeguard.20 This two-thirds majority requirement is based upon constitutional standards in cases where institutional resistance to change is desired, such as for impeachment convictions and constitutional amendments.21      Taiwan provides a foreign case study. In the late twentieth century, reforms equalized party representation and delegated power to individual members.22 There was a resulting increase in policymaking activity (including for matters previously lacking saliency) and a decrease in interparty antagonism.22 While the majority party’s agenda faced increased hardships, one could argue that was more a result of veto powers being handed to minority parties rather than changes in committee structure. Contrary to the Taiwanese reforms, this proposal does not negate popular mandate, with final bill votes requiring a simple majority immune from minority vetoes. Secondly, the initial strain on Taiwanese legislative and executive bureaucracies appears to have diminished in the decades since the reform.23 The proposed rules package counters possible inefficiencies through leadership’s ability to enact closed rules, bypassing the amendment process.24      One could argue the automated agenda placement of bills is unnecessary as discharge petitions already exist. However,
these petitions are inefficient due to their tedious requirements.25Highlightsï The current House leadership structure disincentivizes bipartisanship, fails to promote important bills lacking political saliency, and holds the Speaker hostage to intraparty minorities.1,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16ï A rules package should be implemented that makes committees more bipartisan, eliminates leadership’s formal agenda-setting powers via the automatic placement of bills on the agenda, and mandates a supermajority’s approval to implement rules changes.ï Case studies of the 20th- century House of Representatives and Taiwan’s Legislative Yuan showcase the potential of this policy to bolster legislative productivity and promote bipartisanship.17,18,19,22,23Implementation      The primary weakness of this proposal is its requirement for self-realization: actors outside of House leadership will need to incentivize leadership to cede their powers. The most likely impetus for such change is a continuation of current trends in which the House is gridlocked by the unproductive relationship between fringe minorities and helpless leadership, and the only solution is for leadership to free itself of its agenda-setting responsibilities. This phenomenon occurred in the
previously mentioned Taiwanese Yuan, where their reforms were the byproduct of frustrations over legislative inefficiencies.22      Referring back to the 20th- century House of Representatives case study, progressive Republicans were able to decentralize the House by collaborating with Democrats to strip the Speaker of their power.17 It is necessary to gain support from the opposition party, as those in the majority who voted for the leadership team are less likely to strip power from their preferred candidates. The modern equivalent to these irate progressive Republicans would be the Freedom Caucus, suggesting they could instigate similar changes. However, the differentiating factor between these two groups is that the Freedom Caucus seeks to reshape leadership in its image as opposed to the progressive Republicans’ desire to decentralize power.17,26 Additionally, the Freedom Caucus is averse to collaborating with Republicans, let alone Democrats; this reluctance to cooperate promoted the caucus’ ouster of Speaker McCarthy.27 As established earlier, collaboration with the opposing party is a necessary condition for this policy’s implementation.      One possible incentive for this rules package could be voter backlash to congressional dysfunction. Polling by Gallup shows decreases in congressional approval ratings amid Kevin McCarthy’s ouster (October 2023) and during Marjorie Taylor Greene’s ouster attempt (May 2023).28 Voters’ negative perceptions of the institution are correlated with when fringe factions prevent leadership from putting forward bipartisan bills.28 If one of      
these transgressions were near an election, especially one with close races, it could sway voters to reject the party in power. The opposing political party would likely highlight congressional inefficiency and provide an impetus for the majority party to maintain order within the House.      Considering all these factors, it will be extremely difficult to implement this policy under current political conditions due to institutional resistance. There also appear to be no outside organizations currently focusing on this issue; instead, they are advocating for their policy preferences under the existing legislative framework. As such, the most likely source of change is from within the House. If a new group such as the progressive Republicans of the 20th-century forms, leadership could be pressured to enact these much- needed reforms.Works Cited[1] Quorum Analytics. “115th Congress First Session in Review: Legislative Activity and Trends in Dialogue.” Accessed November 13, 2024. https://quorum- media.s3.amazonaws.com/media/bl og/115thCongressFirstSessionRevie w_Quorum.pdf.[2] Congress.gov. “H.R.5863 – 118th Congress (2023-2024): Federal Disaster Tax Relief Act of 2023.” May 22, 2024.https://www.congress.gov/bill/118t h-congress/house-bill/5863.[3] Steube, Greg. “Opinion: My Bill Would Help Floridians Recover from Storms. But DC Democrats Don’t Care.” Sarasota Herald- Tribune, October 4, 2024. https://www.heraldtribune.com/stor y/opinion/columns/guest/2024/10/0
4/opinion-senate-must-act-on- steubes-bill-to-help-storm-victims- helene-ian-schumer/75407047007/.[4] Hulse, Carl. “Lawmakers Make End Run Around Speaker Johnson on Disaster Bill.” The New York Times, May 17, 2024, sec. U.S. https://www.nytimes.com/2024/05/ 17/us/house-discharge-petition- disaster-relief.html.[5] Rumbach, Andrew, and Sara McTarnaghan. “More Than 3 Million Americans Were Displaced by a ‘Natural’ Disaster in the Past Year. How Can We Prepare for Our Climate Future?” Urban Institute, November 15, 2023. https://www.urban.org/urban- wire/more-3-million-americans- were-displaced-natural-disaster- past-year-how-can-we-prepare.[6] Gallup Inc. “Most Important Problem,” 2024. https://news.gallup.com/poll/1675/ Most-Important-Problem.aspx.[7] Leddy, Maureen. “House Passes Disaster Tax Relief Bill.” Thomson Reuters Tax & Accounting News, May 23, 2024.https://tax.thomsonreuters.com/new s/house-passes-disaster-tax-relief- bill/.[8] Blue, Alexis. “The Rise of Negative Partisanship and How It Drives Voters.” The University of Arizona, October 21, 2020. https://news.arizona.edu/news/rise- negative-partisanship-and-how-it- drives-voters.[9] Kelly, Erin. “RURAL Act: Why Popular, Bipartisan Legislation Can Face Hurdles in Congress.” Cooperative.com, November 25,2019.https://www.cooperative.com/news/ Pages/rural-act-why-popular- bipartisan-legislation-faces-hurdles- in-congress.aspx.[10] Mascaro, Lisa, and Farnoush Amiri. “Speaker McCarthy Ousted
in Historic House Vote, as Scramble Begins for a RepublicanLeader.” AP News, October 3, 2023. https://apnews.com/article/mccarthy-gaetz-speaker-motion-to-vacate- congress- 327e294a39f8de079ef5e4abfb1fa55 5.[11] Hulse, Carl, and Catie Edmondson. “Congress Narrowly Averts Shutdown as House Democrats Help Pass Stopgap Bill.” The New York Times, September 30, 2023.https://www.nytimes.com/2023/09/ 30/us/politics/government- shutdown-house-republicans.html.[12] Binder, Sarah. “McCarthy Paid a Steep Price for His Speakership— Now What?” Brookings, January 10, 2023.https://www.brookings.edu/articles/ mccarthy-paid-a-steep-price-for- his-speakership-now-what/.[13] Edmondson, Catie. “Hemmed In by the Hard Right, Johnson Again Turns to Democrats for Votes.” The New York Times, September 24, 2024. https://www.nytimes.com/2024/09/ 24/us/politics/johnson-spending- democrats-republicans.html.[14] Grayer, Annie, Melanie Zanona, and Manu Raju. “How Johnson Came to Embrace Ukraine Aid and Defy His Right Flank.” CNN, April 21, 2024.https://www.cnn.com/2024/04/21/p olitics/ukraine-aid-mike-johnson- house-speaker-israel- taiwan/index.html.[15] Perry, Kati, Hannah Dormido, Dylan Moriarty, Kevin Uhrmacher, and Adrián Blanco. “How Every House Member Voted on Aid to Ukraine, Israel and More.” The Washington Post, April 20, 2024. https://www.washingtonpost.com/p olitics/interactive/2024/04/20/ukrai[1] 
ne-israel-border-funding-house- vote/?itid=lk_inline_manual_34.[16] Strand, Mark, and Tim Lang. “The Hastert Rule.” Congressional Institute, July 17, 2013. https://www.congressionalinstitute. org/2013/07/17/the-hastert-rule/.[17] Drutman, Lee. “There Are Many Ways to Organize a House of Representatives. Not All Involve a Powerful Speaker.” New America (blog), October 25, 2023. http://newamerica.org/political- reform/blog/there-are-many-ways- to-organize-a-house-of- representatives-not-all-involve-a- powerful-speaker/.[18] House of Representatives Committee on Rules. “About,” December 19, 2013. http://rules.house.gov/about.[19] Huder, Josh. “Our Very Unproductive Congress.” The Government Affairs Institute at Georgetown University, n.d. https://gai.georgetown.edu/our- very-unproductive-congress/.[20] Glass, Andrew. “House Increases Size of the Rules
Committee, Jan. 31, 1961.”Politico, January 31, 2018. https://www.politico.com/story/201 8/01/31/house-increases-size-of- the-rules-committee-jan-31-1961- 373983.[21] Ballotpedia. “Supermajority.”Accessed November 19, 2024. https://ballotpedia.org/Supermajorit y.[22] Huang, Isaac Shih-hao, and Shing-yuan Sheng. “Rethinking the Decentralization of Legislative Organization and Its Implications for Policymaking: Evidence from Taiwan.” Government and Opposition 57, no. 2 (April 2022):318–35.https://doi.org/10.1017/gov.2020.20.[23] BTI Transformation Index. “Taiwan Country Report 2024,” 2024. https://bti- project.org/en/reports/country- report?isocode=TWN&cHash=5617 b0df5babf8ef0791d8aa39ea8398.[24] House of Representatives Committee on Rules. “Special Rule Types,” April 10, 2019.
http://rules.house.gov/about/special- rule-types.[25] Wallach, Philip. “The Discharge Petition: Its History and Role in the 118th Congress.” American Enterprise Institute, April 29, 2024.https://www.aei.org/articles/the- discharge-petition-its-history-and- role-in-the-118th-congress/.[26] Rogers, Kaleigh. “The Freedom Caucus Was Designed To Disrupt.” FiveThirtyEight (blog), January 20, 2023. https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/t he-freedom-caucus-was-designed- to-disrupt/.[27] Beavers, Olivia, Jordain Carney, and Sarah Ferris. “House GOP Back in Familiar Pattern — Fury at the Freedom Caucus.” Politico, January 3, 2023. https://www.politico.com/news/202 3/01/03/house-gop-freedom-caucus- mccarthy-00076268.[28] Gallup Inc. “Congress and the Public.” Gallup.com, 2024. https://news.gallup.com/poll/1600/ Congress-Public.aspx.[1] 
Reducing Recidivism Rates Through Mandatory Rehabilitation ProgramsBy Pari Patel, pyp4@cornell.eduWhile prison rehabilitation programs have been proven to reduce recidivism rates, these programs are not compulsory for inmates and, therefore, mitigating the potential benefits the programs result in. Recidivism rates can be reduced by mandating participation in such programs.
Background      Recidivism refers to the rate at which released prisoners return to prison. The United States has an astonishingly high recidivism rate, with nearly 49.3% of federal offenders being rearrested over an eight-year period.1 Additionally, the stigma surrounding incarcerated individuals leaves released prisoners unable to secure employment and successfully rehabilitate into society, often leading them toward illicit activities.2      The high recidivism rate in the US is a consequence of its punitive rather than rehabilitation- based prison system.3 Prisoners are often stripped of their identity, lack a sense of community, and are exposed to an overly stressful and abhorrent environment that alters their mental health.4 Consequently, the lack of adequate social welfare support after incarceration can lead to incarceration.3 This vicious cycle of incarceration, release, and reoffense is compounded with racial and structural inequality. Black and Brown communities are more likely to be arrested due to stereotypes and unfair policing practices.5 This is further exacerbated by the generational discrimination and poverty minority communities face that add to the cycle structural inequality and incarceration.6      
Furthermore, the annual cost of incarceration for one inmate costs American taxpayers around$120.59 per day, making recidivism not only a social issue but also an economic challenge.7 Beyond these direct costs, recidivism also has macroeconomic consequences. For instance, recidivism is cited to decrease the US’s annual GDP by$65 billion a year due to the cost of housing inmates as well as the loss of productivity and tax revenue inmates would otherwise contribute to the economy.8 Additionally, this cost also does not include the economic and social cost incarceration has on families and communities.9 Reducing recidivism, therefore, is not just a criminal justice issue but also a critical economic and social priority.Policy Idea:      To help reduce recidivism rates and support released inmates, state policymakers should implement a policy requiring inmates to participate in an educational or vocational training program within the prison as a part of their sentence. Through these programs, prisoners can acquire marketable and valuable skills that can help them rehabilitate into society.10 Skills such as interview etiquette, resume building, and financial literacy can be taught to help inmates search for and secure
employment after their release. Furthermore, certification and vocational programs should be provided so inmates can access sustainable employment.Policy Analysis:      The current prison system is proving to be unsustainable, and rising recidivism rates add to the economic and social pressure to promote reform.10 Multiple studies demonstrate how educational and vocational programs directly reduce recidivism by decreasing criminogenic causes and alleviating financial burdens. A Research and Development Corporation (RAND) study finds that educational programs reduce recidivism by 13 percentage points.11 The study also showed that inmates who participated in educational programs were 43 percent less likely to recidivate than those who didn’t participate in the program.11 RAND drew upon also estimated that the educational programs would cost around $1,400 or $1,744 per inmate.11 Comparing this to the average annual cost of incarceration for an inmate being $42,672, educational programs prove to be the most cost-effective solution than incarceration.7 Furthermore, RAND has also estimated that in order for educational programs to be cost- effective and break even, the recidivism rate only needs to      
decrease between 1.9 and 2.6 percentage points, a relatively easy goal.11      Similar policies such as California’s Proposition 57 have successfully reduced recidivism.12 A component of Proposition 57 allows convictionsto utilize rehabilitation programs as a part of sentences.13 The California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation published a report that showed after the enactment of Proposition 57, recidivism decreased by 2.7 percent.14      Furthermore, this proposed policy requires inmates to participate in a rehabilitation program. Current programs do not require inmates to participate in these programs and exclude them from vital resources that provide life-long skills.14 However, if programs are incorporated into sentences, inmates would be required to attend programs and leverage rehabilitation resources. Through this initiative, issues such as mental health disparities and financial illiteracy can be addressed while reducing criminogenic activities after release.Highlights:ï Recidivism is not only a product of social inequality but is also a catalyst in driving inequality further. Structural inequalities and generational issues compounded with improper rehabilitation mechanisms further exacerbate criminogenic behaviors and environments.ï High recidivism rates are not just a social justice issue; it is also an economic issue. Taxpayers spend$120.59 per day per inmate,
amounting to over $60 billion total on prisons.8,16ï Prisoners who engage in rehabilitation programs are 43% less likely to re-offend after release.15 These programs directly reduce criminogenic behaviors and causes by providing social safety nets, ultimately fostering safer communities and breaking cycles of crime that burden individuals, families, and society as a whole.ï Rehabilitation programs are also better economically: they cost around $1,400 per inmate to implement these programs, which is considerably cheaper than the annual cost of incarcerating one inmate.11Implementation:      The implementation of such criminal justice reform would require cooperation from all government levels. Currently, 91% of the nation’s incarcerated population is in local and state prison systems.17 This points to the bulk of programs that need to be concentrated at the local and state level to target the largest incarcerated population. State legislatures can pass criminal reform legislation that focuses on rehabilitation rather than punishment within the state prison system, which states can determine individually either through reallocating budgets or raising taxes. States can also apply for federal funding programs that incentivize criminal justice reform. Federal legislation, such as grant programs through the Department of Justice, can provide financial resources to states implementing evidence-based rehabilitation
programs. Federal incentives could also reward states for reducing recidivism rates and prison populations. Pilot programs and phased implementation of programs would also need to be implemented to identify key metrics, such as long-term effects on employment for incarcerated individuals, and issues to ensure efficiency and scalability. Local and state justice departments would run these programs.      Policymakers should also leverage the various non-profits and social justice institutions that can be included in implementing rehabilitation programs.Community outreach groups can reduce criminogenic activity by providing social safety nets for adults and children.18 Additionally, higher education institutions such as community colleges and universities can be utilized to provide support through programs. Cornell University’s Cornell Prison Education Program (CPEP) is one example of how academic institutions can provide for their community.19 Meta-analysis of inmates who participated in CPEP found that individuals who participated in two or fewer courses have a seven percent recidivism rate, while individuals who complete an associate’s degree have a zero percent recidivism rate.20      To gain support from conservative legislatures, reform advocates can frame rehabilitation programs as fiscally responsible measures that reduce the economic burden of incarceration.Highlighting the long-term cost savings associated with lower recidivism rates. Programs can also utilize volunteers and community spaces to offset costs. Ideological opposition may arise from those
who view rehabilitation as lenient, but this concern can be addressed by phasing in programs gradually and initially targeting non-violent offenders.Works Cited[1] “Recidivism of Federal Offenders Released in 2010.” 2022. United States Sentencing Commission. May 9, 2022. https://www.ussc.gov/research/rese arch-reports/recidivism-federal- offenders-released-2010.[2] Robinson, Gerard. 2021. “Prison Education Can Help Rebuild the Economy.” American Enterprise Institute. July 21, 2021. AccessedNovember 6, 2024. https://www.aei.org/society-and- culture/prison-education-can-help- rebuild-the-economy/.[3] “A Second Chance: The Impact of Unsuccessful Reentry and the Need for Reintegration Resources in Communities.” n.d. https://cops.usdoj.gov/html/dispatch/04-2022/reintegration_resources.html.[4] Haney, Craig. 2001. “The Psychological Impact of Incarceration: Implications for Post- Prison Adjustment.” National Policy Conference. https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default/fil es/migrated_legacy_files/42351/Ha ney.pdf.[5] NAACP. 2022. “Criminal Justice Fact Sheet.” November 4, 2022.https://naacp.org/resources/criminal-justice-fact-sheet.[6] Pettit, Becky, and Carmen Gutierrez. 2018. “Mass Incarceration and Racial Inequality.” American Journal of Economics and Sociology 77 (3–4):1153–82.https://doi.org/10.1111/ajes.12241.[7] 
“Annual Determination of Average Cost of Incarceration Fee (COIF).” 2021. Federal Register. September 1, 2021. https://www.federalregister.gov/doc uments/2021/09/01/2021- 18800/annual-determination-of- average-cost-of-incarceration-fee- coif.[8] Muresianu, Alex. 2018. “Criminal Justice Reform Is Also Good Economics.” Foundation for Economic Education. August 16, 2018. Accessed November 6, 2024. https://fee.org/articles/criminal- justice-reform-is-also-good- economics/#:~:text=According%20t o%20the%20Center%20for,labor% 20force%2C%20boost%20the%20e conomy.[9] McLaughlin, Michael, Carrie Pettus-Davis, Derek Brown, Chris Veeh, Tanya Renn, Institute for Justice Research and Development, Florida State University, The University of Iowa, and Washington University in St. Louis. n.d. “The Economic Burden of Incarceration in the United States.” https://ijrd.csw.fsu.edu/sites/g/files/ upcbnu1766/files/media/images/pub lication_pdfs/Economic_Burden_of_Incarceration_IJRD072016_0_0.p df.[10] “It’s Time To Expand and Reform the Prison-Based Workforce Development System.” 2024. April 26, 2024.https://www.nawb.org/its-time-to- expand-and-reform-the-prison- based-workforce-development- system#:~:text=Evidence%20shows%20that%20incarcerated%20indivi duals,first%20year%20of%20being%20released.[11] Davis, Lois M., Jennifer L. Steele, Robert Bozick, Malcolm Williams V, Susan Turner, JeremyN. Miles V, Jessica Saunders, and Paul S. Steinberg. 2014. “How
Effective Is Correctional Education, and Where Do We Go From Here?: The Results of a Comprehensive Evaluation.” March 18, 2014: 17-18.https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR564.html.[12] Prison Policy Initaitve n.d. “Education.” Prison Policy Initiative. https://www.prisonpolicy.org/resear ch/education/#:~:text=Evaluating% 20the%20Effectiveness%20of%20 Correctional,and%20the%20odds% 20of%20obtaining.[13] California Budget & Policy Center. 2024. “Understanding Proposition 57.” California Budget and Policy Center. October 3, 2024. https://calbudgetcenter.org/resource s/understanding-proposition-57/.[14] Tessaouthyse. 2024. “CDCR Recidivism Report Finds Recidivism Rates Drop - News Releases.” News Releases. February 13, 2024.https://www.cdcr.ca.gov/news/2024/02/13/cdcr-recidivism-report-finds- recidivism-rates-drop-2/.[15] The Boston Consulting Group. 2016. “Reducing Recidivism Through Programming in the Federal Prison Population in the Federal Prison Population FINAL REPORT: BOP Programs Assessment.” Department of Justice. Accessed November 6, 2024.https://www.justice.gov/dag/page/fi le/914031/dl?inline.[16] Zoukis, Christopher, 2024. “The Cost of Recidivism: Victims, the Economy, and American Prisons.” Zoukis Consulting Group. July 10, 2024.https://federalcriminaldefenseattorn ey.com/cost-recidivism-victims- economy-american-prisons/.[17] “A Federal Agenda for Criminal Justice Reform.” 2023.[1] 
Brennan Center for Justice. October 24, 2023.https://www.brennancenter.org/our- work/policy-solutions/federal- agenda-criminal-justice-reform [18]“Beyond Jails: Community- Based Strategies for Public Safety.” 2022. Vera Institute of Justice. May 13, 2022.
https://www.vera.org/beyond-jails- community-based-strategies-for- public-safety.[19] “Cornell Prison Education Program.” n.d. Cornell University. https://experience.cornell.edu/oppor tunities/cornell-prison-education- program.[20] 
Goodrick, Amanda. 2024. “Reversing the Tide.” Bard Prison Initiative. September 11, 2024. https://bpi.bard.edu/news- stories/stories/reversing-the- tide/#:~:text=Recidivism%20rates% 20for%20prisoners%20who,to%20c omplete%20an%20associate's%20d egree.[19] 
Banning Checkpoint Stops to Reduce Racial Profiling and Enhance PrivacyBy Avery Prince, asp256@cornell.eduNew York State should place a ban on checkpoint stops to protect the Fourth Amendment rights of drivers and prevent police discrimination against minority groups.
Background      Police set up checkpoint stops at predetermined locations where drivers who pass through are briefly stopped and questioned.1 Officers may stop any vehicle passing through the checkpoint but must follow systematic and impartial procedures, such as stopping every third vehicle, to ensure objectivity.2 These stops must be highly visible and are often publicized through billboards, radio announcements, and newspaper articles. While checkpoint stops are often brief, some result in searches or further questioning from the police, raising concerns about breaches of individual rights and privacy. The Fourth Amendment protects citizens against unreasonable search and seizure, which had its application to checkpoint stops debated in Michigan Department of State Police v. Sitz (1990), where the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of checkpoint stops.3 After this decision, checkpoint stops were determined unconstitutional in the Michigan, effectively banning their use within the state.3      Checkpoint stops set in specific areas can also lead to a disproportionate racial makeup of drivers stopped, as shown by the Department of Justice (DOJ) investigation into North Carolina’s Alamance County Sheriff’s Office.4
This investigation found that officers repeatedly selected predominantly Latino neighborhoods to set up checkpoint stops and were four to ten times more likely to stop Latino drivers than non-Latino drivers.4 Officers conducting these stops pulled over many Latino drivers without a specific cause, such as reasonable suspicion or a traffic violation, leading officers to question drivers and sometimes search vehicles after stopping them. Similarly, researchers found that New York Police Department (NYPD) checkpoints accounted for 12.1% of stops involving Native drivers, 10.9% involving Asian American and Pacific Islander drivers, 8.4% involving Black drivers, and 8.4% of stops involving Latino drivers. In contrast, only 6.5% of stops involved White drivers.5Policy Idea      New York State should issue a ban on checkpoint stops. Once the ban is implemented, sheriffs would have six months to stop using checkpoints completely. Under the ban, sheriff’s departments and police officers would be required to have a specific cause to make a stop, such as reasonable suspicion or traffic violations like speeding or a broken tail light.      The New York State Division of Criminal Justice
Services would work with sheriffs and police officers to reallocate resources that were previously used for checkpoints to other methods including saturation patrols and other related measures.6 The New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services would also train sheriffs and police officers to report key information about each stop, including the reason the driver was pulled over.Policy Analysis      A ban on checkpoints would reduce racial discrepancies in policing by eliminating a policing method that often targets Latino and Black communities.7,8 Based on the research of several cities in California, checkpoints are often placed outside of Latino communities, leading to disproportionate arrests of Latinos and over-policing of Latino communities.7 Research in Chicago showed that checkpoints similarly target Black and Latino communities, resulting in nearly 20 unrelated citations per drunk driver arrested.8 Banning checkpoints would decrease disproportionate policing of Black and Latino neighborhoods, encouraging other police methods that do not over police Black and Latino communities.      While checkpoint stops may produce some social benefits, it is important to consider the costs      
incurred. These stops are effective at decreasing alcohol-related crashes, but they are extremely costly.2 Typical checkpoints use 15 or more officers and cost between$5,000 and $7,000.2 Instead, police can use alternative methods with similarly effective reduction in driving under the influence.6 Although evidence for the effectiveness of saturation patrols in reducing alcohol-impaired driving is less established than for checkpoints, saturation patrols are frequently used by state patrols and local police departments along with other strategies.9 Combined, these methods are associated with a reduction in alcohol-impaired driving while operating at a lower cost.9 The main costs of saturation patrols are time and publicity, such as billboards and advertisements that promote awareness of the patrol, which are flexible in price depending on the resources of the department implementing them.6 Prior research on checkpoint stops has also cited saturation patrols as a similar yet more sensible alternative, lending an ethos to saturation patrols of inspiring public trust.10Highlightsï Checkpoint stops raise concerns of racial profiling and privacy violations, shown by research into California and North Carolina cities showing disproportionate placement of checkpoints outside of Latino communities.4,7ï Running checkpoint stops requires a lot of police resources that could instead be used for other tested anti- impaired driving methods
that would more fairly protect communities.2,6ï Placing a ban on checkpoint stops and utilizing saturation patrols and related measures would protect Fourth Amendment rights, ensuring stops are based on a specific cause and reducing racial disparities in traffic stops.Implementation      To ban checkpoints in the state of New York, the New York legislature would introduce a bill to ban checkpoint stops. Under this policy, sheriff departments would be required to have a specific cause to make a stop and The New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services would train officers to document key information about the stop, such as why the driver was pulled over. These measures protect privacy and increase transparency in law enforcement practices.      Upon transitioning away from checkpoint stops, the New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services would instruct sheriffs on implementing saturation patrols and other methods and reassigning officers from checkpoints.11 Redirecting funds from checkpoints would allow flexibility in spending on traffic enforcement and areas with different needs to implement less costly methods based on their needs. Training for saturation patrols takes roughly three months, which would give law enforcement time to implement substitute methods within the required time frame.6 Saturation patrols combined with other measures are proven to be effective in deterring drunk driving and reducing alcohol- impaired driving by 18-40%.6,9 If resources are properly allocated,
banning checkpoint stops should reduce spending for sheriff’s departments while maintaining a low rate of drunk driving and accidents.      Based on similar policies in other states and preliminary research on checkpoint stops, adopting this policy in New York would garner support that would help secure its implementation.Several states already prohibit checkpoint stops based on violations of their state constitution or law.2 In Michigan, checkpoints were deemed generally ineffective.3 Checkpoints also use a significant number of resources and police attention that could be used for other methods.2 This policy would gain bipartisan support as a cost- saving method that effectively repurposes police resources. A typical checkpoint with fifteen or more officers can cost $5,000 to$7,000, along with media publicity costs of publicity through paid media such as road signs and advertisements.11 Rather than spending these funds on checkpoints and publicity, officers could be trained for other methods, such as saturation patrols that have flexible costs based on the number of officers participating.6      Additionally, the increased police transparency as a result of this ban aligns with the platforms of organizations such as Communities United for Police Reform, Make the Road New York, and the New York Civil Liberties Union.Organizations like Communities United for Police Reform can publish articles and generate public support for legislation similar to a ban on checkpoints and could similarly advocate for this policy. Evidence of racial discrepancies in checkpoint stops would help gain
the support of these organizations, who could advocate for the bill to pass in the New York legislature. Representatives such as Bill Magnarelli, the chair of the transportation committee, have a history of supporting police transparency efforts and could help lead advocacy for a ban on checkpoints. Additionally, the New York legislature has historically passed bills with similar causes, with the current assembly generally representative of similar ideals.Works Cited[1] Fell, James C., Susan A. Ferguson, Allan F. Williams, and Michele Fields. “Why Are Sobriety Checkpoints Not Widely Adopted as an Enforcement Strategy in the United States?” Accident Analysis & Prevention 35, no. 6 (November1, 2003): 897–902.https://doi.org/10.1016/S0001- 4575(02)00097-0.[2] “Publicized Sobriety Checkpoints” National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 2023.https://www.nhtsa.gov/book/counte rmeasures-that-work/alcohol- impaired- driving/countermeasures/enforceme nt/publicized-sobriety-checkpoints.[3] Tracy A. McCloskey, "Michigan Constitutional Law--A Sobriety Checkpoint Program That Seizes Automobiles on a Public Highway in the State of Michigan without Suspicion Violates Article 1, Section 11 of the Michigan
Constitution," University of Detroit Mercy Law Review 71, no. 4(Summer 1994): 1095-1110.https://heinonline.org/HOL/P?h=hei n.journals/udetmr71&i=1107.[4] “Justice Department Releases Investigative Findings on the Alamance County, N.C., Sheriff’s Office,” U.S. Department of Justice, Sep. 18, 2012.https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justi ce-department-releases- investigative-findings-alamance- county-nc-sheriff-s-office.[5] “NYPD Traffic Stops Data,” New York Civil Liberties Union, Jul. 11, 2024.https://www.nyclu.org/data/nypd- traffic-stops-data#checkpoint.[6] “High-Visibility Saturation Patrols” National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 2023. https://www.nhtsa.gov/book/counte rmeasures-that-work/alcohol- impaired- driving/countermeasures/enforceme nt/high-visibility-saturation-patrols.[7] Peraza, Humberto, Jr. “Over the Legal Limit: How Race Influences DUI Checkpoint Location in Latino Neighborhoods.” Order No. 10639588, San Diego State University, 2017. https://www.proquest.com/dissertati ons-theses/over-legal-limit-how- race-influences- dui/docview/1986801778/se-2.[8] Caputo, Angela. “Chicago Police Sobriety Checkpoints Target Black, Latino Neighborhoods.” Chicago Tribune (blog), May 8, 2015.
https://www.chicagotribune.com/20 15/05/08/chicago-police-sobriety- checkpoints-target-black-latino- neighborhoods/.[9] Sanem, Julia R., Darin J. Erickson, Patricia C. Rutledge, Kathleen M. Lenk, Toben F. Nelson, Rhonda Jones-Webb, and Traci L. Toomey. “Association between Alcohol-Impaired Driving Enforcement-Related Strategies and Alcohol-Impaired Driving.” Accident Analysis & Prevention 78 (2015): 104–109.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2015.0 2.018.[10] Vissing, Jacob. “Note: Preserving Liberty While Increasing Safety: Why Indiana Should Outlaw Sobriety Checkpoints.” Indiana Law Review 48 (2015): 1089. https://advance.lexis.com/api/docu ment?collection=analytical- materials&id=urn%3acontentItem% 3a5G5V-74J0-00CV-F01P-00000-00&context=1519360&identityprofi leid=QQTRN251671.[11] NYS Division of Criminal Justice Services. “New York Police and Peace Officer Training.” http://www.criminaljustice.ny.gov/o ps/training/.[12] Rubalcaba, Joaquin Alfredo- Angel, Alberto Ortega, and PrentissA. Dantzler. “DOJ Intervention and the Checkpoint Shift: Profiling Hispanic Motorists under the Section 287(g) Program.” AEA Papers and Proceedings 114 (2024): 546–49.https://doi.org/10.1257/pandp.2024 1132.
Family First: A Call for Mandatory Paid Family LeaveBy Emily Snider, ems459@cornell.eduThe United States should enact a federal, mandatory paid family leave policy to strengthen its economy, improve public health, and promote equity.
Background      The United States remains the only high-income country without a national paid parental leave policy, despite strong evidence linking paid leave to improved health outcomes for parents and children.1 The Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) is the only federal leave policy, offering up to 12 weeks of unpaid, job-protected leave yearly for eligible employees.2 This leave can cover childbirth, adoption, care for immediate family members with serious health conditions, and personal medical leave for a serious health condition.2 The FMLA’s eligibility criteria include that employees must have at least 12 months of tenure, have worked at least 1,250 hours over the past year, and be employed by companies with 50 or more employees within a 75-mile radius.2      Beyond this federal policy, some states have implemented unique paid family leave policies. Thirteen states and Washington,D.C. have enacted mandatory paid family leave, and nine states have voluntary policies using private health insurance.3 In most states with mandatory leave laws, the policies are funded through social insurance payroll taxes levied on employees and employers.3 Furthermore, employees can buy paid family insurance in some states with voluntary policies.3 New York
is an exception, where employees must purchase paid leave plans through private insurers.3 Parental leave laws across the U.S. are inconsistent, leaving many families without sufficient support.Policy Idea      The U.S. should adopt a federal paid family leave policy with FMLA’s eligibility standards. The funding model would align with President Biden’s past proposals that use Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) as the administration tool, with the benefits funded through a payroll tax. The tax required would be a minimal 0.62% payroll tax split between employers and employees, according to Social Security actuaries.4 To ensure equitable access, benefits would be progressive, with low-income workers who earn minimum wage, receiving close to full wage replacement while on leave.Policy Analysis      Paid family leave policies have positive economic, health, and equity implications. Economically, such policies stabilize incomes, reducing the need for employees to choose between job security and family needs.5 Paid leave improves employee retention, cutting turnover costs (estimated at 21% of an employee’s annual salary).5 90% of companies with paid leave report
neutral to positive effects on productivity and morale.1 In the UK, companies with paid leave were 60% more likely to report better financial performance.1      Paid leave enhances women’s labor force participation, enabling them to remain in roles where they have built valuable skills, boosting productivity.5 It also correlates with improved maternal and child health. In low to middle- income countries, each month of paid maternity leave decreases infant mortality by approximately 13%.1 In Norway, children of parents with extended leave exhibit better cognitive development, and are likelier to attain university degrees and earn higher wages.1      The current FMLA disproportionately benefits wealthier workers because it guarantees only unpaid leave. Half of eligible workers cannot afford unpaid family leave, and two-thirds of those who take it, report subsequent financial strain.6 Paid leave improves access across socioeconomic groups. For example, California’s paid leave law has particularly benefited minority women, less-educated workers, and single mothers.5 Maternity leave usage doubled, and mothers with young children increased their work hours by 6– 9%, with corresponding wage gains.7          
      The equity implications are significant as paid family leave prevents bankruptcies for 25% of dual-income and 13% of single- parent families (predominantly single mothers) missing two or more weeks of work due to illness.5 It also reduces reliance on public assistance, as women returning from paid leave are 40% less likely to need welfare within a year of giving birth.5 Paid leave would provide underserved populations with essential support for their health and financial stability.Highlightsï The U.S. is the only high- income country without a mandatory paid parental leave policy despite evidence of its substantial health benefits, for families, including improved maternal and child well- being.1ï Current federal protections under the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) provide unpaid leave, leaving low-income families without adequate support. Beyond this policy, some states have adopted their own paid leave policies.2,3ï A mandatory federal paid family leave policy, funded by the Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI), would foster economic and health benefits while promoting equity.ï This policy would stabilize incomes, enhance employee retention, improve productivity, and increase women’s labor force participation.5 Additionally, it would improve access to underserved groups, like
minority women and single mothers, helping to prevent bankruptcies and reduce reliance on public assistance.5Implementation      Funding this mandatory leave program would be straightforward, modeled after existing Social Security benefits with a 0.62% payroll tax split between employers and employees.4 Low-income workers would receive near full wage replacement to ensure equitable access, similarly to how many state programs currently operate. Typically, Republican lawmakers oppose tax increases; however, this proposed increase is minimal, and the resulting economic benefits far outweigh its modest impact.8 Additionally, maintaining the current eligibility requirements under the FMLA would strengthen political support for this policy, as the established guidelines have already garnered approval through their successful implementation.      The SSDI falls under the jurisdiction of the Social Security Administration (SSA) within the executive branch, but any changes require Congress to pass a federal law. Although bipartisan support exists for a policy like this one, legislative advocacy and public awareness are essential.9 The House and Senate Bipartisan Paid Family Leave Working Groups should expand outreach to more legislatures to secure broader support.9 Educating businesses and individuals on the policy’s shared positive impacts can alleviate concerns about payroll taxes. Once Congress passes this policy, it could be enacted and funded in the next
fiscal year through minor tax adjustments.      Effective implementation requires widespread workforce awareness. Currently, many eligible employees remain unaware of state- level benefits, especially among marginalized groups. Five years after California’s paid family leave program began, less than half of eligible workers knew about it, with even lower awareness among low- wage workers, immigrants, Latinos, and those without a high school diploma.10 Outreach should focus on social media campaigns to maximize awareness and involve employers, healthcare providers, community organizations, and government agencies.4 Medical providers can play a pivotal role by informing patients directly about eligibility.4 Overall, this federal mandatory paid leave policy, funded through the SSDI with a progressive structure, would provide substantial benefits to individuals, businesses, and the economy, with successful implementation relying on bipartisan support, public awareness efforts, and targeted outreach to marginalized groups.Works Cited[1] Wallace, Kelly. 2017. “Paid leave: What’s the right amount of time?” CNN. https://www.cnn.com/2017/06/29/h ealth/paid-leave-how-much-time- enough/index.html.[2] “Family and Medical Leave (FMLA).” n.d. U.S. Department of Labor. Accessed November 6, 2024.https://www.dol.gov/general/topic/b enefits-leave/fmla.[3] “State Paid Family Leave Laws Across the U.S.” 2024. Bipartisan Policy Center.[1] 
https://bipartisanpolicy.org/explaine r/state-paid-family-leave-laws- across-the-u-s/.[4] Romig, Kathleen, and Kathleen Bryant. 2021. “A National Paid Leave Program Would Help Workers, Families.” Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. https://www.cbpp.org/research/econ omy/a-national-paid-leave- program-would-help-workers- families#_ftn64.[5] “The Economic Benefits of Paid Leave: Fact Sheet.” n.d. Joint Economic Committee. Accessed November 6, 2024. https://www.jec.senate.gov/public/_ cache/files/646d2340-dcd4-4614- ada9-be5b1c3f445c/jec-fact-sheet--- economic-benefits-of-paid- leave.pdf.[6] 
Center for American Progress and the National Partnership for Women & Families. 2014. “Key Features of a Paid Family and Medical Leave Program that Meets the Needs of Working Families.” American Progress. https://www.americanprogress.org/a rticle/real-family-values-paid- family-leave/.[7] Rossin-Slater, Maya, Christopher Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel. 2011. “The Effects of California’s Paid Family Leave Program on Mothers’ Leave-Taking and Subsequent Labor Market Outcomes.” The Institute for the Study of Labor. https://docs.iza.org/dp6240.pdf.[8] Newport, Frank. 2024. “Where Americans Stand on Taxes.” Gallup News.
https://news.gallup.com/opinion/pol ling-matters/652151/americans- stand-taxes.aspx.[9] Antonioli, Justis. 2024. “Bipartisan Momentum on Paid Family Leave Policy in the 118th Congress.” Bipartisan Policy Center. https://bipartisanpolicy.org/blog/bip artisan-momentum-on-paid-family- leave-policy-in-the-118th- congress/.[10] Goodman, Julia M., Holly Elser, and William H. Dow. 2020. “Expand and Simplify To Reach Low-Income Workers with Paid Family Leave Policies.” Berkeley Population Sciences. https://www.populationsciences.ber keley.edu/sites/default/files/SF_Pai d_Parental_Leave_UC- Berkeley_Issue_Brief_3_0.pdf.[1] 
Guaranteeing Flexibility for Employees on Election DayBy Samuel Stille, ss3787@cornell.eduTo augment voter participation, the federal government should designate Election Day as a national holiday and mandate paid voting leave for workers.
Background      High voter turnout is the linchpin of any flourishing democracy, and failure to provide all American voters with flexible voting options compromises it.These options can include vote-by- mail, expanded early voting initiatives, and extended polling hours on Election Day. To improve our democratic system, the government must cultivate an electoral framework that accommodates the diverse needs of its electorate.      As of 2022, 21 states had no laws providing workers with time off to vote, while an additional 6 states had statutes requiring leave for voting without accompanying payment.1 The lack of government involvement in promoting election participation leaves voters at the mercy of their employers. In states without paid leave, lower-income voters may deem the opportunity cost of voting to be higher than the benefit, opting instead to work an additional shift to accrue income.Furthermore, rapacious bosses in states without voter leave mandates may disregard their employees’ voting aspirations and assign them exigent work on Election Day.These phenomena contribute to the disparities in voter turnout rates between socioeconomic strata.      The 2016 presidential election illustrated socioeconomic disparities in voter turnout, with
only 46% of individuals with family incomes below twice the federal poverty line voting, in contrast to 68% of those whose incomes exceeded that threshold.2 Guaranteeing paid time off for workers would ensure that those living paycheck to paycheck have equal voting opportunities, helping bridge the divide in voter turnout between lower and higher-income individuals.Policy Idea      The federal government should create a federal holiday on Election Day. To offset any productivity loss from an additional federal holiday, Veterans Day could be moved from November 11th to coincide with national elections on the second Tuesday ofNovember.3 Finally, Congress should move to mandate a paid 3- hour leave period for workers on Election Day. In 2012, approximately 3.5 million voters endured queues exceeding an hour to cast their ballots, with minority voters being seven times more likely than white voters to encounter such delays.4 The 3-hour period would grant voters latitude in the event of distant polling sites or protracted wait times.Policy Analysis      The absence of federally mandated paid time off on Election Day places the onus of determining
paid voter leave policies on individual states and, ultimately, on employers—resulting in significant disparities in voter turnout between socioeconomic groups. In 2021, 45% of large companies and 55% of small companies afforded their employees paid time off to vote.4 Accordingly, potential voters— particularly those who depend on hourly pay—are often at the mercy of their employers on Election Day. By requiring paid leave nationally, the federal government would seize this discretion from corporations, allowing more of its constituents to access the ballot box. Paid voter leave is hardly a pioneering initiative, as numerous democratic regimes worldwide, including Mexico, Belgium, and Argentina, have implemented a similar policy with corollary increased turnout.5 Additionally, 14 states have already made Election Day a public holiday.6 However, a Princeton University study found that making Election Day a holiday does not significantly increase voter turnout, emphasizing the need to implement policies like paid leave in tandem with the holiday to effectively enhance participation.7      According to Census Bureau data, approximately 27% of nonvoters in the 2022 midterm elections did not vote due to scheduling incompatibility.8 While making Election Day a federal holiday and granting paid leave to      
frontline workers would not eradicate all scheduling problems, it would substantially reduce this barrier for many individuals, especially those in lower-income or hourly positions. Moreover, this policy would help level the playing field across socioeconomic groups, allowing more Americans to participate in the democratic process. Critics of efforts to make Election Day a national holiday often cite the costs, with some estimating a cost to taxpayers of $4 billion.9 However, this proposal remedies this issue by moving Veterans Day to Election Day, ensuring more federal holidays do not financially burden employers.Highlightsï The voting capabilities of many Americans are impeded by financial burdens and difficult working schedules, particularly in states without paid leave policies. In the 2016 presidential election, voter turnout was substantially lower among individuals with lower incomes, highlighting socioeconomic disparities in electoral participation.ï Establishing Election Day as a federal holiday and mandating paid voting leave would help level the playing field among voters across all demographics.ï By moving Veterans Day to Election Day, this policy would bear a net-zero cost and circumvent any productivity losses. Furthermore, the proposed policy aligns with practices in other democratic nations and would significantly
mitigate scheduling conflicts, facilitating greater participation in the electoral process.5Implementation      The initiative to mandate voter paid leave and create a national holiday on election day would require Congressional sponsorship. To successfully change a holiday’s date or add a new holiday to the Federal Register, Congress must pass a law approving the change.10 To lobby Congress to take action on this issue, extensive community support is necessary given the low likelihood of corporate involvement. Since 65% of US citizens agree with making Election Day a federal holiday, a grassroots campaign could fuel this issue’s legislative success.11 Building partnerships with established organizations such as the League of Women Voters, which has over 700 chapters across the country and has over 1 million members, would help corral support and amplify the campaign’s reach and credibility. They have a proven track record of advocating for enfranchisement efforts and supporting voter registration initiatives.12      Public opinion polls on paid voter leave policies are scant, and this aspect of the legislation would create more of an uphill battle.Likewise, a lack of polls would require galvanizing support from labor activists as well. Labor groups, in particular, may see paid voting leave as an extension of workers' rights and potentially frame it as essential for ensuring fair and democratic access to voting. Furthermore, implementing this initiative would require partnerships with Congressmen who
have demonstrated interest in voting rights issues. In 2024, Representative Anna Eshoo (CA- 16), for example, introduced the Election Day Holiday Act which aimed to make Election Day a federal holiday.13 Voter groups could partner with Representative Eshoo to include provisions to mandate federal paid leave across the US, citing the current obstacles for workers on Election Day. To move this idea through the legislative process, activists must build broad support across both sides of the aisle, especially from lawmakers who have championed labor rights and voting access in the past. Convincing Republicans to approve it would likely involve highlighting how the proposal would mitigate financial losses while boosting voter turnout. When meeting with conservative legislators, proponents of this legislation could emphasize the nonpartisan nature of it, as it will increase voter turnout for workers across partisan lines.Works Cited[1] Huddleston, Tom Jr. “A State- by-state Guide to Where You’re Guaranteed Paid Time Off for Voting—And Where You Aren’t.” CNBC. November 15, 2021. https://www.cnbc.com/2022/11/01/ us-states-where-employers-have-to- give-you-paid-time-off-to- vote.html.[2] Stevens, Matt. “Poorer Americans Have Much Lower Voting Rates in National Elections than the Nonpoor, a Study Finds.” New York Times. August 11, 2020. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/08/ 11/us/politics/poorer-americans- have-much-lower-voting-rates-in- national-elections-than-the- nonpoor-a-study-finds.html.[1] 
[3] Rieckhoff, Paul. “Make Election Day a National Holiday.” CNN. November 10, 2023. https://www.cnn.com/2023/11/10/o pinions/opinion-veterans-day- election-day-combine- rieckhoff/index.html.[4] Pettigrew, Stephen. ‘The Downstream Consequences of Long Waits: How Lines at the Precinct Depress Future Turnout’. Electoral Studies 71 (20 August 2020):102188.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electstud.2 020.102188.[5] Thomas, Grace. “Giving Voters Time Off To Vote Would Help Promote Fair Representation.” Campaign Legal Center. June 29, 2021.https://campaignlegal.org/update/gi ving-voters-time-vote-would-help- promote-fair-representation.[6] Gale, William G., and DarrellM. West. “Make Election Day a National Holiday.” Brookings. June 23, 2021.https://www.brookings.edu/articles/ make-election-day-a-national- holiday/.[7] 
Visram, Talib. “Should Election Day Be a Federal Holiday? Maybe Not.” Fast Company. October 21, 2022.https://www.fastcompany.com/9079 8496/should-election-day-be-a- federal-holiday-maybe-not.[8] Douglas, Joshua A. “Opinion: The Unintended Consequences of Making Election Day a Federal Holiday.” CNN. April 9, 2024. https://www.cnn.com/2024/04/09/o pinions/election-day-federal- holiday-presidency-vote- douglas/index.html.[9] “New Census Data Reveal Voter Turnout Disparities in 2022 Midterm Elections.” National Low Income Housing Coalition. May 15, 2023.https://nlihc.org/resource/new- census-data-reveal-voter-turnout- disparities-2022-midterm-elections.[10] Andrzejewski, Adam. “$4+ Billion Cost To Give Federal Employees A New Paid Holiday On Election Day.” Forbes. June 30, 2021.https://www.forbes.com/sites/adam andrzejewski/2021/04/18/new-4- billion-cost-to-give-federal-
employees-a-paid-holiday-on- election-day/.[11] Wagner, Jeff. “How Are Federal Holidays Created?” CBS News. June 19, 2024. https://www.cbsnews.com/minnesot a/news/how-are-federal-holidays- created/.[12] McCormack, Amber. “Should Election Day Be a Federal Holiday? Weighing the Benefits and Drawbacks.” The Alliance for Citizen Engagement. October 21, 2022. https://ace- usa.org/blog/research/research- votingrights/should-election-day- become-a-federal-holiday- weighing-the-benefits-and- drawbacks/.[13] “About Us.” League of Women Voters. Accessed October 23, 2024. https://www.lwv.org/about-us.[14] “Rep. Eshoo Introduces Bill to Make Election Day a Federal Holiday.” Congresswoman Anna G. Eshoo. February 13, 2024. https://eshoo.house.gov/media/press-releases/rep-eshoo-introduces-bill- make-election-day-federal-holiday.
ECONOMIC POLICY      Director: Alice Lee Assistant Director: Nathaniel CainAnalysts: Carson Appel, Simone Chan,Ian Gilenson, Pranav Jaganathan, and Aryan Shah
A Structure to Dig On: Transitioning to Underground Direct Current PowerBy Carson Appel, cla85@cornell.eduIn partnership with East Coast state governments, the federal government should establish a structured tax incentive program to aid organizations like the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and implement underground direct current powerlines to reduce costs associated with catastrophic natural disasters.
Background      Climate scientists have warned for decades of the looming effects of US greenhouse gas emissions. Rising Atlantic Ocean temperatures are directly linked to stronger and more frequent hurricanes and winter storms.1 The effects of these storms on U.S. infrastructure are critical when determining the direction of future gridwork investments and enhancing U.S. power resilience.      A Rowan University research article analyzing Atlantic weather patterns (1971 to 2020) highlighted a dramatic recent increase in the intensification rates of hurricanes.2 A weak Category 1 hurricane can develop into a Category 3 or stronger within 24 hours. Modern hurricanes (2001- 2020) are 28.7% more likely to intensify rapidly, with wind speeds increasing by up to 57 mph over 24 hours.2 With greater intensity and frequency, hurricanes devastate localities, imposing significant costs and leading to extended repair and reconstruction timelines. As of August 2023, tropical storms have caused an average cost of $22.8 billion per event, totaling over $1.3 trillion in lifetime costs.3 The increased frequency also means areas can face multiple hurricanes with shorter breaks, as seen with
Helene (late Sept. 2024) and Milton (early Oct. 2024).3      In addition to hurricanes, a warmer atmosphere holds more moisture, contributing to more frequent and intense precipitation.4 Although U.S. winters are getting warmer and shorter on average, blizzards are becoming more severe and prevalent.4 A state-by-state electric utility performance report by the Citizens Utility Board (CUB) found that northeastern states with high blizzard rates experience longer average power outages annually. Maine and Vermont are at the high end, with outages lasting 908 minutes and 444 minutes per customer per year, respectively.5 The New York Department of Public Service published a cost- benefit analysis estimating overhead transmission power lines cost anywhere from $4,000 to $37,000 per mile, with additional overhead distribution costs between $1,700 and $22,000 per mile.6 Intense snowstorm damage can amplify costs and prolong power outage times.      Currently, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) assists declared natural disasters. However, as event intensity increased, FEMA spent over half its fiscal budget in just eight days. Without intervention, FEMA will be forced to reduce or
suspend aid to catastrophic events.7 Integrated policy solutions are essential to address infrastructure investments and implement preemptive measures to reduce long-term costs.Policy Idea      A distributive tax credit structure should be implemented to promote the development of a direct current (DC) underground electrical grid. Incentives of this nature would increase the reliability and climate resilience of the eastern U.S. power grid. Partnered with this, tax credits will be established for utility companies, modeled after the individual homeowner credits outlined in the Inflation Reduction Act. This system would significantly reduce power outages, lower maintenance costs, and modernize infrastructure to accommodate future energy demands and renewable power integration.Policy Analysis      The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) recently announced a $34 million pilot program to develop a dozen advanced technologies through the Grid Overhaul with Proactive, High- Speed Undergrounding for Reliability, Resilience, and Security (GOPHURRS) for the      
implementation process of underground power lines including the creation of a worm-like digging tool.8 $4 million was directed to improving an AI-driven digital subsurface obstacle detection system. An additional $4 million grant was allocated to establish a sensing platform using radar and radio frequencies to locate existing utility lines. Investments like this are aimed at reducing construction costs for underground systems.8      Converting traditional alternating current (AC) powerlines to direct current (DC) systems can enhance transmission efficiency and decrease overall electrical consumption. Companies in industrial computing, LED technology, solar energy, and electric vehicles increasingly adopt DC power and develop methods to convert currents at various voltages.9,10 High-voltage DC (HVDC) lines transmit nearly double the voltage of AC lines and offer greater stability over long distances.11 While High Voltage AC (HVAC) transmission has traditionally been cheaper, accounting for terminal converter station costs makes HVDC exponentially more cost-effective at distances greater than 600 km above ground or between 50 and 90 km underground.9      Using DC distribution systems in households with solar photovoltaic (PV) panels can reduce energy use by 9-20%, and up to 14- 25% when combined with battery storage.9 Despite high initial implementation costs, HVDC infrastructure is a cost-effective long-term solution, particularly for East Coast development. New York State Assembly Bill 2330-A directed a feasibility study on underground transmission lines,
finding such projects economically viable in densely populated areas prone to extreme weather.6 Underground grids reduce FEMA’s reconstruction costs and can pay for themselves after two damaging weather events.14 Studies indicate that upfront investments in underground powerlines lead to long-term savings by reducing fire damage and improving public health.12,13Highlightsï Catastrophic environmental events are becoming more intense and frequent with global warming, costing$22.8 billion per event, creating an immediate need for climate-efficient grid enhancements.3ï High-voltage direct current (HVDC) power lines are cost-effective when implemented at distances greater than 50 to 90 kilometers underground, establishing economies of scale in long-term integration.9ï DC power is more reliable and resilient compared to alternating current (AC) power and expands the grid for renewable energy integration, leaving room for large-scale implementation.3,9ï This policy would address upfront investments through an integrated tax system to incentivize the implementation of high- voltage direct current underground power by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, utility companies, and local and state government programs
like the Grid Overhaul with Proactive, High-Speed Undergrounding for Reliability, Resilience, and Security (GOPHURRS).8Implementation      This policy proposes an incentive agreement among state governments, FEMA, and local utility companies, funded through tax incentives and small utility bill surcharges. Modeled after New York’s Inflation Reduction Act homeowner credits, utility companies will receive up to 30% tax credits.15 A 2.35% state tax on electrical services will be implemented, with 15% of revenue allocated to FEMA, capped at $20 million- the equivalent of the upfront aid provided by the Biden- Harris Administration in 2024.16 This funding will support DC underground powerlines as part of climate resilience efforts, minimizing financial burdens on residents.      A phased implementation would begin in areas most prone to storm-related outages, aligning with ongoing road construction and utility upgrades. Investments would initially focus on the northern and southernmost states along the East Coast, where immediate investments are required, and slowly work towards a midpoint.By enhancing grid reliance, HVDC power will mitigate catastrophic climate events and establish more stable energy prices for consumers in high-risk areas.      Cities like North Redington Beach, Florida, are implementing underground power supply systems in partnership with local power providers such as the Florida Power Corporation.17 Jacksonville, Florida, and surrounding areas are      
using partnering groups like the Jacksonville Electric Authority (JEA) to study the cost- effectiveness and feasibility of underground power lines.18 Partnerships like these will be used to incentivize local stakeholders and businesses to invest in underground power infrastructure through government-subsidized contracts.      With the help of local policy think tanks, agencies will evaluate the effectiveness of this plan using proportional and integral (PI) simulation modeling. This sophisticated computational approach integrates control systems principles into the analysis of electrical networks.19 This method will enable a detailed evaluation of critical performance metrics— transmission efficiencies, voltage drops, and line losses—specifically within the context of implementing underground High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) systems.20 The insights from this evaluation will inform targeted spending for future projects.Works Cited[1] World Weather Attribution. (n.d.). Climate change key driver of the catastrophic impacts of Hurricane Helene that devastated both coastal and inland communities.[2] Rowan researcher documents a 50-year trend in hurricane escalation due to climate change. (n.d.).https://today.rowan.edu/news/2023/ 10/rowan-researcher-documents-50- year-trend-in-hurricane-escalation- due-to-climate-change.html[3] “Hurricane Costs.” NOAA Office for Coastal Management. https://coast.noaa.gov/states/fast- facts/hurricane-costs.html[4] 
National Geographic. (n.d.). Maybe it’s cold outside. Retrieved November 14, 2024, fromhttps://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/maybe-its-cold- outside[5] Jester, Douglas, and Five Lakes Energy LLC. “Electric Utility Performance A State-By-State Data Review.” Electronic Utility Performance, 2021.[6] Industrial Economics. (n.d.). The Benefits, Costs, and Economic Impacts of Undergrounding New York’s Electric Grid.[7] Politico. (n.d.). Fema Spent Nearly Half Its Disaster Budget in Just 8 Days.[8] Rogers, Jack. “DOE Invests in Tech to Move Power LinesUnderground.” benefitspro.com. https://www.globest.com/2024/01/2 6/doe-invests-in-tech-to-move- power-lines-underground/. [9] Glasgo, B., Azevedo, I. L., & Hendrickson, C. (2016). “How much electricity can we save by using direct current circuits in homes? Understanding the potential for electricity savings and assessing the feasibility of a transition towards DC-powered buildings.” Applied Energy, 180, 66–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2 016.07.036[10] The war of the currents: AC vs. DC power. (n.d.). Energy.Gov. https://www.energy.gov/articles/wa r-currents-ac-vs-dc-power[11] “Benefits of HVDC Transmission Systems: Cence Power.” Benefits of HVDC Transmission Systems Cence Power. https://cencepower.com/blog- posts/hvdc-transmission-systems.[12] Power Lines: Climate Change and the Politics of Undergrounding. (n.d.).https://heinonline.org/HOL/Page?co
llection=journals&handle=hein.jour nals[13] The Advantages of Undergrounding Utilities gprs. https://www.gp- radar.com/article/unveiling-the- underground-the-advantages-of- undergrounding-utilities[14] “From Overhead to Underground: It Pays to Bury Power Lines.” FEMA.gov. https://www.fema.gov/case- study/overhead-underground-it- pays-bury-power-lines. [15] “NYS Guide to Inflation Reduction Act Savings.” NYSERDA.https://www.nyserda.ny.gov/Feature d-Stories/NYS-Guide-to-Inflation- Reduction-Act-Savings. [16] “Biden-Harris Administration Provides More than $20 Million to Hurricane Helene Survivors, Ongoing Search and Rescue Operations Continue in North Carolina.” FEMA.gov. https://www.fema.gov/press- release/20241003/biden-harris- administration-provides-more-20- million-hurricane-helene. [17] States News Service. (n.d.). Public Power Utilities Take Proactive Approach in Response to Supply Chain Challenges. https://advance.lexis.com/api/docu ment?collection[18] Energy Monitor Worldwide. (n.d.). The plan pushes for more underground power lines in Florida. https://advance.lexis.com/api/docu ment?collection=news&id=urn%3a contentItem%3a5VT8-H5X1-F11P- X247-00000-00&context=1519360&identityprofi leid=QQTRN251671.[19] Yang, Z. (2024). PI-based simulation modeling for performance testing of the power[1] 
transmission line. Energy, 301,[20] Yang, Z. (2024). PI-based131753.131753.simulation modeling forhttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.202https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.202performance testing of the power4.1317534.131753transmission line. Energy, 301,
Using Shared Appreciation Mortgages to Improve Homeownership TrendsBy Nathaniel Cain, nc482@cornell.eduThe housing landscape for young people is incredibly fraught, particularly for people of color, who have historically struggled with homeownership at disproportionate rates. Local governments should implement shared appreciation mortgage programs to combat the crisis.
Background      The current state of homeownership in the United States presents several challenges.According to the U.S. Census Bureau’s Housing Vacancies and Homeownership Survey, the homeownership rate in the second quarter of 2024 was 65.6%, falling below the 25-year average of 66.4%, marking the lowest rate in the past two years.1 This decline is particularly concerning for younger Americans, who find it increasingly difficult to purchase homes. For individuals below the age of 35, the homeownership rate for the head of households fell to 37.4%, the lowest figure in four years.1 This is primarily due to stricter lending practices and credit standards following the Great Recession.2 Young adults lacking robust financial stability are unable to purchase homes. In addition, home prices have risen considerably in the past decade, which has made homeownership increasingly unaffordable.2      Racial disparities further complicate homeownership.According to the U.S. Census Bureau, 74.3% of White individuals are homeowners, whereas 45.7% of Black people, 49.5% of Hispanic individuals, and 62.3% of Asian individuals are homeowners.3 Minority groups consistently face lower homeownership rates
compared to their White counterparts, and homes owned by minority groups tend to have lower appraisal values.3 These disparities are rooted in a long history of racial discrimination in the housing market, dating back to the early 20th century when exclusionary behavior such as redlining was commonplace.4      Municipalities across the country must address this via public policy to ensure a more equitable housing market going forward.Shared appreciation mortgages can make homeownership more accessible to those who need it the most.Policy Idea      Local governments across the United States should leverage both federal and state funds to establish shared appreciation mortgage programs. It is ideal for local governments to tackle this issue, as there tends to be extensive variation in housing policies by state and locality. Shared appreciation mortgages, or loans, are typically structured as deferred loans.5 They are interest-free, with repayment deferred until the property is either sold or refinanced, at which the loan is repaid.5 This differs from a typical mortgage, which is repaid in monthly payments. Furthermore, the homeowner pays a percentage of
any property value appreciation gained over time.5 If a home depreciates, the buyer only repays the value of the loan, without interest.6 These programs allow for increased housing accessibility by lowering upfront costs for buyers, while also allowing lenders to recapture new property value gained over time. By financing mortgages with a combination of equity and debt, shared appreciation mortgages spread risk more evenly across lenders and borrowers, decreasing the risk of foreclosure if home prices fall.5Policy Analysis      A 2019 study from the Joint Center for Housing Studies at Harvard University used data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) to estimate the number of eligible households for shared appreciation mortgages across the country. The analysis found that 6.6 million potential homeowners could buy a home in their county with $25,000 to$100,000 in financial assistance, which the authors noted was typical of most shared appreciation programs.6The study also found that an additional 8.6 million people could buy a home with financial assistance of $100,000 or more.6 Furthermore, the study found that shared appreciation programs could ease racial disparities in
homeownership.6 The study found that if all 1.4 million potential Black homeowners became homeowners through shared appreciation programs in 2013, their homeownership rate would’ve increased by 10%.6 Moreover, if all potential Hispanic homeowners became homeowners through shared appreciation mortgages in 2013, their homeownership rate would have increased by 9.4%.6      A 2018 study in the Housing Policy Debate journal observed the short-term loan performance of homeowners participating in nine shared appreciation mortgage programs.7 Using a difference-in- difference analysis, the study compared the outcomes of shared appreciation mortgage holders with the outcomes of other first-time homebuyers in metropolitan areas.7 The results showed that shared appreciation mortgage purchasers had “significantly less mortgage debt” and were “less likely to have a home equity line of credit.”7 Furthermore, the study observed no significant difference between shared appreciation and non-shared mortgage holders when analyzing 90- to 180-day delinquencies.7 This demonstrates that shared appreciation mortgage holders were maintaining homeownership at a similar rate to those with non- shared appreciation mortgages, highlighting the longevity of the program’s effectiveness.Highlightsï Homeownership rates have declined for young adults due to strict lending practices following the Great Recession and high home prices over the past decade.1ï 
Shared appreciation mortgages are structured as deferred, interest-free loans repaid upon sale or refinancing, with homeowners sharing a percentage of any appreciation.5ï Local and state housing authorities should utilize Community Development Block Grant funds to subsidize community financial institutions in providing shared appreciation mortgages to borrowers.ï Housing authorities should ensure that strict oversight is kept over financial institutions to ensure predatory lending practices do not occur.Implementation      Local and state housing authorities should use Community Development Block Grant funds from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development to “sponsor” certain financial institutions in providing shared appreciation mortgages. Local and state governments should prioritize collaborating with local community banks and credit unions for loan distribution, as local financial institutions are often more attuned to the unique needs of residents compared to larger financial institutions.8 Nevertheless, strict oversight is essential: local and state housing authorities must develop clear regulatory frameworks and monitoring practices to prevent predatory lending and ensure responsible loan distribution. This may include regular financial reports on the program’s efficacy.Furthermore, if the necessary funds
are available, the government should contract an outside firm to evaluate the program’s effectiveness.      Local and state housing authorities should ensure their shared appreciation mortgages rely on diverse funding sources. While federal block grants, such as the Community Development Block Grant, can be the primary source of subsidies for these mortgages, governments should work with financial institutions to finance these loans via alternative means, such as through mortgage-backed securities or government bonds.Housing authorities can also consider reaching out to philanthropic organizations or private investors who may be interested in the housing market.      Clear eligibility requirements are crucial to ensure the program reaches its target demographic. For example, the shared appreciation mortgage program in Boulder, Colorado, mandates that enrollees have a family income at 80% of the area’s median, enrollees must work within the city’s formal limits, and enrollees must participate in a financial literacy class for buying a home.9 Programs can also create rules limiting the location, price range, and type of home that can be purchased with a shared appreciation mortgage. For example, Arlington, Virginia’s program does not allow homes to be bought with a shared appreciation mortgage if its price exceeds$500,000.9 This helps to finetune shared appreciation mortgage programs to align with housing market dynamics in a given location.      The application process should be as accessible and      
streamlined as possible to encourage high participation rates. Multiple application pathways, including an online form and a paper application that can be mailed or submitted in person, will accommodate diverse applicant needs. It is imperative to conduct outreach in communities with low homeownership rates. Creating social media adverts, posting flyers in physical spaces, hosting informational town halls, and collaborating with other public entities to spread information are all potential methods of performing such outreach. By implementing these key strategies, local governments can create a more equitable homeownership environment for all.Works Cited[1] Lowest homeownership rate for younger householders in four years. (2024, August 5). https://www.nahb.org/blog/2024/08/lowest-homeownership-rate-in- four-years[2] Callis, Robert. “Rate of Homeownership Higher Than Before Pandemic in All Regions.”
U.S. Census Bureau. Accessed November 5, 2024. https://www.census.gov/library/stor ies/2023/07/younger-householders- drove-rebound-in- homeownership.html.[3] Taylor, M. (2024, September 10). Homeowner data, facts and statistics 2024. Bankrate. https://www.bankrate.com/homeow nership/home-ownership-statistics/[4] Racial differences in economic security: Housing. (2024, September 20). U.S. Department of the Treasury. https://home.treasury.gov/news/feat ured-stories/racial-differences-in- economic-security-housing[5] Caplin, Andrew, Noel Cunningham, Mitchell L. Engler, and Frederick Pollock. “Facilitating Shared Appreciation Mortgages.” The Hamilton Project. Brookings. Accessed November 5, 2024. https://www.hamiltonproject.org/pu blication/policy- proposal/facilitating-shared- appreciation-mortgages-to-prevent- housing-crashes-and-affordability- crises/.[6] Perkins, Kristin, Shannon Rieger, Jonathan Spader, and
Christopher Herbert. “The Potential for Shared Equity and Other Forms of Down Payment Assistance to Expand Access to Homeownership.” Joint Center for Housing Studies at Harvard University, October 2019. https://www.jchs.harvard.edu/sites/ default/files/harvard_jchs_housing_ tenure_symposium_perkins_2019_0.pdf.[7] Theodos, B., Stacy, C. P., Braga, B., & Daniels, R. (2019). Affordable homeownership: An evaluation of the near-term effects of shared equity programs. Housing Policy Debate, 29(6), 865–879. https://doi.org/10.1080/10511482.2 019.1596965[8] Bennett, Karen. “Reasons to Have a Local Bank.” Bankrate, July 31, 2024.https://www.bankrate.com/banking/ checking/reasons-to-have-a-local- bank/[9] Local Housing Solutions. “Shared Appreciation Mortgages.” Accessed November 3, 2024. https://localhousingsolutions.org/ho using-policy-library/shared- appreciation-mortgages.[1] 
Future-Proofed! Federal Automatic IRA for an Easy RetirementBy Simone Chan, sc3336@cornell.eduFederal implementation of automatic Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) helps address gaps in retirement savings access, particularly for marginalized workers. Making saving a default option can help secure millions of Americans’ financial stability and contribute to the nation’s economic success.
Background      Employer-based retirement plays a major role in securing financial welfare for American workers. However, according to the AARP Public Policy Institute, around 55 million employees in the private sector – equivalent to nearly half – work for an employer that does not offer a retirement plan.1 Many employers, especially small businesses, face cost barriers when offering retirement plans.2 About 32 million workers in small businesses did not have access to a retirement plan, compared to about 23 million in businesses with 100 or more workers.2 Workers who are not provided with a retirement plan must open their own Individual Retirement Arrangement (IRA).According to research by Life Insurance Marketing and Research Association Secure Retirement Institute, only 34% of Americans know about IRAs, and 46% of those who do not own an IRA reported that they do not understand enough about IRAs.3 Given the lack of financial literacy, these populations are at a greater risk of financial insecurity in old age.      Marginalized individuals like low-wage workers, small businesses, part-time workers, and gig economy workers are typically the most affected by financial insecurity when entering older age. Without access to a retirement plan,
these workers are exposed to an increased risk of financial struggle, further contributing to the wealth gap. Such a deficit in retirement funds greatly affects the overall economy. PEW Charitable Trust data estimated that six states cumulatively faced a $334.3 billion shortfall due to a lack of or inadequate retirement savings.4      Various policy efforts have attempted to address this gap. State- level automatic IRAs have been implemented across eleven states, and efforts have progressed, but national implementation has yet to occur. The implementation of federal automatic IRAs is urgently needed for the millions of Americans whose financial futures are in jeopardy.Policy idea      The U.S. Department of Treasury and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) should implement automatic IRAs for employees whose company/employer does not offer a retirement plan. The Treasury would oversee the policy framework and manage the infrastructure of the program, while the IRS would handle the enrollment and compliance aspects. The structure of the program will be based on existing states’ automatic IRA programs to ensure fluidity.5 Employers would enroll workers
into a government-managed IRA via social security numbers, with 3- 8% of the employee’s salary automatically deducted. Workers could opt out or adjust contributions for flexibility. Employers would facilitate enrollment and payroll deduction, lowering administrative barriers. Compliant employers would receive tax credits to encourage participation. Workers would retain accounts even if they change jobs, ensuring continued contributions.Policy Analysis      Historically, research has consistently demonstrated that automatic IRA enrollment boosts participation. Research, including projections from the National Bureau of Economic Research, indicates that when eligible workers are automatically enrolled, participation rates climb significantly—from around 66% to 92%.6 These results suggest that this policy will dramatically enhance savings among workers without current access to employer- sponsored plans and ease the burden of establishing voluntary retirement plans.      This federal initiative takes inspiration from successful state-run programs, such as California’s CalSavers. CalSavers automatically enrolls employees who do not have      
retirement plans at work, making it easier for them to save through options with low administrative demands and portability across jobs. Evaluations of CalSavers show a rapid increase in assets under management, growing from $595 million to $858 million in just a year, which not only highlights its viability but also its potential benefits on a national scale.5 Expanding this model at a federal level could provide millions of lower-wage workers with a stable foundation for financial security in retirement, thereby reducing their dependence on future government aid, such as Social Security, to help stabilize governmental budgets.7      More importantly, automatic enrollment addresses behavioral inertia that can occur when saving is a voluntary choice. Many workers may procrastinate or feel overwhelmed by the process of setting up a retirement plan due to factors like complexity, lack of financial knowledge, and competing priorities. Automatic enrollment eliminates the initial burden of taking action and utilizes behavioral economics principles to help push individuals toward better financial strategy as AARP estimates American workers are 15 times more likely to save if they can save through automatic payroll reduction.8,9Highlightsï Nearly half of private-sector employees lack access to quality retirement saving plans, leaving millions at heightened risk of financial insecurity in old age and increasing economic inequality.1ï Federal automatic IRAs address retirement access
barriers, especially for low- wage and gig workers lacking employer-sponsored plans.1ï Automatic enrollment, overseen by the Treasury and IRS, ensures a seamless setup with payroll deductions, enabling easy contributions and portable accounts across jobs.ï Inspired by successful state models like CalSavers, federal IRAs aim to increase savings participation from 66% to 92% among eligible workers.6ï Expanding access to retirement savings reduces reliance on government assistance, enhances financial stability, and narrows the wealth gap, benefiting individuals and the economy.7Implementation      Outreach efforts need to be led by state leaders and policymakers who have implemented similar initiatives in states like California, Oregon, Illinois, and others with a history of supporting similar financial programs to gain federal momentum. By engaging representatives from these states, the policy can gain credibility and utilize existing legislative frameworks for efficiency.Additionally, lobbying efforts should target representatives such as Congressman Richard Neal (D- MA), a prominent advocate for automatic IRAs and senior member of the Ways and Means Committee. Congressman Neal’s experience with bipartisan retirement plans and his influence within the committee would be invaluable in shaping and
advancing the legislation for expedited passage through the House Committee on Ways and Means.10      With the new Senate dominated by Republicans coming in, framing the policy strategically is key. Senator Ron Wyden, a Democrat and Chair of the Senate Finance Committee, is a critical ally due to his history of bipartisan retirement reforms, including the bipartisan Enhancing American Retirement Act with Republican Senator Mike Crapo.11 Wyden’s role can highlight automatic IRAs as a fiscally sound initiative that reduces reliance on government aid while encouraging personal savings. Advocacy should focus on committees like the Senate HELP Committee and the House Education and Workforce Committee. Presenting automatic IRAs as a market-driven, low- regulation solution that supports economic independence for working families can appeal to conservative values. Building coalitions with business groups, think tanks, and community voices strengthen external pressure on legislators.      Given the significant changes this policy brings to the retirement structure, backlash from fiscal conservatives over high federal costs may arise. A study by AARP and the Retirement Research Center projected that 58% of workers with access to a similar model of universal auto-IRA would have saved more than $100,000 for retirement, compared to only 9% of those without access. Meanwhile, 75% of workers without a payroll deduction program have saved less than $10,000.12 Policymakers should emphasize such long-term savings from reduced reliance on      
government assistance during retirement, presenting data that shows how automatic IRAs can decrease dependency on federal welfare programs. Additionally, a phased rollout and capped initial incentives for employers could help address cost concerns while appealing to budget-conscious stakeholders.      For implementation, careful coordination must be made with theU.S. Department of Treasury and the IRS, which play critical roles in overseeing the policy’s rollout. Upon enactment, the Treasury would develop the program’s financial infrastructure by establishing secure and accessible platforms for account management and investment options, allowing employees to track their savings and manage accounts easily. To reduce administrative obstacles, especially for small businesses, the Treasury would unify processes like contributions and reporting into a streamlined, user-friendly system, simplifying participation and compliance.      Meanwhile, the IRS would manage compliance, enrollment, and tax-related oversight. This would include ensuring payroll deductions are implemented correctly and contributions are accurately reported. The IRS could also provide clear guidelines, digital resources, and support materials to help employers transition smoothly, as well as a dedicated support line to address questions, making the policy accessible and reducing administrative burden.Works Cited[1] John, David, and Gary Koenig. 2014. “Workplace Retirement Plans Will Help Workers Build Economic Security.” AARP Public Policy
Institute. https://www.aarp.org/content/dam/a arp/ppi/2014-10/aarp-workplace- retirement-plans-build-economic- security.pdf.[2] Shelton, Alison. 2024. “Reports Highlight Challenges Small Businesses Face in Offering Retirement Benefits.” The Pew Charitable Trusts. https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/resear ch-and- analysis/articles/2024/07/25/reports-highlight-challenges-small- businesses-face-in-offering- retirement- benefits#:~:text=The%20primary% 20reason%20that%20small,over%2 0a%20larger%20asset%20base.[3] Anderson, Brian. 2019. “2 in 3 Americans Don’t Know Much About IRAs.” 401kspecialist. https://401kspecialistmag.com/2-in- 3-americans-dont-know-much- about- iras/#:~:text=2%20in%203%20Am ericans%20Don%27t%20Know%2 0Much%20About%20IRAs&text=L ack%20of%20knowledge%20hurtin g%20IRA,include%20similar%20q uestions%20about%20401ks.[4] Olson, Kim. 2023. “Retirement Assets in State Automated Savings Programs Hit $1 Billion.” The Pew Charitable Trusts. https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/resear ch-and- analysis/articles/2023/12/22/retirem ent-assets-in-state-automated- savings-programs-hit-1-billion.[5] “CalSavers Update—Fine Abatement Opportunity.” n.d. https://www.calcpa.org/whats- happening/california-cpa- magazine/calsavers-update#.[6] American Benefits Council, American Council of Life Insurers, and Investment Company Institute.n.d. “Our Strong Retirement System: An American Success
Story.” https://www.ici.org/doc- server/pdf%3Appr_13_strong_retire ment.pdf.[7] Jovanovska, Tamara. 2024. “The Economic Impact of the Increase in 401(K) Contribution Limits.” Shortlister. https://www.myshortlister.com/insi ghts/401k-contribution-limits- 2024#:~:text=Higher%20individual%20retirement%20savings%20can,t hem%20for%20long%2Dterm%20e fficiency.[8] Carroll, Gabriel D., James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2009. “Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4): 1639–74. https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.2009.1 24.4.1639.[9] Salmon, Jacqueline. 2024. “More Businesses Jumping on Retirement Savings Bandwagon.” AARP.https://www.aarp.org/retirement/pla nning-for-retirement/info-2023/rise- in-401k-benefits.html.[10] “Press Releases | U.S. Representative Richard Neal.” 2024. U.S. Representative Richard Neal. https://neal.house.gov/news/docume ntsingle.aspx?DocumentID=3855.[11] Godbout, Ted. 2024. “Senate Finance Leaders Formally Introduce EARN Act.” ASPPA.https://www.asppa- net.org/news/2022/9/senate-finance- leaders-formally-introduce-earn- act/.[12] John, David, Warren Cormier, Zahra Ebrahimi, Pamela Hess, and James Watt. 2023. “The Effect of a Universal Automatic IRA With Emergency Savings on Household Wealth.” https://doi.org/10.26419/ppi.00212. 001.[1] 
Community Development Financial Institutions and Economic Growth in New York’s I-90 CorridorBy Ian Gilenson, icg8@cornell.eduThe New York State Legislature should increase funding for Community Development Financial Institutions, stimulating growth in underservered areas along the Interstate-90 Corridor and fueling an economic revival backed by both state and federal resources.
Background      The Interstate-90 corridor is a key trade and transportation route spanning 385.5 miles across New York State, connecting major upstate economic hubs such as Buffalo, Rochester, Syracuse, Utica, and Albany.1 In 2023, the corridor was selected as one of 31 national technology hubs under President Joe Biden’s ambitious CHIPS (acronym of “Creating Helpful Incentives to Produce Semiconductors”) and Science Act.2 The initiative aims to foster domestic economic modernization by investing in the research and creation of American-made chips for machines like computers, medical devices, and vehicles.      Designation as a technology hub creates a federally-backed promise to bring jobs and industry to New York’s I-90. Such action is desperately needed, considering the pandemic resulted in a net loss of nearly 13,000 New York businesses. In a post-Covid world, upstate New York has also had the second largest decline in businesses and is ranked 46 out of 50 states in “dynamism,” a measure of economic mobility and growth.3 But the goals of the CHIPS Act appear as a remedy, aiming to offer $40 million into the region to create semiconductor factories, support
preexisting chip manufacturers, and spark small-business development.4      However, the new project faces significant challenges.According to a July 2024 Urban Institute study, business growth in the I-90 corridor remains stagnant, hindered by insufficient government support. Additionally, minority business ownership in this area is minimal, with New York rates trailing other diverse states like Florida, California, and Texas.5This is a bad omen as little businesses in New York can take advantage of the CHIPS program requirement that some grant money be allocated to minority groups.6 Without targeted financial investment in New York State’s business growth, this federally funded initiative risks becoming a case study for economic mismanagement.Policy Idea      New York State legislators should facilitate the expansion of loans for small businesses along the Interstate-90 corridor. To do this, they should fund and deepen access to Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs), supporting future growth created by the CHIPS Act. Specifically, CDFIs are certified lending services required to offer a minimum of 60%
of their available finances to low, middle-income, or underserved Americans and offer fair, non- predatory interest rates.7 CDFIs receive grants from state and local governments and private donors, permitting them to offer more flexible lending terms to upstate New York businesses.8 This policy should be accomplished via specific grants given to CDFIs looking to expand their operations. The money can come from New York’s budget surplus of $2.2 billion, thus avoiding undue stress on taxpayers.9Policy Analysis      The goal of this policy is to expand CDFIs to stimulate upstate New York’s economy. New York currently has 80 CDFIs, but according to New York’s Federal Reserve Governor Lisa Cook, this number is insufficient to drive significant economic growth.10 CDFIs are specifically important because their funds are earmarked for underserved communities and struggling businesses.11 Governor Cook emphasizes that many existing CDFIs are focused on economic rebuilding from the destruction of the pandemic, with resources stretched too thin to foster new growth.12 For New York to capitalize on CDFI funding as a tool for expansion, a policy passed by      
the State Legislature and signed by the Governor’s Office providing more focused funding via grants is essential.      While there were some positive byproducts of COVID-19 economic policies — such as the introduction of the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility and Community Reinvestment Act, which allowed CDFIs to build greater capital reserves — these measures only provided a baseline that underemphasizes development along the I-90 corridor.13 Without such growth, the related economic chaos may imperil the potential success of the CHIPS Act.      Additional government financial support is needed. The Governor of New York holds budgetary powers to inject fresh energy into the economy. For example, in early March, NY Governor Kathy Hochul passed the$800 million COVID-19 Pandemic Small Business Recovery Grant Program to help floundering businesses.14 But the current policy must go beyond rescuing — it must actively bolster new businesses in underperforming areas, like the Interstate-90 corridor. CDFIs can work quickly in giving this boost, as typically smaller, struggling organizations now face fewer barriers to entry from CDFIs, whose jobs are intrinsically to save failing businesses.15 As such, a legislator- created policy to provide greater funding to CDFIs primarily providing their services to I-90 corridor businesses is required.Highlightsï In 2023, the Interstate-90 corridor, a key trade and transportation route spanning New York State,
was selected as a national technology hub under the federal CHIPS and Science Act.1,2ï Business growth in the I-90 corridor remains stagnant, hindered by insufficient government support that can diminish the impact of the CHIPS Act.3,4ï New York should fund and deepen access to Community Development Financial Institutions by providing them with lump- sum grants carved from the state budget.7ï CDFIs target smaller businesses that serve underserved populations, revitalizing struggling businesses and areas.9Implementation      The CDFI grant program will be application-based, requiring Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) to prove how they plan to support new economic development and outline a detailed funding roadmap. This approach builds on the successful model of New York’s Small Business Seed Funding Grant Program (BSFG Program), which operated similarly.16 Both programs rely on an application-based system administered by the state, require the signature of the Governor to pursue their directives and give lump-sum funding to businesses in need. Grant sizes will vary based on each CDFI’s previous gross payouts, ensuring larger institutions receive funding proportionate to their needs while smaller CDFIs obtain adequate resources to expand operations. This tiered structure avoids a one-size-fits-all approach, empowering institutions of all sizes.
Again, previous programs like the BSFG have operated exactly like this, proving the feasibility and giving a model for this program’s success.17      Some business owners in upstate New York may be concerned about prioritizing CDFIs over other lending institutions.CDFIs often require additional steps to demonstrate community impact, like maintaining community partnerships and may be less accessible to business owners outside underserved areas.18 However, it is important to then articulate the primary reason for these grants: to grow small business operations, bring economic growth to underperforming areas, and help marginalized communities become more economically mobile. Past precedent proves that CDFIs are effective at reaching targeted demographics: while traditional banks often exclude marginalized communities because of ingrained mistrust, high collateral expectations, and inconvenient geography, CDFI recipients are 60% people of color, 50% women, and 28% rural residents.19,20 As such, CDFIs can provide for the most diversified overall growth, which is essential to revitalize an area in need of economic growth injections.      With CDFIs being a potential savior for underserved New York communities, it is important to utilize strict CDFI regulations that ensure the safety and efficacy of these institutions. The Department of Treasury outlines steps that states like New York can take to monitor their CDFIs, including expressed punishments for violations in the CDFI application, listed illegal and inconsistent practices and clearly      
expressed ways that CDFIs must contribute to community-level goals.21 Following these standards will create an application system that is free, fair, and economically beneficial to all involved.      By enhancing the lending power of CDFI’s, business growth along the I-90 corridor is expected. When semiconductor jobs come to the corridor as a result of the CHIPS Act, the local economies will already have a baseline for growth. They can appropriately reap the benefits of the federal grant program. By enhancing local economies before the federal grant money becomes available, the New York government can ensure I-90 cities and towns experience steady, upward growth instead of unstable economic swings that may come from an infusion of jobs and factories to areas vastly unprepared to serve them.Works Cited[1] “Hochul Celebrates Federal Award to Empower New York Businesses to Access Opportunities.” Governor Kathy Hochul, December 19, 2023. https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/ governor-hochul-celebrates-federal- award-empower-new-york- businesses-access-opportunities.[2] “5 Crucial Differences between CDFIs and Traditional Banks.” CNote, February 16, 2021. https://www.mycnote.com/blog/5- crucial-differences-between-cdfis- and-traditional-banks/.[3] Augustus, Imani. “Five Reasons Minority Borrowers Can’t Access Capital.” Third Way, September 28, 2022.https://www.thirdway.org/report/fiv e-reasons-minority-borrowers-cant- access-capital.[4] 
“Community Development Financial Institution Assistance Program.” Empire State Development, October 5, 2017. https://esd.ny.gov/community- development-financial-institution- assistance-program.[5] “Community Development Financial Institutions, or CDFIs.” CDFI Fund. https://www.cdfifund.gov/sites/cdfi/ files/documents/cdfi_infographic_v 08a.pdf. Accessed November 16, 2024.[6] “Consumer Compliance Outlook: An Overview of Community Development Financial Institutions.” Consumer Compliance Outlook, 2022. https://www.consumercomplianceo utlook.org/2022/first- issue/overview-of-community- development-financial-institutions/.[7] “Economic and Policy Insights: New York State Business Owners.” Office of the New York State Comptroller, March 2024. https://www.osc.ny.gov/files/reports/pdf/business-owners-in-new-york- state.pdf.[8] “Fact Sheet: Biden-Harris Administration Announces 31 Regional Tech Hubs to Spur American Innovation, Strengthen Manufacturing, and Create Good- Paying Jobs in Every Region of the Country.” The White House, October 22, 2023. https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefin g-room/statements- releases/2023/10/23/fact-sheet- biden-harris-administration- announces-31-regional-tech-hubs- to-spur-american-innovation- strengthen-manufacturing-and- create-good-paying-jobs-in-every- region-of-the-country/.[9] “Fed’s Cook: CDFIs Face Many Challenges in Current Economic Climate.” ABA Banking Journal,
May 14, 2024.https://bankingjournal.aba.com/202 4/05/feds-cook-cdfis-face-many- challenges-in-current-economic- climate/.[10] “Governor Hochul Announces$60 Million Restore New York Program Will Launch Applications Tomorrow.” Governor Kathy Hochul, March 7, 2024. https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/ governor-hochul-announces-60- million-restore-new-york-program- will-launch-applications.[11] “Community Development Financial Institutions – Opportunities for Growth.” Dechert, October 7, 2020. https://www.dechert.com/knowledg e/onpoint/2020/10/community- development-financial-institutions---opportunities-for.html.[12] “NYS CDFI Coalition.” NYS CDFI Coalition. https://www.nyscdfi.org/. Accessed November 16, 2024.[13] Paaswell, Robert. New York in the New World Economy: The I-90 Corridor. https://utrc2.org/sites/default/files/p ubs/New-York-in-the-New-World- Economy-I-90-Corridor-final.pdf.[14] Orecki, Patrick, and Patrick Orecki. “NYS Budget Outlook.” Citizens Budget Commission of New York, March 7, 2024. https://cbcny.org/research/nys- budget-outlook.[15] Racino, Brad. “Upstate New York as a National Tech Corridor? Report Finds Some Obstacles.” Olean Times Herald, July 30, 2024. https://www.oleantimesherald.com/ news/upstate-new-york-as-a- national-tech-corridor-report-finds- some-obstacles/article_e7788f8e- 4dde-11ef-8255- f37dad177b4b.html.[16,17] “Community Development Financial Institution Assistance
Program.” Empire State Development, October 5, 2017. https://esd.ny.gov/community- development-financial-institution- assistance-program.[18] Scheyder, Kristen. “Measuring CDFI Impact: A Conversation on the Need for Independent Research.” Citi, February 26, 2024. https://www.citigroup.com/global/f oundation/news/perspective/2024/m easuring-cdfi-impact-a-
conversation-on-the-need-for- independent-research.[19] Shoulders, Meco. “CDFIs: What Are They and How Do They Work?” Third Way, October 6, 2021.https://www.thirdway.org/memo/cd fis-what-are-they-and-how-do-they- work.[20] Steele, Graham. “Update on Treasury’s Approach to Equitable Community Finance.” U.S. Department of the Treasury,
January 16, 2024. https://home.treasury.gov/news/feat ured-stories/update-on-treasurys- approach-to-equitable-community- finance.[21] Theodos, Brett, et al. “Growing the Small Business Economy of New York’s I-90 Corridor.” Urban Institute, July 19, 2024. https://www.urban.org/research/pub lication/growing-small-business- economy-new-yorks-i-90-corridor.[18] 
Expanding the Internal Revenue Code to Foster Employee Ownership in Private Equity and Venture CapitalBy Pranav Jaganathan, prj27@cornell.eduThe current, limited application of Section 1042 of the Internal Revenue Code restricts the opportunity for employee stock ownership plans (ESOP) in private equity (PE) and venture capital-backed companies. Reform is needed to allow these firms to defer capital gains taxes when selling controlling interests of these companies to ESOPs and reinvesting the amount in ESG-compliant qualified replacement properties.
Background      Employee Stock Ownership Plans (ESOPs) are the most common employee ownership corporate structure in the United States, with approximately 6,500U.S. companies having an ESOP and approximately 14 million U.S. workers being participants.1 They are considered defined contribution plans under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA), as they function by holding stock through a trust fund that accrues money over time as companies contribute more stock.2,3 The goal of ESOPs is to encourage employee retention and motivation throughout their tenure, especially in an age where one in every twoU.S. employees is open to leaving their current job.4 An ESOP tackles these issues by encouraging employees to have a stake in their company’s success, which in turn allows for more productivity, effectiveness, and efficiency.5      Workers are not the only ones who benefit from ESOPs. There are incentives for specific corporations as well. Section 1042 of the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) provides a tax deferral mechanism for business owners who sell stock to an ESOP and reinvest the proceeds in a qualified replacement
property (securities issued by a domestic operating corporation) within twelve months of the sale.6 Specifically, business owners of C Corporations can effectively defer capital gains taxes on their sale of stocks if the sale of their stocks is to ESOPs. The federal government taxes long-term capital gains with preferential treatment at a maximum rate of 23.8%, which is still lower than the rate for other sources of income.7 Section 1042 allows ESOPs to play a significant role in motivating corporations to invest in the betterment of their employees while retaining more of their earnings overall.Policy Idea      The United States Congress should expand Section 1042 of the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) by allowing private equity firms and venture capital funds, which are generally limited liability companies (LLC) or limited partnerships (LP), to defer capital gains taxes when they sell a controlling interest in a company to an Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP). If a PE or VC fund sells 30% or more of its stock to an ESOP that complies with the Employment Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), the firm can
defer capital gains taxes. The proceeds from these transactions must then be reinvested in qualified replacement properties (QRPs), specifically targeting small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) with environmental, social, and corporate governance (ESG) related initiatives. Firms can defer the tax as long as they hold the QRP, with taxes only being implemented after the selling of those proceeds, continuing a capital allocation method that maximizes the firm’s profits while ensuring the empowerment of other workers.Policy Analysis      There are three key objectives that this policy attempts to achieve. First, this policy aims to align PE’s best interests with employees. Job satisfaction grew as the attitudes of workers towards their managers and company performance, specifically in terms of sales growth, increased by 5.4% more than comparison companies with the establishment of ESOP plans. This makes them more likely to be efficient in the long-term.8The second objective of the policy is to ensure the long-term success of PE-backed companies. ESOPs are connected to undeniable success.
73% of the ESOP companies have significantly improved their performance after setting up their plans.8 But in the PE industry, creating the ESOP plans in the first place is rare.9 Through this policy, PE-backed corporations will have an opportunity to improve performance and production output immensely, incentivizing PE firms to implement ESOP plans that produce the benefit in the first place.      The last objective of the policy is wealth building and promotion of concrete ESG initiatives. Although 87% of firms consider ESG factors only to decrease investment risk and potential litigation on a reputational basis, this policy creates two concrete contribution methods to a PE firm’s ESG efforts.10 First, ESOPs themselves are found to have a significantly positive relationship with greater environmental protection, quality of environmental impact information disclosed, and ESG ratings.11 Second, the proceeds are required to be reinvested in SMEs with ESG initiatives which are known to create jobs at a higher rate than non- PE-backed firms and to adopt sustainable business practices.12 Both methods will ensure the PE industry maximizes shareholder value while simultaneously contributing to social welfare.Highlight:ï This policy proposes that through an expansion of Section 1042 of the IRC, private equity (PE) and venture capital (VC) firms can defer capital gains taxes by selling a controlling stake in a company to Employee Stock Ownership Plans
(ESOP) and reinvesting the proceedings into a QRP from an operating corporation that is an SME with ESG initiatives as defined under this law.6ï This policy also encourages reinvestment into SMEs with specific ESG initiatives, increasing their influence in their respective industries to expand their social and environmental welfare impact.13,14ï This policy will use the existing compliance frameworks for Section 1042 with adjustments to account for the QRP differences, documenting both the sale to ESOPs and the reinvestment in ESG- compliant QRPs. The IRS would partner with the Department of Labor to ensure all ESOP transactions meet ERISA standards.15,16Implementation      First, the United States Congress will need to introduce and pass a bill through both chambers, proposing amendments to Section 1042 of the IRC to allow private equity and venture capital firms holding a controlling stake in a company to defer capital gains taxes when selling to an ESOP. Within this bill, Congress must define controlling stake as at least 30%, QRP as any security issued by a domestic “operating corporation,” SMEs as firms that employ fewer than 500 employees, and ESG as a metric used in business and investing to determine a company’s performance across multiple areas of social responsibility like environment, social, and corporate governance.6,13,14 ESOPs must be
defined as a qualified defined contribution plan that is a stock bonus plan or a stock bonus/money purchase plan under IRC Section 401(a).17 These terms are important to define during the legislative process to ensure that the true meaning of the bill is held, especially with potential legal scrutiny.18      Assuming the passage of the bill in both chambers of Congress and the signing of the bill by the President of the United States, the IRS will have jurisdiction in enforcing the law. Prior to enforcement, the IRS will open a Public Notice and Comment Period to receive stakeholder input. Inputs have successfully led to the more effective and efficient enforcement of laws, as seen with the IRS Qualified Business Income Deduction in 2018 and its clarified definitions after the comments.19      To ensure compliance, the IRS will establish a framework to enforce the new tax code similar to the current compliance framework under Section 1042 of the IRC, with a few additional adjustments.Sellers must attach a written statement indicating their choice to apply for Section 1042 to their income tax return for the year of the sale.20 This statement must include the following: a description of the corporation or qualified securities sold, the date of sale, the cost of the QRP purchased, and a justification for why the QRP is considered a part of an SME that can be measured under ESG standards.20 Within 45 days of purchasing the QRP, sellers of the QRP are required to provide a notarized statement detailing the purchase, including the date and cost.Additionally, the statement must include their formalized ESG-
related initiatives, and their corporation size, declaring that the securities represent the QRP concerning the ESOP stock sale.15      Lastly, the IRS will work with the Department of Labor (DOL) to ensure that the ESOPs involved in all transactions comply with ERISA standards.16 The IRS and DOL will also collaborate to collect data regarding the success of the policy. Although the current Section 1042 does not have any provisions regarding data collection to measure its success, this law will encourage the DOL and the National Center for Employee Ownership to collect data regarding the welfare of workers in corporations involved in PE and VC transactions.Works Cited[1] “Employee Ownership by the Numbers.” NCEO, 2024. https://www.nceo.org/articles/empl oyee-ownership-by-the-numbers.[2] “ERISA.” DOL. Accessed November 14, 2024. https://www.dol.gov/general/topic/h ealth- plans/erisa#:~:text=The%20Employ ee%20Retirement%20Income%20S ecurity,for%20individuals%20in%2 0these%20plans.[3] National Center for Employee Ownership. 2019. “What Is Employee Ownership? NCEO.” 2019. https://www.nceo.org/what- is-employee-ownership.[4] Gallup Inc. 2023. “Indicator: Employee Retention & Attraction.” 2023.https://www.gallup.com/467702/ind icator-employee-retention- attraction.aspx.[5] Dudley, Thomas, and Ethan Rouen. 2021. “The Big Benefits of Employee Ownership.” Harvard Business Review, May 13, 2021.
https://hbr.org/2021/05/the-big- benefits-of-employee-ownership.[6] “26 U.S. Code § 1042 - Sales of Stock to Employee Stock Ownership Plans or Certain Cooperatives.” 2022. LII / Legal Information Institute. 2022. https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/26/1042 .[7] Doak, Emily. 2023. “ETFs and Taxes: What You Need to Know.” Schwab Brokerage. July 2023. https://www.schwab.com/learn/stor y/etfs-and-taxes-what-you-need-to- know.[8] Rosen, Corey, and Michael Quarrey. 1987. “How Well Is Employee Ownership Working?” Harvard Business Review. September 1987. https://hbr.org/1987/09/how-well- is-employee-ownership-working.[9] Marketplace Resources. 2023. “Private Equity Leans into the Flexibility of ESOPs.” Verit Advisors. January 18, 2023. https://verit.com/private-equity- leans-into-the-flexibility-of-esops/.[10] Webster, Benjamin. 2022. “ESG and Private Equity Investing - OWL ESG.” OWL ESG. September 8, 2022.https://owlesg.com/2022/09/08/esg- and-private-equity-investing/.[11] Kong, Dongmin, and Yanan Wang. 2021. “Employee Stock Ownership Plans and Corporate Environmental Engagement.” SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.391536 6.[12] Seeman, Axel, Dale Hardcastle, Deike Diers, and Jacqueline Han. 2021. “The Expanding Case for ESG in Private Equity.” Bain. March 1, 2021. https://www.bain.com/insights/esg- investing-global-private-equity- report-2021/.[13] 
Aranoff, Shara. 2010. “Small and Medium- Sized Enterprises: Overview of Participation in U.S. Exports.”[14] Greene, Jim. 2021. “Environmental, Social, and Corporate Governance (ESG).” https://www.kennesaw.edu/coles/do cs/esg-greene-2021.pdf.[15] Markowitz, Dan. 2022. “Tax Treatment of ESOPs: Your Guide to Internal Revenue Code Section 1042.” Mncpa.org. 2022. https://www.mncpa.org/resources/in terest-areas/internal-articles/tax- treatment-of-esops-your-guide-to- internal-reve/.[16] U.S. Department of Labor. 2019. “ERISA.” 2019.https://www.dol.gov/general/topic/h ealth-plans/erisa.[17] Internal Revenue Service. n.d. “Employee Stock Ownership Plans (ESOPs) | Internal Revenue Service.” Www.irs.gov. https://www.irs.gov/retirement- plans/employee-stock-ownership- plans-esops.[18] "Loper Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo." Oyez. Accessed November 14, 2024. https://www.oyez.org/cases/2023/2 2-451.[19] CRS. 2020. “The Section 199ADeduction: How It Works and Illustrative Examples.” https://crsreports.congress.gov/prod uct/pdf/R/R46402.[20] “26 CFR § 1.1042-1T -Questions and Answers Relating to the Sales of Stock to Employee Stock Ownership Plans or Certain Cooperatives (Temporary).” 2014. LII / Legal Information Institute.2014.https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/26/1.1042-1T.
Pathways to Mobility: Affordable Public Transportation for Low-Income NYC ResidentsBy Aryan Shah, ans267@cornell.eduThe New York City Government and the MTA should provide half-priced subway and bus fares to those living at or below 200% of the federal poverty line in order to combat income inequality in New York City.
Background      Income inequality in the United States is a growing problem, with the top 10% of households holding 67% of the nation’s wealth while the bottom 50% possess just 2.5%.1 This disparity is particularly prevalent in New York City, where the wealthiest 20% of Manhattan residents earn, on average, 53 times more than the bottom 20%.2 Statewide, the top 1% earn over 44 times more than the bottom 99%.3 States with higher income inequality have lower life expectancies and higher mortality and obesity rates.4      Public transit provides low- income individuals, who often cannot afford cars, access to jobs to bring themselves out of poverty.5 Residents of the 10 lowest-income city council districts in New York are 45% more likely to commute via bus than the average New Yorker.6 However, the affordability of public transit remains a significant barrier for many low- income households.7 In New York City, as of 2024, 20% of residents reported difficulty affording public transit, rising to 30% among those living in poverty.8 In response to these challenges, the MTA (Metropolitan Transit Authority) introduced the Fair Fares program, which offers half-priced transit for NYC residents living at or below 120% of the federal poverty level.
However, only 56% of eligible New Yorkers have enrolled due to a lack of advertising, public awareness, and potentially fare evasion as well.8 Many eligible residents were unaware of the program or unsure how to apply.7 Furthermore, many low-income workers do not qualify for the program because of the enrollment threshold.8 It is clear that expanded public transit assistance for low-income individuals is needed to address the high cost of transit for low-income New Yorkers, which will serve as a critical step in reducing the city’s high income inequality levels.Policy Idea      To address New York City’s extreme levels of income inequality due to inequality in transportation access, the NYC government should expand the Fair Fares program to residents living at or below 200% of the federal poverty level, as the current 120% threshold still excludes some residents who cannot afford transit. This policy would make subways and non-express buses half-price for eligible residents, allowing them to access jobs to bring themselves out of poverty. Participants would apply for a special MetroCard, granting them half-price access to these services, and they would renew their eligibility annually to ensure
they still meet the income requirements. The program would be funded using the NYC congestion tax on cars, set to provide $15 billion to the MTA from 2020-2024. Funding may also include federal government subsidies. The policy would be proposed through NYC Councilwoman Selvena Brooks- Powers, the Chair of the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.Policy Analysis      The primary cost of expanding the Fair Fares program for low-income NYC residents would be the lost fare revenue from approximately 4.6 million NYC citizens who would no longer pay full fares.9,10 Assuming these individuals use the subway or bus twice daily over 262 workdays per year, this results in 2.41 billion rides annually.11 At the current fare of $2.90 per ride, this amounts to nearly $3.495 billion in lost revenue each year.12 Fares currently account for 23% of the MTA’s $19.38 billion budget, making this a substantial financial loss.13 To compensate for these lost fares, the MTA could tap into funds from the recently raised NYC congestion tax, which is projected to provide $15 billion over 4 years to fund MTA expansion.14 This would eliminate      
the need for fare hikes, as using congestion tax funds would allow the $3.495 billion in lost fare revenue to be covered, given that the tax provides $3.75 billion in increased revenue per year to the MTA.14      This increased access to public transit for low-income individuals from Fair Fares would support upward economic mobility for low-income individuals. Limited public transit expansion has been correlated with higher rates of unemployment, meaning that increasing public transit access would decrease unemployment rates for low-income individuals.15 This decrease in unemployment rates would bring lower-income individuals closer to higher-income NYC residents, thereby increasing chances for upward economic mobility.15 There is also a positive relationship between transit access and the wealth of a neighborhood due to job access.15      Fare reduction programs for low-income residents have proven to be successful in other cities. The Boston city government implemented a 50% fare reduction program for low-income residents, projected to increase low-income ridership by 30%.16Highlightsï As of 2024, income inequality in the US is growing, with the top 10% of households holding 67% of the nation’s wealth, while the bottom 50% holds only 2.5%.1ï Access to public transportation has proven to be a powerful tool for reducing poverty, enabling individuals to reach job
opportunities quickly and efficiently.5ï Affordability remains a significant barrier, as approximately 30% of impoverished people struggle to afford public transportation.8ï The city government of Boston implemented a 50% fare reduction program for low-income residents in the summer of 2024, which is expected to increase low- income ridership by 30%.16ï In order to address this problem, the New York City Government should expand their current Fair Fares program to those living at or below 200% of the federal poverty level, giving them half-price fares on all MTA subways and non-express buses.Implementation      The Office of NYC Councilwoman Selvena Brooks- Powers should sponsor the bill for this policy in the NYC Council, which would most likely pass due to the tendency of NYC residents and the City Council to support socially liberal policies such as this one. Councilwoman Brooks-Powers brings valuable experience in directing infrastructure funding and currently serves as the Chair of the Committee of Transportation and Infrastructure.17 Given their history of endorsing public transit improvements, advocacy organizations, including Transportation for America and the American Public Transportation Association, would also support the proposal by lobbying other NYC councilmembers.18, 19 The NYC Council would work closely with
the MTA to administer and oversee the expanded program.      The main challenge to implementing this expansion is the$3.495 billion in lost fares.12 Although the congestion tax hike would fully cover any lost fare revenue associated with the proposed Fair Fares expansion, only$255 million remain per year for any subway and bus upgrades.12, 14 The MTA can apply for government subsidies from President Biden’s Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, which allocated $8 billion to expand high-capacity rail and bus services in states across the US.20 If federal funding falls through, the MTA can also increase revenue by combatting fare evasion. The MTA can station more officials in high-traffic subway and bus stations to discourage potential fare evaders.21 Although there would be an associated personnel cost, the increased revenue would be significant, given that fare evasion affects 14% of subway and 48% of bus rides in New York City.22, 23 Administrative adjustments associated with special MetroCards could be combated by utilizing infrastructure from the existing Fair Fares program, using any of the aforementioned funding sources to cover the costs associated with program expansion, including personnel and administrative costs.      Limited publicity was another issue with the original Fair Fares program. To address this, the MTA will partner with community organizations to significantly publicize Fair Fares. The campaign will include posters and advertisements in low-income neighborhoods and public housing projects. Publicity would cost roughly $75-150 per advertisement, which could be covered by the 4 to      
1 economic return increased public transportation provides.24, 25 The MTA will also put advertisements on buses and subways, directly reaching eligible riders. To gather community feedback, the MTA will collaborate with community-based organizations in low-income communities to run surveys to determine the effectiveness of advertising campaigns.      The Fair Fares expansion will coincide with the NYC congestion tax on January 5th, 2025.14 Advertising will start simultaneously and continue throughout 2025. The MTA will also conduct quarterly ridership and advertising effectiveness evaluations starting in 2026.      The success of this program will be measured using quarterly evaluations of ridership growth among Fair Fares users. Given that the MTA already tracks ridership using MetroCard swipes, those who swipe using the special Fair Fares MetroCard would be tracked separately to measure the success of this program specifically.      Overall, expanding the Fair Fares program would fight against New York City’s income inequality by providing low-income individuals with increased access to jobs that can support their upward economic mobility.Works Cited[1] Kent, Ana Hernández, and Lowell Ricketts. “The State of U. S. Wealth Inequality.” The State ofU.S. Wealth Inequality. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, August 2, 2024.https://www.stlouisfed.org/institute- for-economic-equity/the-state-of- us-wealth-inequality.[2] Chen, Stefanos. “New York Is Rebounding for the Rich. Nearly
Everyone Else Is Struggling.” New York Times, September 28, 2023. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/09/ 28/nyregion/nyc-income-gap- wages.html.[3] “Inequality in New York & Options for Progressive Tax Reform,” Fiscal Policy Institute, November 10, 2022. https://fiscalpolicy.org/inequality- in-new-york-options-for- progressive-tax-reform.[4] Wilkinson, Richard G., and KateE. Pickett. “The enemy between us: The psychological and social costs of inequality.” European Journal of Social Psychology, vol. 47, no. 1,Feb. 2017, pp. 11–24,https://doi.org/10.1002/ejsp.2275.[5] “Transportation Access.” Urban Institute. Accessed October 9, 2024. https://upward- mobility.urban.org/framework/neig hborhoods/transportation.[6] “Bus Commutes Are Significantly Longer for Low- Income, Black, and Latino Bus Riders. Dedicated Space for Buses Is the Solution.” Transportation Alternatives. Accessed November 14, 2024.https://transalt.org/blog/bus- commutes-are-significantly-longer- for-low-income-black-and-latino- bus-riders-dedicated-space-for- buses-is-the-solution.[7] Sanchez, Thomas W. “Poverty, Policy, and Public Transportation.” Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 42, no. 5 (June 1, 2008): 833–41.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2008.01.011.[8] “CSS Report: New Yorkers Struggle to Afford Mass Transit; Expanding Fair Fares Can Help,” Community Service Society of New York, March 14, 2024. https://www.cssny.org/news/entry/c ss-report-new-yorkers-struggle-to-
afford-mass-transit-expanding-fair- fares#:~:text=Overall%2C%2020% 20percent%20of%20all,over%20the%20past%20three%20years.[9] “The State of Poverty and Disadvantage in New York City.” Columbia University Center on Poverty and Social Policy. Accessed November 1, 2024. https://www.povertycenter.columbi a.edu/nyc-poverty-tracker/the-state- of-poverty-and-disadvantage-in- 2022.[10] Perone, Jennifer. “Advantages and Disadvantages of Fare-Free Transit Policy.” NCTR-473-133. National Center for Transportation Research, October 2002. https://digitalcommons.usf.edu/cgi/ viewcontent.cgi?article=1216&cont ext=cutr_nctr.[11] “Working Day Payroll Calendar, 2024 | University Human Resources - The University of Iowa.” Accessed October 9, 2024. https://hr.uiowa.edu/pay/payroll- services/payroll-calendars/working- day-payroll-calendar-2024.[12] “Everything You Need to Know about Fares in New York.” Metropolitan Transit Authority. Accessed October 9, 2024. https://new.mta.info/fares.[13] “MTA Operating Budget Basics.” Accessed October 9, 2024. Metropolitan Transit Authority. https://new.mta.info/budget/MTA- operating-budget-basics.[14] Kaske, Michelle. “Hochul Plans to Revive NYC Congestion Pricing With $9 Toll.” Bloomberg, November 14, 2024. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/a rticles/2024-11-13/hochul-plans-to- revive-nyc-congestion-pricing-plan- with-9-toll.[15] Kaufman, Sarah, Mitchell Moss, Jorge Hernandez, and Justin Tyndall. “Mobility, Economic Opportunity and New York City[1] 
Neighborhoods.” The Rudin Center for Transportation at the NYU Wagner School, November 2015. https://wagner.nyu.edu/files/faculty/ publications/JobAccessNov2015.pd f.[16] “Making Transit More Affordable: MBTA Board Approves Low-Income Fare Program to Benefit Riders in 170+ Communities,” March 28, 2024. https://www.mbta.com/news/2024- 03-28/making-transit-more- affordable-mbta-board-approves- low-income-fare-program-benefit.[17] “Biography of Selvena Brooks- Powers” New York City Council. Accessed November 13, 2024. https://council.nyc.gov/selvena- brooks-powers/.[18] Transportation For America. “Home.” Transportation for America. Accessed November 1, 2024. https://t4america.org/.[19] 
APTAAdmin. “Home.” American Public Transportation Association. Accessed November 1, 2024. https://www.apta.com/.[20] “Guidebook to the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law | Build.Gov.” The White House. Accessed November 1, 2024. https://www.whitehouse.gov/build/ guidebook/.[21] Porath, Keiko, and Patricia Galilea. “Temporal Analysis of Fare Evasion in Transantiago: A Socio- Political View.” Research in Transportation Economics, Thredbo 16 conference, 83 (November 1,2020): 100958.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.retrec.2020.100958.[22] Stephen, Nessen. “Bloody Turn in NYC’s Fare Evasion Crackdown Raises Question: Is It Worth It?” Gothamist, September 20, 2024.https://gothamist.com/news/bloody-
turn-in-nycs-fare-evasion- crackdown-raises-question-is-it- worth-it.[23] Ley, Ana. “Fare Evasion Surges on N.Y.C. Buses, Where 48% of Riders Fail to Pay.” The New York Times, August 26, 2024, sec. New York. https://www.nytimes.com/2024/08/ 26/nyregion/nyc-bus-subway-fare- evasion.html.[24] “New York City Metro Area Subway-Train Advertising - Ads on PATH and New Jersey Transit Subways-Trains.” Blue Line Media. Accessed December 2, 2024. https://www.bluelinemedia.com/sub way-advertising/new-york-city-ny.[25] Osman, Marc. “Economic Impact of Public Transit.” American Public Transportation Association (blog). Accessed December 2, 2024. https://www.apta.com/research- technical-resources/economic- impact-of-public-transit/.[1] 
EDUCATION POLICY       Director: Sejal Sekhar Assistant Director: Danielle BerkowitzAnalysts: Reagan Allvin, Jaiden Fisher-Dayn, Claudia Nesin, Ben Nusbaum, Abigail Silverman, and Sanshray Singh
Eliminating Mandated Seniority-Based Teacher Layoffs in New York State to Ensure Educational EquityBy Reagan Allvin, rra49@cornell.eduNew York enforces a “last-in, first-out” policy by laying off new teachers first for firing public school teachers, threatening the careers of early-career educators and disrupting the classroom environment. Eliminating this mandate will maintain a diverse, supportive teacher workforce.
Background      Throughout the pandemic, states have spent a disproportionate amount of federal funds on hiring new teachers due to the influx of funding provided by the Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief Fund (ESSER).1 One estimate records that 20% of ESSER funds were spent on staffing. Despite the current teacher shortage, economists predict a sharp increase in layoffs as ESSER spending is cut off in the upcoming years.2      Ideally, teacher layoffs would not be necessary, allowing for an environment of mentorship between new and experienced educators. However, just as emergency funding created budget space for new educators, its absence leaves teacher reduction as the most commonly predicted budget cut among district leaders3. In the state of New York, this prediction has the potential for dire consequences.New York currently mandates a layoff policy in which teachers must be fired in the order of reverse seniority.4,5 However, this perspective is outdated and ignores current research.      Frequently laying off less experienced teachers produces equity issues through widening the achievement gap. People of color
are approximately 45% more likely to be early-career teachers, which disproportionately serve low- income communities and minority students.6,7 Students experiencing high teacher turnover score lower in both reading and math, especially if they were already low-performing.6 A diverse teacher workforce supports students across the board, with teachers of color significantly increasing math and reading scores alongside feelings of self-efficacy among students.8 New York threatens this potential by placing seniority at paramount importance in the face of a possible wave of layoffs while failing to consider that in doing so, they also remove teachers of color from the classroom.6Policy Idea      To resolve issues stemming from seniority-based layoffs, the New York state government should modify existing legislation. Articles 2510 and 2588 of New York State education law require teachers with the least seniority, including years of substitute and paraprofessional experience, to be laid off first in the case of a position termination.4,5 State legislators should modify the sections of these statutes describing layoff policy to eliminate seniority as the first line of discretion in
determining which teacher to lay off in the case of a position termination. In order to replace this first consideration for termination, a task force should be assembled to find another consideration with more research backing from New York communities.Policy Analysis      While the post-pandemic educational era is like nothing observed before, those working in school hiring policy can look to the Great Recession as a reference, since it was the latest period of mass layoffs to date.7 States and districts had to determine how to lay off teaching staff while limiting the impact on students, and this practice will likely continue following the ESSER financial cliff. States who did not use seniority- based layoffs were found to significantly increase high-school graduation rates in the long term, compared with those who did not10.      When school districts were forced to look beyond seniority, they had to investigate other measures of teacher quality. New York State currently evaluates teacher performance through principal ratings, but research finds a positive slant too extreme to accurately determine real impact from most principal evaluations.11          
      Value-added measures, uses changes in test scores to link the presence of a given teacher to a given student’s improvement. These measures have strong research backing, with teachers who score highly on short-term value-added measures being linked to students’ increased college attendance and socioeconomic mobility later in life.12 However, policymakers must note that this measure is purely correlative and sensitive to external community factors outside of the teacher.13 A more sophisticated primary measure is necessary, but should be determined with thorough consideration. Through promptly beginning research on impactful teacher factors, New York can protect early-career and underrepresented educators and eliminate seniority as the foremost argument in personnel decisions sooner rather than later.Highlightsï Approximately 20% of COVID-19 K-12 emergency funding, which will run out in the coming years, was allocated toward paying staff.1 New York’s “first-in, last-out” mandates unfairly impact disadvantaged schools by disproportionately increasing already-rampant teacher turnover.7,8ï Removing reverse-seniority layoff mandates would protect early-career educators, and, in turn, protect the diversity of the teacher workforce.6.ï Other estimates of teacher quality (such as value added measures and principal evaluations) are adequate, but this policy should also
include provisions for increased research on impactful teacher factors.Implementation      New York State should pass a bill to amend education statutes to omit the mandate of seniority-based layoffs within the upcoming legislative session. This legislative change will limit the immediate disproportionate quantity of post-ESSER layoffs on newer educators. To convince lawmakersto reform the statutes, advocates can develop and present case studies based on the successes of any of the 20 states which restrict “last-in.first-out” policies.10      To best serve teachers and students alike, New York should pursue a more standardized approach. Prior to making any additional statutory change, the New York State Department of Education (NYSED) must analyze which aspects of teaching most accurately predict student outcomes. NYSED should launch a series of Randomly-Controlled Trials (RCTs) in schools across the state to analyze various factors of teacher performance, including short-term academic teacher value- added measures and teacher absenteeism. The exhaustive list of teacher effectiveness measures should be developed by a legislative task force composed of advocates for the aforementioned bill, with the input of teacher unions (to ensure fairness) and advocacy groups.Over the course of the next two years, NYSED should measure engagement-based student outcomes such as changes in student-reported self-efficacy to thoroughly measure how different teacher factors affect students’ willingness to learn.      
Following the data collection and analysis of this statewide study, NYSED or a separate legislative task force can determine impacts of specific agreed-upon teacher factors on student engagement outcomes.Legislators should pass an additional bill modifying New York Education Law articles 2510 and 2588 to prioritize factors with the strongest empirical proof in layoff situations, and districts should recommend these factors as ongoing accountability measures.Works Cited[1] “Esser Funding and School System Jobs: Evidence from Job Posting Data.” CALDER, April 1, 2024.https://caldercenter.org/publications/esser-funding-and-school-system- jobs-evidence-job-posting-data.[2] “Layoffs, Shortages, and the Esser Cliff: Making Sense of a Paradoxical Labor Market.” Learning Policy Institute, October 2024.https://learningpolicyinstitute.org/bl og/layoffs-shortages-esser-cliff- paradoxical-labor-market.[3] Diliberti, Melissa Kay, and Heather L. Schwarz. “Districts’ Pandemic Recovery Efforts as COVID-Relief Aid Expires: Selected Findings from the Spring 2024 American School District Panel Survey.” RAND, July 30, 2024.https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA956-23.html.[4] “NYS Open Legislation.” NYS Open Legislation. Accessed October 9, 2024. https://www.nysenate.gov/legislatio n/laws/EDN/2510.[5] “2023 New York Laws;EDN; Article 52; 2588 - Seniority, Retention and Displacement Rights
in Connection with Abolition of Positions in City School Districts of Cities Having More than One Million.” Justia Law. Accessed October 9, 2024. https://law.justia.com/codes/new- york/edn/title-2/article-52/2588/.[6] The inequitable effects of teacher layoffs: What we know and can do. Accessed October 2024. https://direct.mit.edu/edfp/article/17/2/367/108661/The-Inequitable- Effects-of-Teacher-Layoffs-What- We.[7] Goldhaber, Dan, Vanessa Quince, and Roddy Theobald. “Has It Always Been This Way? Tracing the Evolution of Teacher Quality Gaps in U.S. Public Schools.” American Educational Research Journal 55, no. 1 (October 12,2017): 171–201.https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831217 733445.[8] 
Ronfeldt, Matthew, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff. “How Teacher Turnover Harms Student Achievement.” American Educational Research Journal, February 1, 2013. https://cepa.stanford.edu/content/ho w-teacher-turnover-harms-student- achievement.[9] Blazar, D. “Teachers of color, culturally responsive teaching, and student outcomes: Experimental Evidence from the Random Assignment of Teachers to Classes”, December 2021 https://edworkingpapers.com/sites/d efault/files/ai21-501.pdf.[10] A. Bekkerman, D. Boyd, R. Chetty, and D. Goldhaber. “Restricting Seniority as a Factor in Public School District Layoffs: Analyzing the Impact of State Legislation on Graduation Rates.” Economics of Education Review, December 7, 2019.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/scie nce/article/abs/pii/S0272775718305 028.[11] Grissom, Jason A., and Susanna Loeb. “Assessing Principals’ Assessments: Subjective Evaluations of Teacher.” Education Finance and Policy, June 27, 2017. https://cepa.stanford.edu/content/ass essing-principals-assessments- subjective-evaluations-teacher- effectiveness-low-and-high-stakes- environments.[12] Hanushek. “Value-Added Models of Teachers”. 2013. http://hanushek.stanford.edu/sites/d efault/files/publications/Hanushek 2013 Focus 29(2).pdf .[13] “ASA statement on using value-added models for Educational Assessment.” 2012.https://www.amstat.org/docs/default-source/amstat-documents/pol- asavam-statement.pdf.
Revamping Federal Mentorship Programs to Address ‘Hidden Curricula’ in Higher EducationBy Danielle Berkowitz, db755@cornell.eduHidden curricula – the unspoken social, cultural, and academic expectations – have increasingly disadvantaged first-generation and low-income students. The Department of Education should revamp federal mentorship programs, such as TRIO, to make hidden curricula explicit, providing all students with a clear understanding of higher education expectations.
Background      Students across the United States experience vastly different learning opportunities, as many minority and low-income students face unequal access to resources compared to their affluent peers. This disparity not only affects students’ K-12 experience but also limits avenues for higher education and college readiness. As students transition to higher education, the effects of this inequality persist.Students from wealthier backgrounds often come equipped with cultural capital, which helps them navigate the unspoken norms of higher education, like interacting with professors, understanding syllabi, and attending office hours.1 These informal but crucial skills, known as “hidden curricula,” are assumed to be universal; however, many first-generation and low- income students have never been exposed to them.2 As a result, hidden curriculum perpetuates educational inequities, putting these students at a disadvantage in higher education.      The federal government currently offers a series of eight mentorship programs, such as Upward Bound, Talent Search, and Student Support Services (TRIO) Programs, to help students overcome economic, social, academic, and cultural barriers in
education.3 Three of these programs— Student Support Services, the McNair Post-Baccalaureate Achievement Program, and Veterans’ Upward Bound — specifically focus on barriers in higher education; nevertheless, these programs do not address components of hidden curriculum. Instead, they concentrate on other elements such as tutoring, academic coaching, and supplemental coursework. Furthermore, the programs lack clear, measurable objectives, making it difficult to assess their effectiveness.4 Program outcomes are defined by long-term student success without considering the specific determinants of that success. This approach perpetuates inequality, as it fails to address one of the root causes — hidden curricula — and instead relies on academic support as a supplementary fix.5Policy Idea      The Department of Education (ED) should revamp federal TRIO programs in higher education to address challenges associated with the hidden curriculum. This revamped approach would introduce targeted initiatives focused on key aspects of hidden curricula, such as financial literacy, networking, career readiness, and academic navigation.
These programs will enable students to learn practical strategies for interacting with professors, understanding syllabi, attending office hours, navigating campus resources, and more. Additionally, the revamped programs should incorporate specialized training for mentors to equip them with the tools needed to guide students effectively through the hidden expectations of higher education.The curriculum should be updated yearly to remain relevant and tailored to the norms of specific institutions, ensuring program effectiveness. The ED should also conduct annual reviews of the program content in collaboration with mentors and student representatives to take into account feedback from students about challenges and shifts in hidden curriculum.Policy Analysis      Implementing a policy that addresses the knowledge gap between students of different socioeconomic backgrounds is essential to leveling the playing field in higher education.6 Without modifying federal mentorship programs to address hidden curricula, higher education opportunities for all Americans will continue to be limited by their financial constraints.      
      The structure of federal TRIO programs makes them ideal for implementing modules that address hidden curricula, as they effectively reach students who would benefit from them the most. Congress mandates that two-thirds of TRIO participants come from families with incomes at or below 150% of the federal poverty level and where neither parent has graduated from college. As a result, TRIO programs currently serve more than 880,000 first-generation and low-income students.Additionally, with $48.8 million in annual funding, including 114 program grants and sponsorships from 50 historically Black colleges and universities coupled with funds from ED’s Higher Education Act, these programs have a proven track record of having the financial means to support underrepresented student populations and dismantle these hidden education barriers.7      In addition, research has shown that a simple, cost-effective intervention, such as a workshop, can effectively assess and address hidden curricula. The standardized workshop used in the study significantly improved students' understanding of hidden curricula and successfully improved their academic performance.8 Making hidden curricula explicit also helps build cultural capital, which is proven to boost academic success in higher education.9 Given these successful results, implementing similar workshops administered by existing federal mentorship programs should expect to yield similar results. By focusing on hidden curricula, TRIO can enhance its existing initiatives, ensuring that students not only gain access to educational opportunities but also develop the skills and knowledge
needed to navigate the complexities and expectations of higher education.Highlightsï Students from minority and low-income backgrounds face unequal learning opportunities and limited exposure to “hidden curricula” compared to their more affluent peers, perpetuating inequality in higher education.ï Federal government mentorship programs such as TRIO, which are designed to help students overcome economic, social, academic, and cultural barriers in education do not address key elements of the hidden curriculum.ï The federal government should revamp TRIO programs to focus on hidden curricula, offering targeted initiatives in financial literacy, networking, career readiness, and academic navigation to help students effectively engage with professors, syllabi, office hours, and campus resources.ï Expanding federal TRIO programs to include initiatives on hidden curricula could better prepare students for the expectations of higher education, ensuring that low-income and first- generation students can successfully navigate the academic system.Implementation      There is currently substantial bipartisan support for
TRIO, demonstrated by the continuous support of increased funding by Congress. In 2023, a funding deal included a $54 million (4.7%) increase for TRIO in Fiscal Year (FY) 2023.10 Additionally, the Senate Appropriations Committee recently approved a FY25 funding bill for TRIO, raising its budget by$20 million over FY24. The bill passed with strong bipartisan support by a vote of 26-2.11 This reinforces the commitment to expanding the programs’ impact and highlights the feasibility of revamping programs to address hidden curricula. Given this, there should be broad support for ED to revamp TRIO programs.      Under the Every Student Succeeds Act, the federal government allocates Title I funds to educational facilities serving low-income student populations, determined primarily by federal census poverty estimates and thecost of education in each state.12 To cover administrative needs — such as developing specific program modules, maintaining relevant information, and training staff — the federal government should bolster Title I funding to support the enhancement of these existing programs. This additional funding should extend to public higher education institutions, with private institutions also eligible to apply, provided they demonstrate financial need.      To design the new initiatives, ED should first conduct a baseline needs assessment among higher education institutions currently offering TRIO programs to identify hidden curriculum challenges. ED should then collaborate with institutions to design curriculum modules, ensuring that program content      
aligns with the norms, expectations, and resources of differing institutions. To minimize additional costs of module implementation, ED should encourage institutions to partner with local organizations such as nonprofits and to connect with on-campus groups for guest speakers and peer mentors.      Before nationwide implementation, ED should pilot these modules within an existing TRIO program to empirically validate the effectiveness of learning modules. Testing the modules at a single institution will allow for evaluation and adjustments, ensuring they are effective before expanding to widespread implementation.Following a successful pilot, TRIO funding from ED’s Higher Education Act, along with additional Title I funding, will support expanding the program across high-need institutions.Works Cited[1] Hopkins, Laura, Lana Saciragic, Joanna Kim, and Glenn Posner. “The Hidden Curriculum: Exposing the Unintended Lessons of Medical Education.” Cureus, October 25, 2016.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/ articles/PMC5120972/.[2] Cornbleth, Catherine. “Beyond Hidden Curriculum?” Journal of Curriculum Studies 16, no. 1(January 1984): 29–36. https://doi.org/10.1080/0022027840 160105.[3] 
Hamm, Terrance L., and Barbara Clapp. “Coe and Trio Programs.” Council for Opportunity in Education, June 20, 2024. https://coenet.org/coe-and-trio- programs/.[4] Tyson, Charlie. “Programs Should Try to Unveil Colleges’ ‘Hidden Curriculum.’” Inside Higher Education News, Events and Jobs. Accessed November 5, 2024. https://www.insidehighered.com/ne ws/2014/08/04/book-argues- mentoring-programs-should-try- unveil-colleges-hidden-curriculum.[5] Hidden curriculum as one of the current issues of Curriculum. Accessed November 5, 2024. https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1 083566.pdf.[6] Neuman, Susan B., and Donna Celano. “The Knowledge Gap: Implications of Leveling the Playing Field for Low?income and Middle?income Children.” Reading Research Quarterly 41, no. 2 (April6, 2006): 176–201.https://doi.org/10.1598/rrq.41.2.2.[7] Program Statute - Trio and Gear up (PDF). Accessed November 5, 2024.https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/l ist/ope/trio/statute-trio-gu.pdf.[8] Hopkins, Laura, Lana Saciragic, Joanna Kim, and Glenn Posner. “The Hidden Curriculum: Exposing the Unintended Lessons of Medical Education.” Cureus, October 25, 2016.https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.845.[9] Jin, Hui, Shi Jiao, Xu Ma, and Yunan Xia. “Cultural Capital as a
Predictor of School Success: Evidence and Gender Differences in Chinese Middle Schools.” Nature News, June 29, 2024. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41 599-024-03382-x#:~:text=Recent%20research%20h as%20indicated%20that,settings%2 0(J%C3%A6ger%2C%202011).[10] “Congress Announces Bipartisan Funding Deal, Includes 4.7% Increase for Trio for FY 2023.” Council for Opportunity in Education, December 20, 2022. https://coenet.org/news- impact/advocacy-update/congress- announces-bipartisan-funding-deal- includes-4-7-increase-for-trio-for- fy-2023/.[11] “Senate Committee Approves$20M Increase for Trio Programs: Here’s How to Keep the Momentum.” Council for Opportunity in Education, October 17, 2024. https://coenet.org/news- impact/advocacy-update/senate- approves-20m-increase-for-trio- programs-heres-how-to-keep-the- momentum/.[12] “Title I, Part A: Improving BASIC Programs Operated by Leas Fact Sheet.” New York State Education Department. Accessed November 5, 2024. https://www.nysed.gov/essa/title-i- part-improving-basic-programs- operated-leas-fact-sheet.[1] 
Combatting the School-to-Prison Pipeline: Removing Police Presence from New York City Public SchoolsBy Jaiden Fisher-Dayn, jf884@cornell.eduIn order to address racial inequities in K-12 education and enhance school safety, NYC public schools should remove NYPD school safety officers and implement restorative justice measures. By removing officers, responses to student behavior will be in the hands of school counselors who can handle situations through methods and diversion programs that reintegrate students into class rather than suspensions and expulsion.
Background      Since the 1970s, United States K-12 public schools have increasingly used on-site full-time police officers, increasing from fewer than 100 to 20,000.1 While police presence aims to promote safety, increased policing only creates the illusion of security without addressing realissues.2 New York is one of just seven states where over 50% of schools have a police presence. As of late February 2023, the number of active New York City Police Department school safety agents totaled almost 3,900.3 In fact, research shows that school policing exacerbates inequity through disproportionate arrests of disabled, Black, Latinx, Indigenous, and LGBTQ+ students.4 From 2016 to 2020, 91% of all arrests at NYC schools are Black and Latinx young people, despite these students being only 66% of the enrolled population. Furthermore, the rise in school policing has come at the expense of other important school authorities. Almost one-third of American K-12 students attend schools with police presence, lacking sufficient nurses, counselors, or social workers.5      Instead of rehabilitative responses to misconduct, such as
peer mediating or using dialogue to resolve conflicts, many schools have taken a retributive approach. These retributive policing approaches result in suspensions and other disciplinary actions that disproportionately affect children of color.5 On average, 250 preschoolers face suspension or expulsion each day.6 More broadly, nearly 3 million K-12 students endure suspensions, and over 100,000 get expelled every year.7 These disciplinary actions have harmed educational outcomes. They lead to academic struggles, increased dropout rates, and feed into the school-to-prison pipeline, in which young students from low- income backgrounds are more likely to be jailed due to punitive policies that push students out of the classroom.8 For instance, a study from the University of California, Irvine found that high school students who experience suspension or expulsion are more than twice as likely to face criminal charges as young adults.9Policy Idea      In order to address the issues of school policing, police officers should be removed from K-12 public schools in New York City.Instead, funds should be reallocated
to alternative safety measures, which may include mental health professionals, counselors, and restorative justice programs.Counselors and mental health professionals will be responsible for addressing student issues.      By focusing on root causes and addressing issues through dialogues, retributive approaches will not be necessary, even in violent interactions between students. The proposed approach prioritizes mental well-being and non-punitive approaches to student misconduct. There are many implemented models and blueprints for effective restorative justice models in schools. The NYCDOE will evaluate the funding needed using the money that they currently spend on police presence. Overall, this policy will reduce suspensions and expulsions, improve academic outcomes, and create a safer and more supportive learning environment for all students.Policy Analysis      Transformative approaches to school safety have yielded positive results around the country. For example, in Chicago, removing School Resource Officers (SROs) led to a decrease in high-level discipline infractions.10 Schools      
retaining SROs had a larger proportion of Black students and experienced higher suspension rates. Eliminating these officers would mitigate racial biases and keep more students in school.Furthermore, in Des Moines, Black students were six times more likely to have contact with police than their white counterparts.11 When the Des Moines school board redirected funds from policing to restorative practices, student arrests decreased, and the sense of safety among students increased.12      These initiatives have yielded promising results, including reduced court referrals, reduced suspensions, and an increase in staff appropriately responding to behavioral crises.13 These results highlight that this policy is both effective and equitable. This policy is also cost-effective. The financial burden of employing police in schools diverts funds from other necessities that would address school safety without perpetuating inequities. In 2018, 26 states invested over $960 million in enhancing SRO presence and school security, while 60% of public schools did not offer mental health services, and 18% had no paid school nurses.14 In schools where Black students were the majority, 20.7% had more security staff than mental health professionals, compared to just 2.5% in majority White schools.15 If police were removed, schools would be able to afford mental health staff.      Funding for restorative justice programs would be cheaper,16 as training existing educators and staff would not require paying additional full time salaries. Furthermore, redirecting funds into rehabilitative training
and mental health resources will have a positive effect, rather than continuing to spend millions of dollars on a system that fails to keep students safe. Restorative policies have been proven to improve the average GPA and reduce student gang membership, depression, and substance abuse.17Highlightsï While the federal government has invested over $1 billion to increase police presence in schools over the past 25 years, these institutions still lack adequate mental health resources and school nurses.ï Increasing school policing exacerbates inequity through disproportionate punishments with disabled, Black, LatinX, Indigenous, and LGBTQ+ students.ï To address the inequities of school policing, New York City should eliminate police presence in public schools and resort to alternative safety measures that focus on mental health and dialogue between students and staff, ultimately leading to an environment where students aren’t punished through suspensions and expulsions, but reintegrated into the classroom.ï Restorative justice programs around the country have been successful in over 40 school districts that have already transitioned from school policing to alternative and restorative methods.Implementation      
To successfully implement this policy, New York City should begin with a phase-out approach. The NYC Department of Education should start decreasing police presence in selected school buildings so schools can eventually transition away from NYPD presence. Fewer police officers will allow educators more opportunities to manage student behaviors.Cutting down on police presence will allow funds to be reallocated to extracurriculars, teaching and learning improvements, mental health resources, and counseling.Simultaneously, restorative school programs will be implemented at these schools.      In addition, increasing funding for restorative school programs should be a city priority. To successfully transition from school policing to rehabilitative and restorative approaches, New York City needs to significantly reallocate funds for restorative justice. In 2024, 6.5 million dollars was budgeted for restorative justice programs in comparison to over$300 million dollars spent on NYPD School Safety Officers.1,2 Research indicates that the cost to implement restorative programs in the first year is about $48,000 per school.18 A substantial reallocation in school safety funding would allow the development and implementation of safe and successful alternatives to policing in public schools.      Even without policing, safety within schools is paramount. The process of implementing alternative forms of school safety should include soliciting feedback and suggestions from school and community members, advocacy groups, students, and parents. These key agents should provide feedback      
on safety protocols and mental health resources. Including school members, advocacy groups, students, and parents will effectively help develop and revise training programs that educators and counselors must complete at the start of every school year, using successful programs as a model for implementation.A committee within the NYC Department of Education would oversee and implement training programs into schools, collaborating with community and advocacy groups. This committee would oversee school safety responses and ensure the prioritization of mental health and restorative practices over punishments and suspensions.Funding for this would be accounted for in the initial reallocation of funds.      Advocacy groups, including Integration and Innovation Initiative at NYU Metro Center, Dignity in Schools New York, and the NYCLU, can help support city policymakers in implementing new restorative justice programs. These organizations have specialized in understanding policing in schools and researching how to implement successful alternatives.      Addressing potential challenges and backlash from other policymakers is imperative for ensuring the feasibility of this program. Current NYC Mayor Eric Adams has increased NYPD school safety officers in his tenure, indicating that this proposal would face political backlash.19 However, research shows that students are not safer with police officers in schools. Furthermore, building a broad coalition of community leaders, educators, and parents will
strengthen the case for ending school policing. Previously, under community pressure, former Mayor DeBlasio agreed to move control of thousands of school safety agents to the education department from the police department.20 It is time for an alternative that will not only work to combat racial inequities perpetuated by retributive policing in schools but that will keep students safe.Works Cited[1] “The End of School Policing.” California Law Review. Accessed December 15, 2024. https://www.californialawreview.or g/print/the-end-of-school-policing.[2] Morrison, Nick. “Police on Campus Criminalize Students Instead of Keeping Them Safe, Study Finds.” Forbes, November 10, 2023.https://www.forbes.com/sites/nickm orrison/2023/11/10/police-on- campus-criminalize-students- instead-of-keeping-them-safe- study-finds/.[3] “City Eliminates Hundreds of Vacant School Safety Positions After More Than 20 Percent Decline in Safety Agent Staffing in City’s Public Schools over Three Years.” New York City Independent Budget Office, March 2023. https://www.ibo.nyc.ny.us/iboreport s/city-eliminates-hundreds-of- vacant-school-safety-positions- after-more-than-20-percent-decline- in-safety-agent-staffing-in-citys- public-schools-over-three-years- march-2023.pdf.[4] “We Spend Millions Policing Students. It Doesn’t Make Our Schools Safer.” Vera Institute of Justice. Accessed December 15, 2024.https://www.vera.org/news/we-
spend-millions-policing-students-it- doesnt-make-our-schools-safer.[5] “Juvenile Justice: School-to- Prison Pipeline.” ACLU. Accessed December 15, 2024. https://www.aclu.org/issues/juvenil e-justice/juvenile-justice-school- prison-pipeline.[6] “Preschool Suspensions, Expulsions Harmful but Common.” Chalkbeat, January 18, 2023. https://www.chalkbeat.org/2023/1/1 8/23559188/preschool-suspensions- expulsions-harmful-common.[7] “The School-to-Prison Pipeline.” Learning for Justice, Spring 2013. https://www.learningforjustice.org/ magazine/spring-2013/the-school- to-prison-pipeline.[8] “School Discipline Research.” UCI School of Education. Accessed December 15, 2024. https://education.uci.edu/penner_sc hool_discipline_2022.html.[9] “Removing School Resource Officers Hasn’t Led to More Disciplinary Issues or Made Students Less Safe.” WTTW News, June 26, 2024.https://news.wttw.com/2024/06/26/r emoving-school-resource-officers- hasn-t-led-more-disciplinary-issues- or-made-students.[10] “Des Moines Students Win Our Mannheimer Youth Advocacy Award.” ACLU of Iowa. Accessed December 15, 2024. https://www.aclu- ia.org/en/news/des-moines- students-win-our-mannheimer- youth-advocacy-award.[11] "The City That Kicked Cops Out of Schools and Tried Restorative Practices Instead." In These Times. Accessed December 15, 2024.https://inthesetimes.com/article/the- city-that-kicked-cops-out-of-
schools-and-tried-restorative- practices-instead.[12] “Do We Need Police in Schools? Creating Safety for All Students.” Center for Policing Equity. Accessed December 15, 2024.https://policingequity.org/resources/ blog/do-we-need-police-in-schools- creating-safety-for-all-students.[13] “Research to Consider as Schools Address Community Demands to Renegotiate School- Police Partnerships.” Child Trends. Accessed December 15, 2024. https://www.childtrends.org/publica tions/research-to-consider-as- schools-address-community- demands-to-renegotiate-school- police-partnerships.[14] “Compared to Majority-White Schools, Majority-Black Schools Are More Likely to Have Security Staff.” Child Trends. Accessed December 15, 2024.
https://www.childtrends.org/publica tions/compared-to-majority-white- schools-majority-black-schools-are- more-likely-to-have-security-staff.[15] “The Impact of Restorative Practices on School Climate.” Learning Policy Institute. Accessed December 15, 2024. https://learningpolicyinstitute.org/pr oduct/impact-restorative-practices- report.[16] “The Prevalence and the Price of Police in Schools.” UConn Neag School of Education, October 27, 2020.https://education.uconn.edu/2020/1 0/27/the-prevalence-and-the-price- of-police-in-schools/.[17] “Which Districts Have Cut School Policing Programs?” Education Week, June 2021. https://www.edweek.org/leadership/ which-districts-have-cut-school- policing-programs/2021/06.[18] 
“Mayor’s Office and CUNY Invest $6.5M in Restorative Justice for 16 NYC Organizations.” Make the Road New York. Accessed December 15, 2024. https://maketheroadny.org/mayors- office-and-cuny-invest-6-5m-in- restorative-justice-for-16-nyc- organizations/.[19] “NYPD Budget Report.” New York City Council. Accessed December 15, 2024. https://council.nyc.gov/budget/wp- content/uploads/sites/54/2021/03/05 6-NYPD.pdf.[20] “Rejecting the Mayor's Militarization of Schools and Communities in NYC.” Alliance for Quality Education of New York, June 11, 2024.https://www.aqeny.org/2024/06/11/ rejecting-the-mayors-militarization- of-schools-and-communities-in- nyc/.
How Universal Pre-K Threatens Child Care Accessibility: A Case for Mixed DeliveryBy Claudia Nesin, can89@cornell.eduThe implementation of universal pre-K programs in many states threatens the economic viability of childcare centers, exacerbating the childcare crisis. States expanding access to universal pre-K should be mandated to do so through a mixed delivery model.
Background      Advocates tout universal access to preschool as critical for accessibility and equality in early childhood care and education (ECCE). President Biden’s 2021 American Families Plan called for universal access to preschool for all three- and four- year-olds, and many states have since begun implementing state-funded pre-K programs.1,2 However, these programs have had an unforeseen consequence, putting their benefits at risk and threatening to further degrade our already fraught early childhood system. As public pre-K expands, it drives childcare providers out of business, exacerbating preexisting childcare deserts and driving up childcare costs.3,4 One study found that implementation of public pre-K in NYC reduced one day care seat for every seven four-year-olds who enrolled in the program; alarmingly, every seat lost was in a high- poverty area. The quality of centers near public pre-K facilities also diminished.4      In Tulsa, Oklahoma, where 70% of four-year-olds are enrolled in public pre-K, 43% of all licensed ECCE providers have closed and ECCE costs have risen by an average of 33%.5,6 This issue occurs because private childcare providers derive nearly all of their profit from three- and four-year-olds —
providing infant and toddler care actually loses money due to the high staff-to-children ratio it requires.7 The rise of publicly funded pre-K has diminished the number of preschool-aged children in private care, despite the sustained demand for infant and toddler care. A study of nine states and Washington, D.C. found that for every slot of licensed childcare, there are more than five infants and toddlers, over three times the ratio when measuring preschool-aged children.8 Furthermore, 95% of counties studied were classified as childcare deserts, a deficit especially pronounced in rural and low-income areas. This absence of childcare forces parents out of the workforce, a burden falling largely upon mothers.9      Additionally, the earliest investments in children bear the highest returns, so inadvertently sacrificing the accessibility of childcare for that of preschool is likely to harm children’s success.10Policy Idea      To mitigate growing threats to already limited childcare accessibility, states implementing subsidization of preschool should utilize a mixed-delivery system that includes both private center-based and home-based care. Mixed- delivery systems enable state and federal funding to support preschool
programs in various settings — public schools, center-based care, federally-funded means-tested Head Start preschool programs, religious centers, and, in some states, family or home-based childcare.11 Despite the fact that home-based care serves about three million children, only about half of states that implement mixed-delivery allow family childcare (FCC) providers to receive state funding.12 Home-based care is most utilized by rural families, families of marginalized racial groups, and low-income individuals who prioritize affordability, convenience, and flexible scheduling.2,13 It is also disproportionately provided by women of color.14 The FCC inclusive mixed-delivery funding structure subsidizes the care of private and FCC providers along with public pre-K facilities, helping them retain their preschool-aged children and remain economically viable.Policy Analysis      The implementation of a mixed-delivery childcare system that includes FCC providers would facilitate family access to local, high-quality, culturally and linguistically responsive care, available even during non- traditional hours. Mixed-delivery has demonstrated to meet these goals. A report by the Virginia      
Early Childhood Foundation found that the state’s mixed-delivery program successfully increased the accessibility of high-quality ECCE, particularly for low-income families.15 The study also found that the mixed-delivery program’s investment in ECCE providers enabled them to bolster program quality. Additionally, Colorado has mandated a family childcare inclusive mixed-delivery system for their universal pre-K program in order to prevent the loss of providers and consequent increase in costs and decrease in availability; leverage all existing childcare facilities to maximize accessibility; prioritize familial choice; and account for the diverse needs of distinct communities. The state has already seen success for these initiatives in Denver and Summit County.16      Enabling family childcare providers to access additional funding, such as that obtained through inclusion in preschool subsidization programs, has been demonstrated to prevent closures. In Minnesota, access to Child Care Stabilization Grants through the American Rescue Plan decreased the risk of family childcare provider closure — just 5% of providers who received funding closed during the pandemic, as opposed to 26% of providers who did not.17 This illustrates that the loss of FCC providers is rooted in inadequate funding, rather than disinterest in the field.      For underappreciated childcare providers, particularly those responsible for FCC, this mixed-delivery model would denote them as a legitimate facet of the childcare team. It would enable them to maintain financial viability by preventing the loss of profitable
three- and four-year-old children, preserving the jobs of a group disproportionately composed of racial and ethnic minority women.18Highlightsï The implementation of public pre-K programs nationwide is putting private childcare providers out of business, exacerbating the lack of availability and affordability within the childcare market.4ï To resolve this issue, public pre-K should be subsidized through mixed-delivery systems, which fund preschool programs in many settings, including public schools, center-based care, Head Start programs, religious centers, and family or home-based childcare.11ï Mixed-delivery systems provide parents with the agency to choose between a range of preschool options, enabling access to high- quality, local, culturally and linguistically appropriate care, available during non- traditional hours.16ï A mixed-delivery pre-K system is feasible due to bipartisan support, successful examples across the nation, and its efficient use of pre-existing childcare infrastructure.20, 21, 6Implementation      Due to high bipartisan support for the measure, the implementation of mixed-delivery funding for subsidized pre-K is very feasible.19 This ability to generate bipartisan support was exemplified during the 2024 vice presidential
debate, in which both candidates supported a mixed-delivery system in order to strengthen parent choice in childcare.20 Additionally, as mixed-delivery pre-K utilizes pre- existing infrastructure, implementation is time- and cost- efficient.6      When implementing a mixed-delivery model, states should look to the models provided by previously established systems.Successful examples of mixed- delivery include Washington’s Early Childhood Education and Assistance Program, North Carolina’s Smart Start Network, and West Virginia’s WV pre-K.21 The methods adopted by these states vary, and those considering implementation should determine which model would work best for them by performing a comparative analysis of their demographics, political ideologies, and the availability of funding as compared to example states. Next, states should develop a clear and comprehensive legislative framework defining their mixed- delivery model, outlining eligibility criteria, funding mechanisms, and quality standards. States should ensure that both center- and home- based childcare providers are eligible for funding, ensuring the financial viability of FCC providers. As subsidization is chronically underutilized by FCC providers even when technically available, states should develop a mechanism for clearly communicating the funding opportunities available to these providers, and create a program to help assist them with the paperwork necessary for participating. Once the mixed- delivery model is established, the state should put a robust monitoring and evaluation system in place to
assess the system’s effectiveness and address any issues that may materialize. This system ought to measure and analyze enrollment numbers, child outcomes, and provider and family satisfaction, enabling the state to make adjustments to the program accordingly. States should implement mixed-delivery pre-K systems immediately. Until a change to the childcare landscape is made, providers will continue to go out of business, and families will continue to lose essential childcare services.Works Cited[1] The White House. “FACT SHEET: The American Families Plan,” 2021.https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefin g-room/statements- releases/2021/04/28/fact-sheet-the- american-families-plan/.[2] Workman, Simon. “The True Cost of High-Quality Child Care Across the United States.” Center for American Progress, 28 June 2021,https://www.americanprogress.org/a rticle/true-cost-high-quality-child- care-across-united-states/.[3] Stanford, Libby. “Which States Offer Universal Pre-K? It's More Complicated Than You Might Think.” 25 January 2023, https://www.edweek.org/teaching- learning/which-states-offer- universal-pre-k-its-more- complicated-than-you-might- think/2023/01.[4] Brown, Jessica H. “Does Public Pre-K Have Unintended Consequences on the Child Care Market for Infants and Toddlers?” SSRN Scholarly Paper. Rochester, NY, December 8, 2018. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.336061 6.[5] 
Gilreath, Ariel. “Tulsa Study Offers More Evidence of Pre-K’s Benefits into Adulthood.” The Hechinger Report, September 29, 2022.http://hechingerreport.org/tulsa- study-offers-more-evidence-of-pre- ks-benefits-into-adulthood/.[6] Early Care & Education Consortium. “A MIXED- DELIVERY SYSTEM IS THE MOST SUSTAINABLE AND EFFICIENT SOLUTION TO MEET POLICY OBJECTIVES,” 2021.https://www.ececonsortium.org/wp- content/uploads/2021/07/ECEC- Solutions-Paper-Mixed- Delivery.pdf.[7] American Experiment. “Free Pre-K Is Hurting the Childcare Industry,” May 2, 2024. https://www.americanexperiment.or g/free-pre-k-is-hurting-the- childcare-industry/.[8] Jessen-Howard, Steven. “Understanding Infant and Toddler Child Care Deserts.” Center for American Progress, 31 October 2018,https://www.americanprogress.org/a rticle/understanding-infant-toddler- child-care-deserts/.[9] Lyons, J'Taime. “Narrowing the Gender Wage Gap with Universal Child Care – Michigan Journal of Public Affairs.” Michigan Journal of Public Affairs, 10 April 2020, https://mjpa.umich.edu/2020/04/10/ narrowing-the-gender-wage-gap- with-universal-child-care/.[10] Heckman, James. “The Heckman Curve.” The Heckman Equation, https://heckmanequation.org/resour ce/the-heckman-curve/.[11] First Five Years Fund. “ED and HHS Urge States to Make Headway on Mixed Delivery Preschool.” First Five Years Fund,
1 March 2024, https://www.ffyf.org/2024/03/01/ed-and-hhs-urge-states-to-make- headway-on-mixed-delivery- preschool/.[12] Harmeyer, Erin. “Including Family Child Care (FCC) Programs in Publicly-Funded Pre-K: Conditions for Success,” n.d. https://nieer.org/sites/default/files/2 023-08/homegrown-nieer-fcc- report-final.3.31.pdf.[13] Weisenfeld, GG. “Including Family Child Care Homes in Publicly-Funded Pre-K Programs: Estimating the Cost of Supporting Quality.” National Institute for Early Education Research, 1 March 2024,https://nieer.org/sites/default/files/2 024-03/homegrown-nieer-fcc-pre-k- cost-study-design-draft3.pdf.[14] Mefferd, Eve. “The US Child Care System Relies on Women of Color, but Structural Barriers Systematically Disadvantage Them.” Urban Institute, 14 June 2023, https://www.urban.org/urban- wire/us-child-care-system-relies- women-color-structural-barriers- systematically-disadvantage.[15] Virginia Early Childhood Foundation. “2024 Mixed Delivery Evaluation Report,” June 2024. https://vecf.org/wp- content/uploads/2024/06/2024Mixe dDeliveryEvaluationReport.pdf.[16] Early Milestones Colorado. “SUPPORTING FAMILIES THROUGH MIXED DELIVERY IN COLORADO’S UPK PROGRAM,” n.d.https://earlymilestones.org/wp- content/uploads/2023/03/UPK- Mixed-Delivery.pdf.[17] Office of the City Auditor Policy and Research Division. “Early Care and Education Report,” 2024.https://lims.minneapolismn.gov/Do
wnload/FileV2/45323/PAR-Report- and-Analysis-of-Early-Care-and- Education.pdf.[18] Melvin, Samantha. “A Transformative Vision for the Authentic Inclusion of Family Child Care in Mixed-Delivery PreK Systems,” 2022. https://www.erikson.edu/wp- content/uploads/2022/09/PKFCC- Conceptual-Framework-final.pdf.[19] 
First Five Years Fund. “The First Five Things to Know About: The Child Care and Development Block Grant Reauthorization Act of 2024,” 2024.https://www.ffyf.org/resources/202 4/08/the-first-five-things-to-know- about-the-child-care-and- development-block-grant- reauthorization-act-of-2024/.[20] CBS News. “Walz and Vance Address Child Care Concerns and
Costs,” October 2024. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v= WwxNXDEozwA.[21] Morris, Suzann. “Examples of Mixed-Delivery Early Care and Education Systems.” Bipartisan Policy Center, 2021. https://bipartisanpolicy.org/blog/exa mples-of-mixed-delivery-early- care-and-education-systems/.[1] 
Securing Financial Futures: A Proposal for Financial Literacy EducationBy Ben Nusbaum, bbn24@cornell.eduStudents lack necessary financial skills to make smart life decisions. Therefore, New York should implement a financial literacy course that covers budgeting, investing, and other personal financial skills into the 12th-grade curriculum.
Background      The role of education is to provide students with the knowledge and skills to navigate life and become productive members of society. One skill crucial to becoming a successful adult and leading a happy, fulfilling life is financial literacy. Financial literacy is the ability to understand and use financial skills, such as budgeting, investing, understanding taxes and saving for retirement.1 However, over half of teens report feeling unready to handle their finances.2 A 2019 survey of 30,000 college students found 47% do not feel prepared to manage their money, with only 37% of Gen Z students planning to follow a budget and 47% planning to pay off their credit card on time.3 It is clear that students don’t feel financially prepared for their futures. However, public schools have the ability to bridge this gap, and it is important they take all measures to educate and prepare their students.      More than half of states require high school students to take a semester-long financial literacy course before graduating.4 However, New York lags behind, only requiring an economics course, which is also its own graduation requirement.5,6 New York State (NYS) high school economics courses focus on large-scale market concepts, not practical financial
skills students can use in everyday life. The course recommended in New York has four main standards, and only one of the standards, “Individual Responsibility and the Economy,” has sub-standards on personal finance.7 Within New York, only 20 high schools, about 1.3% of those in the state, require a semester-long personal finance course to graduate.8,9 Evidently, American students lack the financial literacy necessary for long-term success as adults, and NYS must do its part to improve its insufficient financial curriculum.Policy Idea      Education should prepare students for life after graduation; therefore, schools must teach financial literacy skills that will be crucial to student well-being in life, regardless of the path they take after graduation. The NYS Legislature should create a graduation requirement that all high schoolers must complete a semester-long financial literacy course. This course will be taken in 12th grade and will teach students the fundamentals of financial literacy, including personal financial knowledge, investment skills, and basic budgeting skills. Students should graduate high school with an understanding of the importance of credit scores, savings accounts, and other practical financial skills.
Policy Analysis      Research consistently shows that financial literacy education improves financial behaviors and outcomes. States that offer financial literacy courses, such as Georgia, Texas, and Idaho, have reported higher credit scores and lower loan delinquency rates among students who complete these courses.8 Additionally, students who receive a financial literacy education tend to struggle less with debt and report a better quality of life as adults.10 Financial literacy education fosters a sense of security and independence, reducing stress and improving mental health, contributing to overall life satisfaction by equipping students with the knowledge to make informed financial decisions, manage their budgets, and avoid excessive debt.11 Given the success of financial literacy courses in other states, implementing one in NYS is expected to yield similar results.      Now more than ever, college is becoming increasingly expensive, with the price increasing 3.63% every year, forcing more students to take out loans than in the past.12,13 Additionally, Gen-Z has the worst debt management skills out of any generation, proving their inability to handle these loans responsibly.14 As this trend continues, it is clear students need help managing their      
debt, and a financial literacy course would provide significantsupport. Furthermore, studies show that students who received financial instruction in class were more likely to utilize low-interest college loans compared to their peers.14 Additionally, researchers found that financial literacy courses increased repayment rates among low-income and first-generation students.15 The ideal time to offer the course is 12th grade because students must be versed in financial literacy once they graduate high school, however the topic should be fresh in their minds as they become adults and begin to navigate their finances.The financial literacy requirement for NYS is extremely important, as students will not only be better equipped to finance their postsecondary education but will gain necessary financial skills that will help them lead happier, more successful lives.Highlightsï Many teenagers feel unprepared to manage their finances, as about half of college students lack confidence in their money management skills.ï NYS does not mandate a dedicated financial literacy course, leaving most students without essential financial skills for everyday life.ï The NYS Legislature should require all high school students to complete a semester-long financial literacy course in 12th grade, covering crucial topics like budgeting, credit scores, and savings.ï Implementing this course would likely improve
students’ financial behaviors, leading to better debt management, higher credit scores, and enhanced overall life satisfaction, as demonstrated by successful programs in other states.Implementation      In 2023, the NYS Senate introduced Bill S4860A to the State Senate’s Education Committee.16 This bill requires a stand-alone financial literacy course as a graduation requirement, mirroring the policy proposed above. State Senator Leroy Comrie sponsored the bill alongside eleven cosponsors, including two Republicans, indicating some bipartisan support. Although this seems like promising news, a version of this bill has been introduced in every legislative cycle for the past fifteen years. The bill has never managed to make it to the floor for a vote, likely due to a lack of political priority and sufficient advocacy. Therefore, more must be done to grow appeal among lawmakers and the public.      Financial education experts should back the proposal to help it gain support and reach the floor for a vote. Experts should work with school administrators, lawmakers, and other key stakeholders to form a comprehensive curriculum that covers crucial topics including budgeting, investing, saving, and credit. These experts could be compensated for their work designing the bill by nonprofit organizations focused on financial literacy, corporate sponsors with a vested interest in the bill’s passing, or it could be conducted as pro bono work. A key stakeholder that is often overlooked are students, who can help the effort by demonstrating
their interest for financial literacy in their schooling.17 State Senator Leroy Comrie should incorporate students into a social media campaign advocating for the bill, growing public attention while connecting with a large younger audience. Testimonials from students who would welcome financial literacy education could be used to raise awareness and motivate the public.      After the New York State legislature passes the bill, it is important that it is implemented in a timely manner. Teachers should be required to attend professional development meetings with financial education experts who are well-versed in the curriculum to ensure the class is taught effectively. Once the policy is implemented, schools should monitor and evaluate the policy’s success. Student and teacher concerns should be addressed on a school-by-school basis through administrative avenues. Researchers will assess the policy’s efficacy by studying whether young New Yorkers are making better financial decisions after 10 years, measuring metrics including higher credit scores and lower loan delinquency rates.      Despite the potential for strong support, several obstacles must be addressed. Budget constraints may raise concerns about the costs associated with curriculum development and teacher training. To address this, NYS should partner with local financial institutions that are interested in helping the community. These institutions have incentive to aid financial literacy among students, and could help mitigate costs with funding and curriculum planning support.17          
However, even without these measures, no changes to the education budget would be necessary due to the policy’s low price, as there are minimal costs associated with curriculum design and a short training session.18 Additionally, concerns over another graduation requirement may be calmed by the widespread support for the course.19      In conclusion, despite possible implementation challenges, a financial literacy course in NYS high schools is feasible and would be extremely helpful for students. It is imperative to equip students with essential skills to confidently manage their financial futures, setting them on a path toward long- term stability and success.Works Cited[1] Investopedia. “Financial Literacy: What It Is, and Why It Is So Important To Teach Teens.” Accessed November 12, 2024. https://www.investopedia.com/term s/f/financial-literacy.asp.[2] USA, Junior Achievement. “New Research Shows The Majority of Teens Feel Unprepared to Finance Their Futures.” Junior Achievement USA. Accessed November 12, 2024. https://jausa.ja.org/news/press- releases/new-research-shows-the- majority-of-teens-feel-unprepared- to-finance-their-futures.[3] AIG. “Buckling under Debt and a Lack of Financial Knowledge, College Students Feel Toll of Financial Stress,” May 2019. https://aig.gcs-web.com/news- releases/news-release- details/buckling-under-debt-and- lack-financial-knowledge-college.[4] Solutions, Ramsey. “Which States Require Financial Literacy for High School Students?” Ramsey
Solutions. Accessed November 12, 2024.https://www.ramseysolutions.com/fi nancial-literacy/states-require- financial-literacy-in-high-school.[5] Nation’s Report Card. “New York Report Card Vision 2020.” Accessed November 12, 2024. https://www.thenationsreportcard.or g/new-york.[6] NYC Public Schools. “Graduation Requirements.” Accessed November 12, 2024. https://www.schools.nyc.gov/learni ng/student-journey/graduation- requirements.[7] “Increasing Number of States to Require Stand Alone Financial Literacy Classes in High School.” Accessed November 12, 2024. https://www.nysscpa.org/news/publ ications/the-trusted- professional/article/increasing- number-of-states-to-require-stand- alone-financial-literacy-classes-in- high-school-051222.[8] New York State Education Department. “Commissioner Rosa Op-Ed: We Should Be Teaching Financial Literacy in New York’s High Schools.” Accessed November 12, 2024. https://www.nysed.gov/news/2024/ commissioner-rosa-op-ed-we- should-be-teaching-financial- literacy-new-yorks-high-schools.[9] “New York High Schools.” Accessed November 12, 2024. https://high- schools.com/directory/ny/.[10] “SPI Addresses Student Financial Literacy Benefits Year 2023 (CA Dept of Education).” Accessed November 12, 2024. https://www.cde.ca.gov/nr/ne/yr23/ yr23rel22.asp.[11] Bai, Ruofan. “Impact of Financial Literacy, Mental Budgeting and Self Control on Financial Wellbeing: Mediating
Impact of Investment Decision Making.” PLOS ONE 18, no. 11(November 14, 2023): e0294466.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0294466.[12] Education Data Initiative. “College Tuition Inflation [2023]: Rate Increase Statistics.” Accessed November 12, 2024. https://educationdata.org/college- tuition-inflation-rate.[13] Cilluffo, Richard Fry and Anthony. “5 Facts about Student Loans.” Pew Research Center, September 18, 2024. https://www.pewresearch.org/short- reads/2024/09/18/facts-about- student-loans/.[14] Reporter, Suzanne Blake, Consumer, and Social Trends. “Gen Z Has a Serious Debt Problem.” Newsweek, February 9, 2024. https://www.newsweek.com/gen-z- struggling-pay-debt-student-loans- 1868611.[15] Engle, Jeremy. “Should Financial Literacy Be a Required Course in School?” The New York Times, December 2023. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/12/ 14/learning/should-financial- literacy-be-a-required-course-in- school.html.[16] “NY State Senate Bill 2023- S4860A.” Accessed November 12, 2024.https://www.nysenate.gov/legislatio n/bills/2023/S4860/amendment/A.[17] Johnson, Monique. “How Banks Can Bridge the Financial Literacy Gap and Empower Communities.” Forbes, November 6, 2024.https://www.forbes.com/councils/fo rbesfinancecouncil/2024/11/06/how-banks-can-bridge-the-financial- literacy-gap-empower- communities/.[18] Boser, Ulrich. “The Hidden Value of Curriculum Reform.” The[1] 
Center for American Progress, October 14, 2015. https://www.americanprogress.org/a rticle/the-hidden-value-of- curriculum-reform/[19] 
Intuit Blog. “Intuit Survey:U.S. High School Students Want Financial Education at School.” April 2, 2024.
https://www.intuit.com/blog/innova tive-thinking/intuit-survey/.
Incorporating Culturally Responsive Teaching into School to Increase Academic SuccessBy Sejal Sekhar, scs326@cornell.eduOver 25 states have introduced anti-DEI bills targeting higher education, which have put students of color at a disadvantage socially and academically. To counter these laws, culturally responsive teaching needs to be implemented.
Background      In recent years, party lines have reshaped America’s education system. With anti-Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) bills introduced in over twenty-five states, education differs heavily from state to state.1 Of the 86 proposed bills, 14 have received final legislative approval and become law, which aims to restrict mandatory DEI training, DEI offices and staff, diversity statements, and identity-based preferences for hiring and admissions.2 The start of 2023 marks the push by Republican politicians to limit and ban DEI initiatives, and with the Supreme Court’s decision to ban affirmative action, the agenda was furthered.3 Polling found approximately 77% of Republicans believe discrimination against white and black people is equally problematic, which underscores why some lawmakers are pushing for DEI restriction.4      One of the main groups affected by DEI policies, bans, and restrictions is college students.When asked what they would do if their college abolished DEI initiatives, 55% of polled college students reported they would consider transferring schools.5 In addition, 59% of students stated that they would reconsider enrolling in their respective universities if they lacked DEI initiatives.6 While many
lawmakers believe establishing anti- DEI bills is better for the country, most college students clearly disagree. Beyond college students, around 61% of the American public support DEI programs.7 One of the main harms caused by banning or limiting DEI in schools is the threat to cultural competence and the undermining of the student community, which is why colleges need to continue supporting their students by developing alternative solutions to ensure equal representation.Policy Idea      Colleges should implement culturally responsive teaching as an effective way to counter anti-DEI legislation, which creates an inclusive learning space by using student’s diverse backgrounds to add cultural nuance to the curriculum.8 Through implementing culturally responsive teaching, inclusion begins in the classroom and focuses on building student-to- student and student-to-teacher relationships. To allow the program to be implemented and sustained, qualitative and quantitative data must be consistently gauged. The quantitative way to determine if culturally responsive teaching is effective is by analyzing students’ academic performance prior to and post-implementation. Additionally, the retention rates within classes
and majors should be used to determine if culturally responsive teaching effectively encourages students through engagement and participation. Adding these techniques into daily lessons will make individuals more empathetic and culturally informed inside and outside of the classroom.Policy Analysis      Culturally responsive teaching has proven to improve academic outcomes and the development of ethnic-racial identity due to culturally responsive teaching being more effective than traditional teaching methods.10 Although teachers feel ill-prepared to lead conversations about race, a University of Pittsburgh study revealed that they would be willing to implement culturally responsive teaching in their classrooms if they received adequatetraining.11 Furthermore, the ease of implementing culturally responsive teaching through simple curriculum changes, such as changing the literature being studied, makes universities more inclined to implement the program. The primary issue with traditional learning is that it does not address the realities of today’s society and only supports a certain demographic: middle-class, white, and English-speaking families.13 A simple solution is increasing
diversity among teachers. Since 80% of full-time professors are white, conversations about race become easier when students of color feel connected to their teachers because of shared experiences.13 It has been noted that students are, in fact, not the blank slates they are made out to be; they start to develop their own understandings of the world very early on, and it is key to utilize this within classrooms rather than repress it.14      To counter the argument of the Republican lawmakers who do not find it beneficial to the economy to invest in DEI initiatives, research shows a correlation between attending a racially diverse institution and income earnings.5 Therefore, implementing culturally responsive teaching can counter the anti-DEI legislation and assist the future economy.      The qualitative measure of student participation increases active learning, therefore enhancing problem-solving and collaboration between students. Since DEI policies create equitable resources for all students and foster a sense of community where everyone feels valued, it is vital to create substitute programs amidst the recent legislation targeting DEI practices.Highlightsï The increasing attacks on efforts to ensure minorities have an equal playing field makes culturally responsive teaching essential for creating an immediate impact.ï Over 100 bills in 30 states are working to limit or ban DEI policies such as DEI training, DEI offices and staff, diversity statements,
and identity-based preferences for hiring and admissions within higher education.2ï To counter anti-DEI legislation, culturally responsive teaching can be implemented to ensure equity remains at the forefront of education.ï Culturally responsive teaching fosters a more inclusive classroom by creating a space where individuals can learn from each other’s backgrounds, become more informed, and therefore increase collaboration and problem- solving skills.8Implementation      Implementing culturally responsive teaching is simple and has significant benefits. This teaching increases face-to-face communication, open dialogue, and integration of current world issues to better understand students’ backgrounds into the curriculum.9 Therefore, culturally responsive teaching can work to create the same environment DEI policies promote by making students conscious of biases while increasing students’ academic performance.      Implementing culturally responsive teaching should begin at higher education levels, as anti-DEI laws primarily target these institutions. It would be beneficial for school boards to look at New York City’s framework that affirms racial, linguistic and cultural identities by preparing students for rigorous learning through making them aware of differing perspectives to adequately enact culturally responsive teaching.12 Aiding students as well as teachers
is key to making sure the plan can be successful. To understand the benefits in the long term, student and teacher surveys should be sent out at the beginning and end of each academic year to evaluate the progression of culturally responsive teaching. Increasing teacher diversity through recruiting from Minority-Serving Institutions, such as HBCUs, not only helps students due to culturally responsive teaching but also counters backlash from states that are anti-DEI. This way, schools are still able to push for representation and bridging cultural divides amidst hostile states working to eliminate DEI.      To determine if culturally responsive teaching is effective, school boards should analyze students’ academic performance prior to and post-implementation in addition to a survey to gauge qualitative and quantitative data about the program, therefore allowing for improvement.Additionally, the retention rates within classes and majors should be used to determine if culturally responsive teaching effectively encourages students through engagement and participation. By collecting data and highlighting success progress, the school board can allocate more money to increasing culturally responsive teaching.      Given the banning or limiting of DEI policies in higher education, the money spent on DEI can be reallocated to culturally responsive teaching. Typically, the widely accepted authors who have studied in traditional academic curricula are white. While there is the acknowledgment that there is nothing wrong with traditional readings, there is a push to incorporate more worldly      
literature.14 Through teachers adding more multicultural works into the curriculum, students can make their own interpretations about today’s society and become more informed citizens under culturally responsive teaching.Works Cited[1] NBC News. “Map: See Which States Have Introduced or Passed Anti-DEI Bills,” March 2, 2024. https://www.nbcnews.com/data- graphics/anti-dei-bills-states- republican-lawmakers-map- rcna140756.[2] Seligman, Lara D. “Here Are the States Where Lawmakers Are Seeking to Ban Colleges’ DEI Efforts.” The Chronicle of Higher Education, October 23, 2023. https://www.chronicle.com/article/h ere-are-the-states-where- lawmakers-are-seeking-to-ban- colleges-dei-efforts.[3] Seligman, Lara D. “The Assault on DEI.” The Chronicle of Higher Education. https://www.chronicle.com/package/the-assault-on-dei.[4] “Home of the Marist Poll | Polls, Analysis, Learning, and More.” https://maristpoll.marist.edu/polls/a pril-2024-presidential-election/.[5] BestColleges.“Most Students Would Consider Transferring If DEI Initiatives Were Abolished: Survey”
https://www.bestcolleges.com/resea rch/most-students-would-consider- transferring-if-dei-initiatives- abolished/.[6] Collinson, David L., and RyanM. Calo. “The Causes and Consequences of Ending Diversity.” Scholars Strategy Network, September 2023. https://scholars.org/contribution/cau ses-and-consequences-ending- diversity.[7] Suter, Tara. “Most Americans Support Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Programs: Poll.” Text. The Hill (blog), June 18, 2024. https://thehill.com/homenews/race- politics/4727744-americans-favor- dei-programs-poll/.[8] Understood, Educators Team at. “What Is Culturally Responsive Teaching?” Understood. Accessed November 6, 2024. https://www.understood.org/en/artic les/what-is-culturally-responsive- teaching.[9] Education, University of San Diego-Professional & Continuing. “Culturally Responsive Teaching Guide (+10 Examples).” University of San Diego - Professional & Continuing Education, March 21, 2022.https://pce.sandiego.edu/culturally- responsive-teaching-guide-10- examples/.[10] Byrd, Christy M. “Does Culturally Relevant Teaching
Work? An Examination From Student Perspectives.” Sage Open 6, no. 3 (July 2016):2158244016660744.https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244016 660744.[11] Anderson, Melinda D. “How Teachers Are Learning to Discuss Racism in Class.” The Atlantic (blog), January 9, 2017. https://www.theatlantic.com/educati on/archive/2017/01/how-teachers- learn-to-discuss-racism/512474/.[12] New York State Education Department. Culturally Responsive- Sustaining Education Framework. 2018.https://www.nysed.gov/sites/d efault/files/programs/crs/culturally- responsive-sustaining-education- framework.pdf.[13] Will, Madeline, and Ileana Najarro. “What Is Culturally Responsive Teaching?” Education Week, April 18, 2022, sec. Teaching & Learning, Teaching. https://www.edweek.org/teaching- learning/culturally-responsive- teaching-culturally-responsive- pedagogy/2022/04.[14] Burnham, Kristin. “Culturally Responsive Teaching: 5 Strategies for Educators.” Graduate Blog, July 1, 2024.https://graduate.northeastern.edu/res ources/culturally-responsive- teaching-strategies/.
Addressing the Special Education Teacher Shortage: Retention, Job Satisfaction, and BurnoutBy Abigail Silverman, ahs266@cornell.eduThe national shortage of special education teachers poses a significant threat to the success of students with diverse abilities. Using discretionary grants from the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, the government can address the issues that this field is facing.
Background      The increasing nationwide demand for special education teachers (SET) is a critical issue that demands immediate attention. Improving the low retention, job satisfaction, and burnout in this field is essential to meeting students’ needs. While SETs are often assumed to work exclusively in schools, their roles extend beyond. Many serve in hospitals, residential facilities, and other settings, providing pivotal educational support to students with diverse needs in various environments.1 SETs are essential in providing personalized instruction to students with diverse learning needs, ensuring they receive the tailored education necessary for success.2      In 2023 through 2024, more than 80% of states reported a shortage of SETs, and the number of students needing special education has risen due to improved identification and a deeper understanding of how to support those with learning differences.3 This shortage significantly affects the quality of education for students with learning differences, leading to larger class sizes, less individualized attention, and increased burnout among existing teachers.4 In 49 states, up to 50% of special education teachers face burnout within five years, and an
alarming 75% leave the profession entirely within ten years.5 Teacher burnout occurs when educators undergoing stress for a long period experience emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, and lack of personal accomplishment.6      When looking at laws pertaining to special education, TheU.S. Department of Education’s Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) is a law that provides children with disabilities nationwide access to free public education, including special education.7 The IDEA oversees how states and public agencies deliver early intervention, special education, and related services to over 7.3 million eligible infants, children, and youth with disabilities.7 Besides this, Congress has yet to successfully introduce, pass, and send a comprehensive bill addressing the need to alleviate the shortage of SETs.Policy Idea      The IDEA authorizes discretionary grants, providing states with the flexibility to allocate funding toward novel solutions that directly address the challenges faced by SETs. These grants offer a critical opportunity to develop targeted programs that can have a lasting impact on teacher burnout, job satisfaction, and retention rates. Congress should mandate individual
states to use their IDEA-authorized grants to create programs that teach SETs Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT), a promising practice for solving teacher burnout, and ensuring each SET has the administrative support needed to maintain the level of materials and resources needed to educate their students.8      By strategically utilizing discretionary grants, states can provide immediate relief to SETs while also creating a sustainable foundation for SETs to thrive long term. Moreover, the discretionary nature of these grants allows states to tailor solutions to their specific needs, taking into account factors like student population, regional differences, and current resources.Policy Analysis      As the student population grows, policymakers often focus on the supply shortage of special education teachers.3 However, it is more important to first implement policies that help retain current teachers in the field before focusing on recruiting new ones. By directing public agencies to use discretionary grants for new programs, challenges with job retention, satisfaction, and burnout can become much more manageable.      When considering teacher burnout, research has shown that      
burnout in special education stems from difficult student behaviors, insufficient support from administration, and overwhelming job responsibilities.9 The overarching goal of ACT is to emphasize staying in the present moment while simultaneously encouraging psychological flexibility that is in line with one’s values and goals. If SETs can manage the inherent challenges of their work without facing mental exhaustion through programs funded by IDEA's discretionary grants, burnout will be greatly reduced. In employment settings outside of education, researchers have linked ACT to reductions in stress and burnout.8 For example, it was found that for a population of counselors with few resources and little agency support, ACT treatment was associated with a reduction of the symptoms of burnout.8      A lack of administrative support is one of the most common reasons that SETs consider or ultimately decide to leave special education.8 Insufficient support can include limited access to teaching materials and resources as well as inadequate assistance from central and building office personnel.10 A study of 391 SETs found that those reporting higher levels of principal support were more likely to demonstrate greater commitment and job satisfaction.8 By allocating additional funds and dedicated personnel to support SETs, schools could alleviate much of the pressure and stress that SETs face, leading to increased job satisfaction and job retention.Highlightsï The growing number of students benefiting from
specialized and tailored education programs has led to a significant shortage of special education teachers.3ï Low job retention rates, rising job dissatisfaction, and heightened levels of burnout contribute to the shortage of special education teachers.ï Congress should enhance the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act to help teachers manage burnout and increase administrative support.ï These programs should use Acceptance and Commitment Therapy because it alleviates burnout symptoms in other professions.8 Teachers who feel strong administrative support are more likely to report job satisfaction.8Implementation      To effectively address the special education teacher shortage, this proposal leverages IDEA’s discretionary grants to fund ACT training and enhanced administrative support. States must apply for these grants by demonstrating how their proposed programs align with the objectives of IDEA while simultaneously addressing the local needs of the individual state.      Each state should submit a comprehensive application to the US Department of Education detailing how they intend to use the discretionary grant funds to improve SET retention and job satisfaction and reduce burnout.11 Each application will include a comprehensive needs assessment that identifies and elaborates on local challenges, such as teacher-to-
student ratios, retention trends, and existing resource deficiencies. The plan will also include ACT training and improvements to administrative support. States can develop a budget breakdown demonstrating efficient and targeted use of grant funds by employing structured budget templates, conducting thorough research and development to justify expenditures, and aligning the budget closely with the Grant Narrative.12 This approach ensures that every dollar is accounted for, supports the proposed objectives, and addresses the specific needs highlighted in the application. By integrating clear, measurable goals into the financial plan, states can present a compelling case for how funds will directly benefit their constituents and achieve the desired outcomes.12      After administering discretionary grant plans for specific states, policymakers can tailor ACT programs to align with the needs of SETs. ACT training should emphasize mindfulness, value-driven action, and psychological flexibility to alleviate burnout in high-stress professions. This training can occur through professional development days, online platforms, or weekend workshops for SETs.13 In addition to a portion of the fund allocated directly to ACT programming, another portion should be allocated for an increase in administrative support, such as hiring instructional aides and support staff to assist SETs with non-teaching tasks and increasing classroom resources and teaching materials.8      Navigating the passage of these grants through Congress presents a significant challenge, especially when considering a GOP-dominated legislature. These      
grants will receive funding by shifting the budget of the existing IDEA funds, but some lawmakers may view it as an expansion of federal spending or fear that it sets a precedent for budget increases. That said, it is crucial to present this policy initiative effectively, supported by a clear and detailed explanation of budget reallocation.      Furthermore, engaging stakeholders such as teachers, unions, administrators, and parents can greatly influence state policymakers to address infrastructure challenges affecting SET’s poor work environments.14 Fostering a relationship between these groups and state policymakers strengthens policy implementation and ensures the inclusion of diverse perspectives when making significant changes to the status quo.14      The initial states that are granted the funds from the Department of Education should submit annual progress reports and data on teacher retention rates, job satisfaction, and burnout. These grants can receive funding by shifting the current IDEA budget to prioritize these changes. With real- world feedback, more and more states can implement the same steps followed, ultimately correcting the SET shortage throughout the country.Works Cited[1] University, Gwynedd Mercy. “The Growing Need for Special Education Teachers in the U.S.” Gwynedd Mercy University. Accessed November 13, 2024. https://www.gmercyu.edu/academic s/learn/demand-for-special- education-teachers.[2] Kristy Pruitt Dean, and Kristy Pruitt. “Home.” Careers in Special
Education: Benefits, Reasons & Challenges. Accessed November 13, 2024.https://www.alliant.edu/blog/consid ering-career-special-education- reasons-rewards-and-challenges.[3] Aldeman, Chad. “Where Are All the Special Educators?” Education Next, October 29, 2024. https://www.educationnext.org/whe re-are-all-the-special-educators- teacher-shortage/.[4] Cross, Freddie. “Teacher Shortage Areas Nationwide Listing 1990–1991 through 2017–2018,”May 2017.https://www.ed.gov/sites/ed/files/ab out/offices/list/ope/pol/bteachershor tageareasreport201718.pdf.[5] Miller, Megan L. Teacher Burnout. Master’s thesis, Bethel University, 2022. Spark Repository. https://spark.bethel.edu/etd/866.[6] Maslach, Christina, and SusanE. Jackson. Maslach Burnout Inventory Manual. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press, 1986.https://www.researchgate.net/public ation/277816643_The_Maslach_Bu rnout_Inventory_Manual?enrichId= rgreq- aa9160883404b8ba1c5a16ebb7d7ca fc- XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQY WdlOzI3NzgxNjY0MztBUzoyMzc 4NjA2ODI5ODk1NjhAMTQzMzcyMTgxNDkxMA%3D%3D&el=1_ x_2[7] Pendharkar, Eesha. “The Number of Students in Special Education Has Doubled in the Past 45 Years.” Education Week, August 1, 2023.https://www.edweek.org/teaching- learning/the-number-of-students-in- special-education-has-doubled-in- the-past-45-years/2023/07.[8] Emery, Debra W., and Branden Vandenburg. “Special Education
Teacher Burnout and Act,” n.d. Accessed November 13, 2024.[9] Brunsting, Nelson C., MelissaA. Sreckovic, and Kathleen Lynne Lane. “Special Education Teacher Burnout: A Synthesis of Research from 1979 to 2013.” Education andTreatment of Children 37, no. 4(2014): 681–711.http://www.jstor.org/stable/4468394 3.[10] Conley, Sharon, and Sukkyung You. ‘Key Influences on Special Education Teachers’ Intentions to Leave: The Effects of Administrative Support and Teacher Team Efficacy in a Mediational Model." Educational Management Administration & Leadership 45, no. 3 (2017): 521-540.https://doi.org/10.1177/1741143215 608859.[11] U.S. Department of Education. “Getting Started with Discretionary Grant Applications.” Accessed November 28, 2024. https://www.ed.gov/grants-and- programs/apply-grant/getting- started-discretionary-grant- applications.[12] OpenGrants. “Creating an Effective Budget Template for Grants.” Accessed November 28, 2024. https://opengrants.io/creating- an-effective-budget-template-for- grants/.[13] Firestone, Lisa. “Psychological Burnout and Acceptance and Commitment.” Psychology Today, March 22, 2022. AccessedNovember 28, 2024. https://www.psychologytoday.com/ us/blog/the-mindful-path-to-self- acceptance/202203/psychological- burnout-and-acceptance-and- commitment.[14] Arend, Phillip. “Engaging Stakeholders in Education Research, Dissemination, and Advocacy.” TeacherPH, July 27,[1] 
2020. Accessed November 28,2024.https://www.teacherph.com/engagin
g-stakeholders-education-research- dissemination-advocacy/.
Excellence, Equity, and Enrichment: Spreading the Schoolwide Enrichment Model in Broward CountyBy Sanshray Singh, ss4379@cornell.eduGifted education is currently implemented in a variable, inequitable fashion, raising concerns about its effectiveness in enhancing student performance. Elementary schools in Broward County should end separated classes for gifted students and implement the SEM method coupled with accelerated instruction.
Background      Across the country, “gifted and talented” programs have received increasing scrutiny over both entrenching socioeconomic inequities through issues with racial diversity and ability to substantively influence student trajectories. 1 Thus, it is important to ensure that such programs are both effective and equitable in their selection of gifted students who need specialized learning resources of these resources.      At the elementary school level, Broward County, one of the largest districts in South Florida, currently implements a policy of creating “tracked” classes, which are separate classes created for children classified as “gifted” by an IQ test score.2 When there are not enough gifted students to fill an entire class, they are combined with “high achieving” students who are not “gifted” but have the highest performance in their grade on state- standardized tests of the previous year. These classrooms must have “gifted specific programming” and “differentiated instruction,” leaving it up to individual schools to develop practices that vary from school to school.2 Thus, differences in tax base (wealthier areas have more municipal money to draw from than poorer areas) may create differences, such as lack of gifted trained staff, lesser access to
specialized materials and resources, etc., following trends of lower quality programming for poorer children. A 2019 survey of 2000 elementary schools found that most 3rd grade level teachers were not using differentiated/accelerated instruction in gifted classrooms.2      Research shows that class separation may have minimal impact on gifted students’ learning, often showing little increase above grade-level math and reading achievement. National surveys find gifted students earning in the 75th to 80th percentile, which is within the average score range.3Another study followed students from 3rd grade to 7th grade, comparing test scores of children just above the cutoff to be placed into gifted- tracked classes and just below this cutoff. They found weak associations between being in a gifted class and better performance on math and reading test scores.3Policy Idea      Elementary schools in Broward County should replace tracked gifted and talented classes with integrated enrichment activities for all students, emphasizing accelerated instruction for specific subjects (math, reading, or science) through district administrative action. This enhanced, accelerated curriculum will produce more tangible,
replicable impacts on not only math and reading scores but also non- achievement metrics such as student engagement and enjoyment. The Schoolwide Enrichment Model, credited to the National Center for Research on Gifted Education, works through asking teachers to identify “gifted behaviors” including sustained interest in a particular subject, higher-order thinking, etc. Teachers would create enrichment clusters designed around certain areas, such as science, debate, literature, or math, which engage students in creative, critical thinking-oriented tasks. For instance, they create projects around advanced material to build synthesis and application-based problem- solving skills.4 Simultaneously, selected students may receive accelerated instruction to take advantage of their quicker learning curve.Policy Analysis      Creating separate classes leads to inequality in learning resources and environments based upon very early demonstrated potential. By waiting to split classrooms until secondary school, there are more opportunities for children to learn from their peers at an elementary level. Studies have shown that while gifted children see insignificant gains in test scores from separating classrooms, there is      
harm imparted to lower-achieving students.4,5 A literature review of various gifted education studies found that underperforming groups in 6 different studies had boosted student performance from “detracking”, or recombining classes.5 Thus, detracking rectifies some issues with creating separation at an age where socialization is as important a facilitator in development as tested IQ.      Additionally, models of accessible enrichment introduce critical thinking skills that do not explicitly cater to “state standards” but have longer term core development benefits for students. Together, these more comprehensive approaches can enhance educational quality for all students. For example, the “CLEAR” model out of the University of Virginia showed an advantage in achievement on ELA exams compared to the regular curriculum for gifted 3rd graders.6 CLEAR-mandated readings, including above grade level poetry, coupled with a research project, which forces synthesis of ideas, both of which emphasized analytical skills like structural understanding, main ideas, and rhetorical choice.6 Another study on SEM implementation found students reported “greater creative productivity” and generally more time spent in school on self-defined “topics of interest” after implementation.7 Such critical thinking skills carry through to all further education. For math, acceleration is clear-cut and could follow models employed in middle schools where state standards of1.5-2 academic years are covered in one year instead. A 2013 study found that accelerated math
increased feelings of engagement and enjoyment among gifted students, while teaching content that was useful for advanced standardized testing.8Highlightsï Gifted education is implemented in an inconsistent, inequitable manner across school districts and the country generally.1ï Broward County currently provides separate gifted programming for students beginning in elementary school, which harms “lower ability” students while also not creating noticeable improvements in performance.2,7ï Implementing a top- down Schoolwide Enrichment Model to all schools in BCPS and detracking will enhanceeducation by standardizing strong enrichment practices.5-9ï SEM remedies harms caused by early class separation, builds critical thinking skills, and increases student engagement and test scores.6,11Implementation      Following the Nation Council on Gifted Research and Education’s framework for bringing SEM to schools, Broward County should convene a committee of elementary teachers from each of 28 school zones, at least one teacher specializing in gifted and nongifted education for grades 3-5.9 This committee should assess current awareness of SEM methods and document which schools, if any, are
already using these enrichment methods in partial or full capacity. Parent-focused sessions, consisting of informational presentations and public forums, will be needed to build support and address any concerns parents may have. Next, a working group of curriculum experts, primarily teachers, will write specific grade-level guidelines for the SEM curriculum. These guidelines could include creating recommended book/activity lists for reading and a monthly schedule of higher grade-level math that should be covered by accelerated programming. This working group would also incorporate input on how students may socioculturally and academically receive specific materials from teachers around the county and present these findings to the school board, who’ll vote on whether to pass such a policy and begin allocating resources towards it.      To pass the policy, potential members of local government to target for endorsement include Dr. Barbara Sharief, an influential figure in local politics and former Mayor of Broward County. She is currently running for State Senate with the endorsement of the entire Florida Education Association, a prominent teacher’s union.11      Following the example of the Washington DC school districts, certain schools that represent the spectrum of schools by average household income and letter grade should trial SEM.10 The district should appoint a task force, including the county Coordinator of Broward Gifted Services, who will work with school administrators and teachers to tailor their implementation of SEM to their school while ensuring county-wide standards are met. To verify the      
impact of SEM, data on students’ test scores and measures of classroom engagement, such as attendance and enjoyment, should be tracked over a 3-5 years. After this testing period, the school board and Coordinator of Broward Gifted Services can use these findings to decide whether and how to expand SEM into various elementary schools each year.Works Cited[1] Barshay, Jill. “PROOF POINTS: What Research Tells Us about Gifted Education.” The Hechinger Report, October 18, 2021.https://hechingerreport.org/proof- points-what-research-tells-us-about- gifted-education/[2] “Procedural Guide for Gifted Education.” Broward County Public Schools, August 2018. https://www.browardschools.com/c ms/lib/FL01803656/Centricity/Dom ain/13483/2018_Procedural_Guide. pdf[3] Hamilton, “What Really Happens in Gifted Education: A Portrait of Three States.” Pushing the Boundaries of Gifted Education, 2019. https://ncrge.uconn.edu/wp- content/uploads/sites/982/2019/04/ What-Really-Happens-in-Gifted- Education-A-Portrait-of-Three-States.pdf[4] Barton, Paul E. “Parsing the Achievement Gap: Baselines for Tracking Progress. Policy Information Report.” Policy Information Center, Mail Stop 19- R, Educational Testing Service, Rosedale Road, Princeton, NJ 08541-0001 ($15, prepaid), 2003.https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED482932.[5] Redding, C., & Grissom, J. A. “Do Students in Gifted Programs Perform Better? Linking Gifted
Program Participation to Achievement and Nonachievement Outcomes.”, Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 43(3), 520-544. 2003.https://doi.org/10.3102/0162373721 1008919.[6] Reis, S. M., & Renzulli, J. S. . “Developing High Potentials For Innovation In Young People Through The Schoolwide Enrichment Model.” In The International Handbook on Innovation (Ed.), Larisa Shavinia. New York: Pergamon Press, pp. 333–346. 2003 ://www.researchgate.net/ profile/Joseph- Renzulli/publication/279719545_D eveloping_High_Potentials_for_Inn ovation_in_Young_People_Throug h_the_Schoolwide_Enrichment_Mo del/links/5a36becbaca27247ede1c2 25/Developing-High-Potentials-for- Innovation-in-Young-People- Through-the-Schoolwide-Enrichment-Model.pdf[7] Rui, Ning. “Four Decades of Research on the Effects of Detracking Reform: Where Do We Stand?—A Systematic Review of the Evidence.” Journal of Evidence- Based Medicine, 2(3), 164–183. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1756- 5391.2009.01032.x.[8] Callahan, Carolyn M., Tonya R. Moon, Sarah Oh, Amy P. Azano, and Emily P. Hailey. “What Works in Gifted Education: Documenting the Effects of an Integrated Curricular/Instructional Model for Gifted Students.” American Educational Research Journal, 52(1), 137–167.https://www.jstor.org/stable/245467 24.[9] Vahidi, Siamak. “The Effectiveness of the Schoolwide Enrichment Model on Selected
Aspects of Elementary School Change.” Renzulli Center for Creativity, Gifted Education, and Talent Development, February 11, 2015.https://gifted.uconn.edu/schoolwide-enrichment-model/semeffct/.[10] Guyton, Kori Nicole. . "Impact of Acceleration on Gifted Learners' Academic Achievement and Attitudes Toward Mathematics." Order No. 3722953, Piedmont College. 2013 https://www.proquest.com/dissertati ons-theses/impact-acceleration-on- gifted-learners- academic/docview/1723062775/se- 2.[11] Vahidi, Siamak. “Implementing the Schoolwide Enrichment Model: A Five Stage Planning Process for Consensus Building and the Development of a Mission Statement.” Renzulli Center for Creativity, Gifted Education, and Talent Development, February 10, 2015. https://gifted.uconn.edu/schoolwide-enrichment- model/implement_sem/.[12] “SEM Directory—District of Columbia.” Renzulli Center for Creativity, Gifted Education, and Talent Development, June 20, 2019. https://gifted.uconn.edu/schoolwide-enrichment-model/semdirdc2/.[13] 6 News. “Dr. Barbara Sharief Receives Florida Education Association Endorsement.” April 16, 2024.https://www.wate.com/business/pre ss- releases/cision/20240416FL88739/d r-barbara-sharief-receives-florida- education-association- endorsement/.
ENVIRONMENTAL & TECHNOLOGY POLICYDirector: Krislyn Michel Assistant Director: Jack TurnerAnalysts: William Dignam,Noah Duguma, Alix Kerebel, Thej Khanna, Kashyap Rajesh, Harrison Sachs, and Connor Weiss
Agricultural Solutions to Water Resource Issues in the American SouthwestBy William Dignam, wed45@cornell.eduWith wildfires and droughts becoming more common in the American Southwest as a result of climate change, developing sustainable agricultural practices and new technologies can help defend against the water issues the region will face.
Background      Agriculture practices use around 70% of global freshwater resources.1 Current agriculture practices and water resource management face increasing pressure to meet the rising global demand for food sustainably while concurrently conserving water and protecting the environment.Furthermore, certain areas of the world are more prone to drought issues and weather events that affect water resources. The Southwestern United States is particularly vulnerable to drought and water scarcity due to its arid climate and reliance on limited water sources.According to a recent study published in the Nature Climate Change journal the 22-year drought affecting Southwestern North America has been the region's most severe megadrought since at least the year 800 AD.2      The Southwest is home to three main watersheds that stretch across Texas, Arizona, Utah, California, New Mexico, Colorado, Wyoming, and Nevada. The Colorado River watershed is especially significant as it provides water for millions of people, supports large agricultural areas, and sustains ecosystems.3 However, droughts and increasing water demands from urban and agricultural systems are decreasing the river‘s flow rates and depleting
its reservoirs.3 The intricate network of watersheds in the Southwest highlights the need for collaborative water management practices and technologies among Southwestern states to allocate water resources equitably and efficiently.      Innovative solutions, such as improving irrigation methods using analysis tools, utilizing AI and machine learning for resource efficiency, addressing water adoption, drought-resistant crop varieties, and investing in water recycling and desalination technologies, are essential to address the region‘s water challenges. Using these and other agricultural technologies in the Southwest and the rest of the United States will drastically improve water resources.Policy Idea      Congress could enact a comprehensive Southwest Agricultural Innovation and Resilience Program (SAIRP), which combines federal and state efforts under a single, unified framework. The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) would manage a $5 billion federal loan and grant initiative to fund this program. It would provide federal backing targeting innovative companies in Silicon Valley, such as vertical farming start-ups like Plenty and Bowery Farming, and agri-tech
leaders like John Deere, as well as large agricultural ventures in the Southwest, including groups like Driscoll‘s Farms that specialize in water conservation.4,5 The program would allocate funding to businesses developing water- efficient irrigation systems,drought-resistant crop varieties, and advanced soil health monitoring technologies, supporting the development and implementation of innovative water-saving and crop- enhancing technologies. States can initiate pilot programs and demonstration projects that showcase the potential of agricultural technologies in real- world settings.Policy Analysis      Specific technologies show potential in the Southwest.Solutions like N-Drip‘s gravity- powered drip irrigation system help farmers conserve water by replacing the outdated flood irrigation method still used in nearly 40% of the region‘s farms.6 This system can reduce water use by up to 70% without requiring pumps or energy, which is particularly suited to areas like California and Arizona where water scarcity is a more pressing issue.6 Digital tools, such as Acuity Agriculture's dashboard, provide farmers with real-time data on soil moisture and climate conditions to help them optimize irrigation
practices and meet strict water usage regulations. Additionally, indoor and vertical farming technologies, which use recycled water and AI-controlled systems, have emerged as key innovations for growing crops with up to 95% less water, helping reduce issues with the region‘s water supply draining. Together, these technologies are essential for adapting to the Southwest‘s rapidly changing water landscape, which is driven by both population growth and climate change.      The USDA and Congress could maximize the effectiveness of these technologies through SAIRP‘s joint loan program by providing essential funding for initial implementation and scaling. By backing innovations like N-Drip‘s energy-free irrigation and Acuity Agriculture’s data-driven soil monitoring, SAIRP helps farmers transition from outdated methods without bearing high upfront costs. Additionally, USDA-led coordination ensures farmers have access to training and technical support, minimizing barriers to adoption. While initial costs are high, the long-term savings in water and increased crop yields can offset these expenses, investing in a sustainable solution for both the government and farmers.Highlightsï Increasing droughts and wildfires threaten water resources in the Southwestern United States, highlighting the need for sustainable agricultural practices and new technologies to protect water availability.1ï Agriculture uses roughly 70% of global freshwater.1
The Southwest’s reliance on limited water sources and vulnerable watersheds calls for innovative resource management and conservation.ï The Southwest Agricultural Innovation and Resilience Program (SAIRP) would provide $5 billion in federal loans and grants through the USDA, targeting irrigation, drought-resistant crops, and digital monitoring technologies.4,5ï With federal support, technologies like N-Drip irrigation and AI soil monitoring can reduce water use by up to 70%, improve crop yields, and adapt farming practices to the region’s evolving climate challenges.6Implementation      To implement SAIRP once approved, Congress and the USDA could model the initiative on existing green energy acts, such as the Rural Energy for America Program (REAP - H.R. 5051),which provides grants and loan guarantees to agricultural producers and rural businesses for energy- efficient projects.7 Similar to REAP, SAIRP could offer grants and subsidized loans specifically targeting water-saving technologies and data-driven agricultural practices that align with the program’s environmental goals.Additionally, SAIRP could draw on lessons from the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA), which allocates funding for clean energy and sustainable farming practices, providing tax credits to incentivize eco-friendly investments.8 A portion of the IRA’s clean energy and agricultural
sustainability funding could be redirected or earmarked specifically for SAIRP’s objectives. Through SAIRP, USDA-led workshops, and outreach programs could help inform farmers about the economic and environmental benefits of adopting technologies like N-Drip’s drip irrigation or Acuity Agriculture’s soil monitoring dashboards mentioned previously.      SAIRP’s success will depend on addressing several challenges. Reaching and educating farmers in the Southwest, where political ideologies vary widely, will require careful planning and community-based outreach.Farmers may be skeptical about adopting new practices, especially if they perceive them as government- imposed. Creating workshops for local needs and involving respected agricultural leaders in the process may help build trust. Workshops should focus on practical, actionable solutions to challenges faced by the community, such as improving soil health, managing water resources, or adopting sustainable farming techniques.Including agricultural leaders, who understand the unique cultural and economic aspects of the region, lends credibility to the initiative and creates a sense of collaboration.Second, the cost of advanced technologies may be prohibitive for lower-income farmers. Even with subsidies, upfront investments in tools like precision irrigation systems and digital monitoring may seem too high. The program would counter this by providing tiered financial aid options, such as higher grants for small farmers or long- term, low-interest loans that allow for gradual repayment. This approach would make SAIRP accessible to a broader range of
farmers, allowing access to water conservation solutions needed for the region.Works Cited[1] Kashiwise Haruna, Tony Fujs. World Bank Blogs. “Strains on freshwater resources: The impact of food on production on water consumption”, August 23rd, 2023.https://blogs.world bank.org/en/opendata/strains- freshwater-resources-impact-food- production-water- consumption#:~:text=Today%2C% 20around%2070%20percent%20of, goes%20to%20the%20industrial%2 0sector.[2] Williams, Briana. Columbia Climate School, State of the Planet. “Megadrought in Southwest Is Now the Worst in at Least 1,200 Years, Study Confirms”, February 14, 2022.  https://news.climate.columbi a.edu /2022/02/14/megadrought-in- southwest-is-now-the-worst-in-at-least-1200- years-study-confirms/.[3] 
Food and Water Watch. “Colorado River: The Challenges of a Critical Water Source”, February 28, 2023.https://www.foodandwaterwatch.or g/2023/02/28/colorado-river/.[4] Lempert, Phil. Forbes. “Supermarkets and Shoppers Must Embrace Vertical Farming—Our Future Depends on It”, September 15, 2023.https://www.forbes.com/sites/phille mpert/2023/09/15/supermarkets-and-shoppers- must-embrace-vertical-farming-our- future-depends-on-it/.[5] Growing Returns Blog. “Driscoll’s Berry Company Invests in Water Conservation”, January 23, 2019. Environmental Defense Fund.https://blogs.edf.org/growingreturns/2019/01/23/ driscolls-berry- company-water-conservation/.[6] PG Signal. “Western Farmers Are Strapped for Water—These Technologies May Help." November 8, 2022.
https://pgsignal.com/2022/11/08/we stern-farmers-are-strapped-for- water-these technologies-may-help/.[7] United States Department of Agriculture, Rural Development. “Rural Energy for America Program: Renewable Energy Systems and Energy Efficiency Improvement Guaranteed Loans.” Accessed December 19th, 2024. https://www.rd.usda.gov/programs- services/energy-programs/rural-energy-america- program-renewable-energy- systems-energy-efficiency- improvement-guaranteed-loans.[8] The White House, Statements and Releases. “Fact Sheet: How the Inflation Reduction Act Helps Rural Communities”, August 17, 2022. https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefin g-room/statements- releases/2022/08/17/fact-sheet-how- the-inflation-reduction-act-helps- rural-communities/.
Unlocking the Potential of New York City’s Vacant and Underutilized LotsBy Noah Duguma, ndd32@cornell.eduNew York City has one of the world’s most expensive property markets since the housing supply is constantly strained. New York City should increase housing stock by building housing on vacant lots.
Background      In recent decades, New York City’s housing market has skyrocketed in value. The average price per square foot in the city has doubled since the 1990s.1 Combined with extremely high demand for housing, it is more difficult than ever for a populace with a median monthly income of$5,344 per month to find their way onto the New York City property ladder.2 At the same time, New York City is home to over 25,000 vacant and underutilized lots and tens of thousands of vacant properties. The number of vacant and underutilized lots could be even higher because the private housing system in New York City is not well studied.3, 4 In addition, massive potential exists within subdividing former single-family homes to create multiple-family dwellings.      Much of New York City's new construction comes from rezoning for increased density, a process called “upzoning.”5 This practice, which started during the Bloomberg and De Blasio administrations, has proved to be extremely effective in creating new housing stock. A third of recent housing development has happened in upzoned areas.6 Despite upzoning’s promise, New York City’s vacant lots continue to lay sallow. If New York City repurposes all of its vacant and underutilized lots and properties to
their fullest potential, tens of thousands of new housing units could be built in neighborhoods where housing is most needed.Policy Idea      The first part of this policy will direct the New York City government to jettison any vacant or underutilized lots in public holding. On the private end, New York City will impose a five percent property tax on vacant and underutilized lots and properties in private holding. This tax would not only generate revenue for the city government, but it would also incentivize private landowners to sell or develop their vacant lots.Development on the remaining lots within New York City will be exclusively multifamily units, and any new construction will be architecturally representative of the vacant lot neighborhoods. Building efforts on these undeveloped and underutilized lots will be concentrated on affordable housing initiatives.      Single-family homeowners will also be incentivized to subdivide or build onto their property through counseling the city will provide and generous tax credits for every extraneous unit added onto a respective parcel.Policy Analysis      In a city with such a complicated public-private property
market, this policy could face considerable challenges from varying actors. Private property owners could object significantly against the mandatory property tax on vacant lots. Residents against neighborhood development could also push back against any initiatives to redevelop vacant lots into residences rather than repurposing vacant lots for other forms of community good.Architecture firms might also face difficulty trying to build homes on vacant lots because some of the remaining vacant lots in New York City have unique dimensions. At the same time, residents in more economically depressed New York City neighborhoods (where more vacant and underutilized lots tend to be) would benefit from new stocks of housing.      Vacant lot repurposing fits into the broader land use category of brownfield revitalization.Brownfields are areas of land that are currently fallow due to previous industrial activity. The revitalization of brownfields has a storied history in the Northeastern United States. Specifically in New Jersey, a state with a long industrial past, hundreds of brownfield sites have been revitalized for new residential and commercial uses.The Hovnanian Building Company has even specialized in turning New Jersey’s brownfield zones into affordable and luxury housing units
for four decades.7 The Hovnanian company’s success story should show that brownfield revitalization is a viable and scalable way of creating new housing.Highlightsï New York City’s housing market is one of the most expensive and congested in the world.1ï At the same time, thousands of lots in New York City are laying fallow or being underutilized.3,4ï This policy proposal aims to develop the existing undeveloped and underutilized lots in public possession and put pressure on private landowners to develop these lots through the implementation of a specialized 5% property tax on undeveloped and underutilized lots; building efforts will be concentrated on constructing affordable housing.ï In addition, single-family homeowners in New York City will be incentivized to subdivide or add to their lots through generous tax credits and free counseling from the city.Implementation      This policy proposal has an exclusive focus on New York City, and as such will only need to be passed on the citywide level. This policy proposal will be proposed to the New York City Council. There might be potential pushback from certain council districts with higher- income residents due to this policy focusing on constructing affordable housing. Recently, within New York City, there has been fierce
local opposition to the construction of affordable housing within wealthy neighborhoods, as evidenced by recent disputes in Windsor Terrace.8 However, with effective advertising of the policy proposal’s extremely pertinent benefits of increased housing availability and decreased property prices to New York City’s Council Members, the Council floor will surely push the policy to be approved.      If passed, the first step of this policy proposal entails an extensive geographical survey (conducted by the New York State Geological Survey) of all the underutilized, unused, and single- family lots within New York City. Due to New York City’s capacious area and diverse intra-district needs, such a survey will take well over a year to complete. After the survey is completed, neighborhoods with the highest number of underutilized and unused lots will be prioritized over neighborhoods with fewer underutilized lots. Emptier neighborhoods must be prioritized because empirical evidence states that the neighborhoods with the highest number of unused lots in New York City are economically depressed.3 Conveying the funds from the five percent property tax on unused and underutilized lots to the most economically depressed New York City neighborhoods will allow New York City to perform directed residential development in the most in-need neighborhoods (based on numerical figures from vacantlandnyc.com).      Civil society organizations and advocates for affordable housing (such as the Metropolitan Council on Housing) would be the most ardent supporters of such a policy proposal. In fact, advocacy
from the aforementioned groups for this policy proposal would ensure that this policy proposal would pass on the Council floor, thereby ameliorating New York City’s dire housing crisis.Works Cited[1] Rothman, Larry. “Analyzing 100 Years of Real Estate Price History in Manhattan.” ELIKA New York, 18 Oct. 2016, www.elikarealestate.com/blog/traci ng-buying-real-estate-new-york- past-100-years/.[2] “What Are the Average Salaries in New York City? (2023).” HousingAnywhere, housinganywhere.com/New-York-- United-States/average-salary-in- nyc.[3] “NYC Vacant Land.” Vacantlandnyc.com, 2024, vacantlandnyc.com/.[4] “Vacancy Market in New York.” ATTOM, 23 Aug. 2023,www.attomdata.com/solutions/mark et-trends-data/zombie-foreclosures- report/vacancy-market-in-new- york/.[5] Cartier, Brad. “What Is Upzoning, and What Does It Mean for Investors?” The Motley Fool, www.fool.com/investing/stock- market/market-sectors/real-estate- investing/commercial-real- estate/upzoning/.[6] “The Geography of New Housing Development.” Furmancenter.org, furmancenter.org/stateofthecity/vie w/the-geography-of-new-housing.[7] Sichelman, Lew. “Brownfield Sites Become Gold for One Company.” Builder, 11 Feb, 2004, www.builderonline.com/building/re gulation-policy/brownfield-sites- become-gld-for-one-company_o. Accessed 8 Nov. 2024.[1] 
[8] Brand, David. “In Windsor Terrace, a Housing Dispute Ensnares Mayor Adams’ Sweeping
Reform Plan.” Gothamist, 2024, gothamist.com/news/in-windsor- terrace-a-housing-dispute-ensnares-
mayor-adams-sweeping-reform- plan. Accessed 8 Nov. 2024..
Growing Towards Equity: Tackling Food Desserts and Emissions through Community GardensBy Alix Kerebel, ak2755@cornell.eduOur current food production and distribution system leaves vulnerable Americans and our planet behind. The US government can close gaps in food security through new grants for community gardens in lower-income communities.
Background      Millions of Americans do not have access to the food necessary for a healthy lifestyle, a condition described as food insecurity. As of 2024, nearly 14% of Americans experience food insecurity.1 This proportion has remained relatively constant since 2001, despite numerous advancements in agriculture and technology.1 While food insecurity touches Americans across demographics, certain groups are disproportionately impacted.Namely, as of 2023, 23% of African American households, 22% of Latino households, and nearly 39% of impoverished households experienced food insecurity.1      Many lower-income households live in so-called “food deserts”. Food deserts are communities in which there is a lack of grocery stores, and where traveling to the nearest grocery store is inefficient and difficult at best. The high prices of healthy food compound the effects of food deserts, causing detrimental health impacts on low-income individuals.2,3 Specifically, the lack of nutritious food in a food desert increases the risks of various health issues, leading to a 0.8-4.7 years shorter life expectancy.3      Simultaneously, food production as a whole faces serious sustainability issues. Food
production emissions (excluding those associated with land use) account for nearly a third of greenhouse gas emissions. Namely, the transportation of produce and its packaging in stores drive up food production’s environmental footprint.4 To protect both citizens and our planet, the US government should invest in sustainable and accessible food production methods.Policy Idea      Congress should encourage the development of community gardens by providing application- based grants to USDA-designated Low-Access (LILA) neighborhoods (food deserts). To receive these grants, government leaders of towns must complete a simple application in which they outline their community’s eligibility for the program and their detailed plans to establish a community garden large enough for the demonstrated interest in the program. The application process should be made simple, but, if needed, government leaders should be encouraged to seek support from private corporations or the Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production (OUAIP). City leaders should reapply for this program every couple of years and be subject to various accountability measures.
Policy Analysis      Providing grants for community gardens provides the initial incentive needed to kickstart the efforts despite upfront administrative burdens.5 Gardens initiated through a grant program would reduce the effects of food desert inhabitation. Citizens participating in a community garden are 3.5 times more likely to eat the recommended amount of fruits and vegetables.6 Additionally, one study finds that those in food deserts could save approximately $84 per month on food by utilizing community gardens.7 By increasing the consumption of healthy foods, community gardens were linked to improving physical and physiological health, helping close the health gap between citizens.8      Community gardens are also key in decreasing greenhouse gas emissions.9 A study published in the Landscape and Urban Planning Journal found that a kg produced in community gardens “had 2 kg lower emissions than one purchased.10 However, a recent study by the University of Michigan found that, if implemented incorrectly, community gardens may increase food production emissions. Creating the material needed for opening and maintaining the garden releases greenhouse gases that are not offset if the garden doesn’t remain open for long enough.11 The study      
explains that to reduce overall greenhouse gas emissions, community garden programs should extend the lifetime of necessary infrastructure (raised beds, fabric nets, paths, etc.) and practice urban symbiosis.11 Integrating these best practices into the grant program is essential to maintaining its long- term sustainability benefits.Highlightsï Rates of food insecurity in the US are high, posing serious health consequences for vulnerable Americans.1,2,3ï The food production process is not sustainable, with many emissions coming from transport.4ï The United States should provide an application-based grant program for food- insecure neighborhoods to create and maintain community gardens.ï The program would provide a crucial source of healthy nutrition while cutting emissions from obtaining food.5,6,7,8,9,10Implementation      The United States should implement an application-based grant program for American cities to support the creation and maintenance of community gardens, which should be administered through the OUAIP. These grants will help fund materials, land purchases, and crops, amongst other necessary purchases. Since the federal government is funding materials, the OUAIP should also restrict what materials should be purchased with the money to ensure high-quality infrastructure is used to lengthen the life span and, if
possible, local compost material is used for soil enrichment.Emphasizing these sustainable practices will amplify the gardens’ environmental impact.11      To qualify for the grant, cities must be a USDA-designated low-access neighborhood (a food desert) and submit plans for a community garden large enough to support interested residents–which they should measure through public polls. The community gardens must be available to all citizens free of charge and be created on public- owned vacant lots or public gardens to not limit other economic opportunities. While cities themselves should submit the grant applications, they will be encouraged to utilize the help of private corporations, which are currently helping manage community gardens and thus have more expertise. The grant process should be designed to be as simple as possible. However, if needed, the OUAIP should assist cities in the application process to overcome the initial application burden and ensure accessibility.5      The grants should be made available for application immediately, be valid for three years (before renewal is required), and be subject to regular auditing to ensure upkeep and maintenance. If the cities are not properly utilizing funds, the OUAIP should provide direct intervention and assistance to resolve obstacles. Funding for this program should come from general tax revenue.      Political opposition may stem from this funding mechanism, though, as some politicians may see the program as costly. To counter it, politicians should emphasize the fact that, since the program is application-based, the OUAIP can
decide to allocate funds to only the most needy cities, depending on available resources. The same can be argued against opponents who believe the job is already being done by nonprofits: the OUAIP can choose to allocate funding only in cities without preexisting gardens. To further address the issue of funding, politicians should emphasize that as public health outcomes increase thanks to the gardens, which may help reduce Medicaid and Medicare spending.6,7,8Works Cited[1] “Interactive Charts and Highlights.” USDA ERS - Interactive Charts and Highlights. Accessed December 18, 2024. https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/foo d-nutrition-assistance/food-security- in-the-u-s/interactive-charts-and- highlights/.[2] “Access to Foods That Support Healthy Dietary Patterns.” Access to Foods That Support Healthy Dietary Patterns - Healthy People 2030. Accessed December 18,2024.https://odphp.health.gov/healthypeo ple/priority-areas/social- determinants-health/literature- summaries/access-foods-support- healthy-dietary-patterns.[3] “Living in Food Deserts Is Associated with Shorter Life Expectancy in the US, New Research Shows.” American Cancer Society MediaRoom. Accessed December 18, 2024. https://pressroom.cancer.org/release s?item=1237.[4] Crippa, M., E. Solazzo, D. Guizzardi, F. Monforti-Ferrario, F.N. Tubiello, and A. Leip. “Food Systems Are Responsible for a Third of Global Anthropogenic GHG Emissions.” Nature Food 2,
no. 3 (March 8, 2021): 198–209.https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-021- 00225-9.[5] Boekelheide, Don, and Lucy Bradley. “Funding and Resources.” NC State University. Accessed December 18, 2024. https://content.ces.ncsu.edu/collard- greens-and-common-ground-a- north-carolina-community-food- gardening-handbook/funding-and- resources.[6] Manzanete, Lisa. “Community Gardens: An Effective Approach to Food Equity.” Loma Linda University Institute for Health Policy and Leadership. July 13, 2021.https://ihpl.llu.edu/blog/community- gardens-effective-approach-food- equity.[7] Kan-Rice, Pam. “Urban Gardens Improve Food Security.” University
of California, October 8, 2021. https://www.universityofcalifornia.e du/news/urban-gardens-improve- food-security.[8] “Community Gardens.” County Health Rankings & Roadmaps. N.d. University of Wisconsin Population Health Institute. https://www.countyhealthrankings.o rg/strategies-and-solutions/what- works-for- health/strategies/community- gardens.[9] Puigdueta, Ivanka, Eduardo Aguilera, José Luis Cruz, Ana Iglesias, and Alberto Sanz-Cobena. “Urban Agriculture May Change Food Consumption towards Low Carbon Diets.” Global Food Security 28 (March 2021): 100507. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2021.1 00507.[10] 
Cleveland, David A., Noelle Phares, Krista D. Nightingale, Robyn L. Weatherby, William Radis, Jane Ballard, Madia Campagna, et al. “The Potential for Urban Household Vegetable Gardens to Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions.” Landscape and Urban Planning 157 (January 2017): 365–74.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbpla n.2016.07.008.[11] “Study Finds That Urban Agriculture Must Be Carefully Planned to Have Climate Benefits.” University of Michigan News. January 22, 2024. https://news.umich.edu/study-finds- that-urban-agriculture-must-be- carefully-planned-to-have-climate- benefits/.[1] 
Regulating Personalized Pricing in the Big Data Era: Toward a Fair Market FrameworkBy Thej Khanna, tkk28@cornell.eduPersonalized pricing—using personal information to set prices—is not a new phenomenon. In an age where data is everything, however, there is an urgent need for clear and proactive regulation to define acceptable data usage boundaries and protect American consumers.
Background      Surveillance pricing refers to the use of algorithmic pricing systems, artificial intelligence, and related technologies to determine individualized prices based on consumer data including location, demographics, credit history, or browsing history1. The practice of personalized pricing is not novel; product costs have historically been variable, with factors including overhead, customer desire, and competitor prices all contributing to historical examples of individualized pricing.2 Studies additionally highlight potential consumer benefits, as personalized pricing profiles enable corporations to charge customers closer to their perceived willingness to pay, maximizing profit and market share.3      Personalized pricing schemes pose more harm than benefit, with these schemes often stifling market innovation, eviscerating consumer rights and privacy, and setting a dangerous precedent for how much control the public is willing to give algorithms over our daily lives. Potential risks include the exploitation of less knowledgeable consumers, the targeting of behavioral biases, violations of national discrimination law, and shifting market share towards corporations with the
resources to engage in large-scale data collection and analysis.4      The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has recently issued an investigative probe requesting information regarding the use of surveillance pricing methods across four key areas: types of products and services offered, data collection and inputs, customer and sales information, and impact on consumers and prices.1 This investigative probe is not intended to result in policy action, instead focusing on further establishing the current landscape of surveillance pricing.Policy Idea      The FTC should implement the following initiatives: establish a dedicated algorithmic marketing investigative division within the Bureau of Consumer Protection (BCP) focused primarily on enforcement and consumer reporting, establish data disclosure requirements for corporations including specific details data collection practices and usage in pricing schemes, and create a third-party auditing and certification system for companies that adhere to consumer data privacy standards. By
implementing this three- pronged policy approach, the FTC can effectively provide a sense of regulatory stability to the sphere of algorithmic consumer protection, set up a foundation for future data privacy standards, and place power back in the hands of individual consumers.Policy Analysis      Establishing a dedicated algorithmic marketing investigative division within the BCP would allow the FTC to effectively leverage pre-existing administrative structures to enforce the second prong of this policy proposal, specifically data disclosure. The current focuses of the BCP include their work within the Division of Privacy & Identity Protection, which operates online assistance and a call center for victims of identity theft.5 Implementing a similar structure for algorithmic pricing schemes would increase the efficacy of the other two prongs of this proposal, as well as offer consumers an avenue for individual recourse and advisement.Additionally, the division’s placement within the BCP would leverage already existing organizational structures, with divisions such as the Division of Financial Practices currently
focusing on emerging technology broadly.6      Establishing data disclosure requirements would similarly pressure corporations to adhere to equitable pricing schemes.Structuring a data disclosure requirement similar to the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) would require companies to disclose what data is being collected and for what purpose.7 The efficacy of this policy is demonstrated by the effects of GDPR, with a survey of EU citizens finding that 60% of respondents were aware of their ability to access personal data held by public administrations, and 51% were aware of their ability to access data held by private companies.8 This requirement would check back against one of the major concerns regarding surveillance pricing: lack of transparency on how algorithms determine individual pricing.9 The benefits of data disclosure requirements extend beyond consumer protection.      Finally, creating a third- party auditing and certification system would help incentivize companies to adhere to new algorithmic pricing regulations by enabling the attainment of a displayable certificate.Additionally, a third-party auditing system would reduce the administrative load placed on the FTC: by focusing on certifying accrediting services rather than performing audits, the FTC would experience the same outcomes for a fraction of the workload. Third- party audits additionally increase consumer confidence, with a Deloitte report finding that 78% of respondents believe that third-party audits enhance the credibility of a company's financial and other disclosure practices.10
Highlightsï The creation of algorithmically determined individualized prices poses potential risks to consumer welfare, including violating national discrimination laws, exploiting unaware consumers, and creating monopolies.ï Personalized pricing models are not necessarily predatory; fair and balanced pricing systems can maximize profit margins, increase accessibility to goods and services, and enhance market competitiveness. Achieving this balance requires government oversight and safeguards to ensure transparency, anti- discriminatory development, and consumer privacy.ï Through a three-pronged approach including the founding of a new algorithmic marketing investigative division, the creation of data disclosure requirements for algorithmic pricing schemes, and the introduction of a third-party accrediting system for consumer data usage, the FTC can effectively provide clarity to the field of algorithmic pricing models.Implementation      A multi-phased and chronological approach is necessary. The FTC should first establish the proposed surveillance pricing investigative division within the BCP. This division would leverage resources from existing divisions, particularly the Office of
Technology given its established focus on advising the FTC on policy and research initiatives in the fields of artificial intelligence, machine learning, and human- computer interaction.11 To ensure the success of this new division, the BCP should allocate additional funding and personnel, recruiting experts focused on algorithmic transparency, consumer privacy, and data ethics. The division would become responsible for monitoring emerging algorithmic pricing practices, enforcing the data disclosure standards outlined in prong two of this policy, and providing an accessible reporting system for consumers affected by discriminatory pricing practices.Given the upcoming administration’s focus on deregulation and reducing expenditures, the FTC may need to first begin with voluntary partnerships and industry collaboration, gradually expanding enforcement as market conditions and administrative interest evolve.      The second stage of this proposal is the development of a standardized data disclosure framework for corporations using algorithmic personalized pricing models. To achieve this, the FTC must first complete its ongoing probe into surveillance pricing practices. Without a deeper understanding of the current landscape of algorithmic pricing models the FTC risks hampering market competition, with a 2018 joint report between the DOJ and the FTC finding that equitable personalized pricing models enhance market competition, efficiency, and welfare.12 An additional intermediate step to help determine effective requirements would be a period of public      
comment, inviting feedback from consumer advocacy groups, algorithmic justice experts, and industry representatives. Finally, before fully implementing the data disclosure requirements, the FTC should provide a grace period for companies to prepare; hasty implementation could put a massive strain on businesses, particularly smaller organizations without dedicated privacy teams. Given surveyed costs of GDPR compliance ranging from $1.7 million for small to medium-sized businesses and up to $70 million for larger corporations, immediate implementation of this data framework would have major economic impacts.13      The third prong, the third- party auditing and certification program, involves developing a transparent auditing process to certify organizational adherence to the new data disclosure requirements outlined in the second prong. Mirroring existing FDA third-party certification programs, where the FDA officially recognizes accreditation bodies, the FTC would offload enforcement and investigative responsibilities, thereby reducing additional strain on the agency.14      To ensure the efficacy of these policy changes, the FTC should engage in a targeted communications campaign to ensure consumers are aware of their rights. Additionally, the FTC should provide guidance documents and host workshops to assist businesses in complying with new data disclosure requirements, particularly smaller to mid-range companies that may experience financial difficulty. These three prongs will likely succeed under the Trump administration, with
incoming FTC Chair Andrew Ferguson having already expressed support for increased scrutiny of surveillance pricing methods.15 By implementing this policy, the FTC will set a global precedent for responsible algorithmic pricing, ensuring consumer rights are safeguarded in the evolving digital economy.Works Cited[1] Federal Trade Commission. “FTC Issues Orders to Eight Companies Seeking Information on Surveillance Pricing.” Federal Trade Commission, July 23, 2024. https://www.ftc.gov/news- events/news/press- releases/2024/07/ftc-issues-orders- eight-companies-seeking- information-surveillance-pricing.[2] Wallheimer, Brian. “Are You Ready for Personalized Pricing?” The University of Chicago Booth School of Business, February 26, 2018.https://www.chicagobooth.edu/revie w/are-you-ready-personalized- pricing.[3] Elmachtoub, Adam N., Vishal Gupta, and Michael L. Hamilton. “The Value of Personalized Pricing.” Management Science 67, no. 10 (April 5, 2021). https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2020.3 821.[4] Mozilla, and Consumers International. A Consumer Investigation into Personalised Pricing, n.d. https://www.consumersinternational.org/media/369070/personalized_pri cing.pdf.[5] Federal Trade Commission. “Division of Privacy and Identity Protection.” Federal Trade Commission, n.d. https://www.ftc.gov/about- ftc/bureaus-offices/bureau-
consumer-protection/our- divisions/division-privacy-and- identity.[6] Federal Trade Commission. “Division of Financial Practices.” Federal Trade Commission, n.d. https://www.ftc.gov/about- ftc/bureaus-offices/bureau- consumer-protection/our- divisions/division-financial- practices[7] European Commission. “What Information Must Be given to Individuals Whose Data Is Collected?” European Commission, n.d. https://commission.europa.eu/law/la w-topic/data- protection/reform/rules-business- and-organisations/principles- gdpr/what-information-must-be- given-individuals-whose-data- collected_en.[8] “Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council Data Protection as a Pillar of Citizens’ Empowerment and the EU’s Approach to the Digital Transition - Two Years of Application of the General Data Protection Regulation.” EUR-Lex, June 24, 2020. https://eur- lex.europa.eu/legal- content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A 52020SC0115.[9] Beam, Christopher. “Welcome to Pricing Hell.” The Atlantic, April 16, 2024.https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/a rchive/2024/04/surge-pricing-fees- economy/678078/.[10] Tamboly, Nilofeur. “Understanding the Third Party Audit Process” AuditGuru, January 22, 2024.https://audit.guru/understanding- the-third-party-audit- process/#:~:text=According%20to%20a%20survey%20conducted,pos
itive%20reputation%20in%20the% 20market[11] Federal Trade Commission. “Office of Technology.” Federal Trade Commission, n.d. https://www.ftc.gov/about- ftc/bureaus-offices/office- technology.[12] U.S. Department of Justice,U.S. Federal Trade Commission, Personalised Pricing in the Digital Era – Note by the United States, 2018.https://www.justice.gov/atr/page/fil e/1313091/dl?inline. [13] 
Demirer, Mert, Diego J. Hernández, Dean Li, and Sida Peng. “Data, Privacy Laws and Firm Production: Evidence from the GDPR.” National Bureau of Economic Research, February 2024. https://doi.org/10.3386/w32146.[14] U.S. Food and Drug Administration. “Accredited Third- Party Certification Program.” U.S. Food and Drug Administration, October 26, 2023. https://www.fda.gov/food/importing-food-products-united-
states/accredited-third-party- certification-program.[15] United States, Congress, Office of Commissioner Andrew N. Ferguson, and Andrew N. Ferguson. Concurring Statement of Commissioner Andrew N. Ferguson, Surveillance Pricing Intermediaries Matter Number P246202, 23 July 2024.https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc_gov/pdf/surveillance-pricing-6b- ferguson-concurrence.pdf.
Unmasking the Digital Deception: Combatting Deepfake Misinformation in PoliticsBy Kashyap Rajesh, kr583@cornell.eduAs deepfake technology blurs the line between fact and fiction in politics, implementing mandatory labeling for AI-generated content safeguards democracy by ensuring transparency, enabling informed decision-making, reducing misinformation, and holding creators accountable for deceptive or altered media.
Background      In the past few years, there has been an exponential increase in the use of deepfakes, AI-generated videos and audio clips that look and sound incredibly real but are not. In fact, deepfake content grew by 900% between 2019 and 2020, with forecasts predicting up to 90% of online content could be synthetically generated by 2026.1 They have caused a growing concern over the distortion of truth and have blurred the lines between fact and fiction.2 In 2023, Reuters found that roughly 500,000 video and voice deepfakes were shared on social media around the world.3 By 2025, we can expect to see 8 million deepfakes shared online, consistent with the rate of doubling deepfakes every six months.3      AI-generated misinformation is already impacting elections. Just two days before Slovakia’s recent parliamentary vote, social media was flooded with a fake audio clip of a prominent party leader allegedly discussing plans to buy votes.4 This incident resulted in a significant loss for the implicated party, spotlighting the risks of AI-powered misinformation.4 The problem is borderless: in January 2024, during New Hampshire’s presidential primary season, a deepfake audio of President Joe Biden, which falsely
claimed that primaries did not matter was widely circulated.      The risk is clear: the next generation of voters may eventually lose faith in not only what we read and see but in the political system itself. About 63% of Americans believe that altered or fabricated videos and images cause significant confusion around the facts of current events and issues.6 At a time when political polarization is high and civic engagement is low, the rapid development of AI-driven disinformation threatens to overwhelm our ability to discern what is real, eroding the very essence of our democracy.7Policy Idea      To combat misinformation and increase trust in the electoral process, an AI-Generated Content Disclosure Law is necessary. This law would require all media platforms—social media sites, news outlets, and streaming services—to label content created or significantly modified by AI. The label must be visible and state that the content was generated or altered using artificial intelligence (defined as advanced AI systems capable of generating or altering content that misleads audiences). Enforcement would involve private companies implementing detection tools internally, under government oversight, to monitor and flag
content. This ensures consumers can engage with online content more transparently and confidently.Policy Analysis      The ease with which these technologies can now create hyper- realistic content creates a massive political liability.8 This aforementioned AI-Generated Content Disclosure Law addresses the root of this problem by increasing transparency for the public when they engage with this media. Instead of just restricting this content, the policy focuses on educating viewers and building trust. When viewers know whether AI created something, they can engage more critically and responsibly with the media, as suggested by President Biden’s executive order last fall.9      Additionally, there is existing precedent. For example, the European Union’s Digital Services Act includes provisions for flagging disinformation, though it fails to specifically address AI-generated content specifically.10 Similarly, some platforms have voluntarily introduced their own labels for AI content, but these efforts are often inconsistent across media platforms.11 By mandating such a labeling initiative across platforms across the US, this law would create a more unified approach to resolving the issue.      
      Enforcing this policy would require platforms to develop or obtain advanced detection tools for identifying AI-generated content, leading to increased administrative and operational costs.12 Additionally, funding for these efforts would need to come from both government and platforms, potentially with support from media literacy grants, which would be challenging.      However, studies have shown that disinformation costs the global economy over $78 billion annually, and AI-generated deepfakes pose growing threats to political stability and trust.3 Hence, by investing in detection and transparency tools, both platforms and governments can reduce these costs by contributing to a more informed and engaged electorate, mitigating the spread of harmful AI- driven misinformation. In the long run, these savings, combined with increased public trust, make this a worthwhile investment for safeguarding media integrity.13Highlightsï AI-generated misinformation poses a threat to the strength of democratic institutions.1ï Any piece of media (i.e., images, videos, audio) produced or altered by AI must carry a label similar to “This content was generated using artificial intelligence.”ï Platforms would be responsible for identifying AI-generated content through AI detection tools, ensuring that the proper labels are applied.ï If a platform fails to flag AI- generated content appropriately, penalties
ranging from fines to content removal would be imposed by a regulatory agency, such as the Federal Communications Commission.ï Ensures that consumers can easily identify AI-generated or AI-altered content, thereby reducing misinformation and enhancing the legitimacy of online information.ï Implementing the AI- Generated Content Disclosure Law requires bipartisan support, public outreach, FCC incentives for compliance, and transparent success metrics like reduced flagged AI content, with penalties funding media literacy programs and input from a community advisory board to refine guidelines.Implementation      Implementing the AI- Generated Content Disclosure Law would require coordinated legislative efforts and public outreach to ensure compliance and build public trust in political media. Platforms should be mandated to label all AI-created or altered media with clear disclaimers, ensuring users are informed about the nature of the content they interact and engage with online.      However, since public trust is at an all-time low, platforms may initially resist compliance, citing increased costs and operational burdens.14,17 In response, the FCC should create incentive programs or grants for smaller platforms to adopt detection tools, reducing financial barriers to compliance.15 If additional funding becomes necessary, penalty revenue from
non-compliant platforms and grants from public-private partnerships would help sustain the program. If funding falls short, additional measures like increased public- private partnerships, reallocation of FCC resources, or supplemental government appropriations would be necessary to sustain the program. Additionally, early-stage outreach to nonprofit media literacy organizations and advocacy groups would help raise awareness of the need for transparent labeling practices, preventing the companies from framing the policy as excessively burdensome.      Considering resistance from tech companies and political lobbying, securing bipartisan support would be essential. Pre- committee support can be garnered by engaging bipartisan caucuses like the Problem Solvers caucus and hosting stakeholder roundtables with legislators, industry leaders, and public interest groups.Representative Cathy McMorris Rodgers, Chair of the House Committee on Energy and Commerce, could introduce the bill due to her prior leadership on tech issues, in alignment with existing federal efforts around AI regulation, such as Biden’s executive order. 9 Given that this issue directly affects the elections for sitting lawmakers, who are at risk of being deepfaked themselves, conversations have already been widespread.18 These existing discussions help set the foundation for strong legislative support. Once introduced, hearings would feature AI ethics experts, media representatives, and technology researchers who can testify on the urgency of managing AI-driven misinformation. The Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation would
then refine the bill, paving a smoother path through a potentially polarized legislature.      Measuring success would involve several metrics, such as reducing flagged AI-generated content, improving public trust in media, and the efficacy of the compliance rates amongst platforms. Monthly compliance reports would be submitted to the FCC, with third-party audits ensuring detection tools are working effectively.16 Platforms failing to comply would face fines, with the revenue generated from these fines back into social media literacy programs that train consumers to engage with information more carefully.      The FCC would gather public feedback throughout the rollout, with a community advisory board established to collect input from users, advocacy organizations, and technology companies. This feedback would allow the FCC to adjust implementation guidelines as needed, ensuring the policy remains relevant and effective as the technology evolves.Works Cited[1] World Economic Forum. “How Can We Combat the Worrying Rise in Deepfake Content?” World Economic Forum, May 19, 2023. https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2 023/05/how-can-we-combat-the- worrying-rise-in-deepfake-content/.[2] Mackenzie, James. “South Korea: The Deepfake Crisis Engulfing Hundreds of Schools.” BBC News, September 3, 2024. https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/ cpdlpj9zn9go?eicker.news.[3] Jacobson, Noah. “Deepfakes and Their Impact on Society.” CPI OpenFox, February 26, 2024.
https://www.openfox.com/deepfake s-and-their-impact-on-society/.[4] Nadal, Lucas de, and Peter Jan?árik. “Beyond the Deepfake Hype: AI, Democracy, and 'The Slovak Case.” HKS Misinformation Review, August 30, 2024. https://misinforeview.hks.harvard.e du/article/beyond-the-deepfake- hype-ai-democracy-and-the-slovak- case/.[5] Swenson, Ally, and Will Weissert. “New Hampshire Investigating Fake Biden Robocall Meant to Discourage Voters Ahead of Primary.” AP News, February 6, 2024.https://apnews.com/article/new- hampshire-primary-biden-ai- deepfake-robocall- f3469ceb6dd613079092287994663db5.[6] Gottfried, Jeffrey. “About Three-Quarters of Americans FavorSteps to Restrict Altered Videos and Images.” Pew Research Center, June 14, 2019.https://www.pewresearch.org/short- reads/2019/06/14/about-three- quarters-of-americans-favor-steps- to-restrict-altered-videos-and- images/.\[7] Journal of Democracy. “How AI Threatens Democracy.” Accessed November 27, 2024. https://www.journalofdemocracy.or g/articles/how-ai-threatens- democracy/.[8] Columbia Journalism Review. “Artificial Intelligence in the News: How AI Retools, Rationalizes, and Reshapes Journalism and the Public Arena.” CJR. Accessed November 27, 2024.https://www.cjr.org/tow_center_rep orts/artificial-intelligence-in-the- news.php.[9] The United States Government. “Fact Sheet: President Biden Issues Executive Order on Safe, Secure,
and Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence.” The White House, October 30, 2023. https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefin g-room/statements- releases/2023/10/30/fact-sheet- president-biden-issues-executive- order-on-safe-secure-and- trustworthy-artificial-intelligence/.[10] European Commission. “Questions and Answers on the Digital Services Act.” Accessed November 27, 2024. https://ec.europa.eu/commission/pre sscorner/detail/en/qanda_20_2348.[11] Ahlman, Andrea. “Platforms Take the First Step on Labeling AI Content.” Center for Journalism & Liberty, June 10, 2024. https://www.journalismliberty.org/p ublications/platforms-labeling-ai- content.[12] The Economist Newspaper. “Businesses Are Finding AI Hard to Adopt.” The Economist. Accessed November 27, 2024. https://www.economist.com/technol ogy- quarterly/2020/06/11/businesses- are-finding-ai-hard-to-adopt.[13] Tiernan, Peter, Eamon Costello, Eavan Donlon, Magdalena Parysz, and Mairéad Scriney. “Information and Media Literacy in the Age of AI: Options for the Future.” MDPI, September 7, 2023. https://www.mdpi.com/2227- 7102/13/9/906.[14] Financial Times. “Europe's Rushed Attempt to Set the Rules for AI.” Financial Times. Accessed November 27, 2024. https://www.ft.com/content/6cc784 7a-2fc5-4df0-b113- a435d6426c81?utm_source=chatgpt.com.[15] Federal Communications Commission. “Compliance Assistance for Small Businesses.” FCC. Accessed November 27,[1] 
2024.https://www.fcc.gov/communicatio ns-business- opportunities/compliance- assistance-small-businesses.[16] Federal Communications Commission. “FCC Strengthens Requirements for Third-Party Authentication Solutions.” FCC. Accessed November 27, 2024.
https://www.fcc.gov/document/fcc- strengthens-requirements-third- party-authentication- solutions?utm_source=chatgpt.com.[17] Brenan, Megan. “Americans' Trust in Media Remains Near Record Low.” Gallup, October 18, 2022.https://news.gallup.com/poll/40316
6/americans-trust-media-remains- near-record-low.aspx.[18] Nazzaro, Miranda. “Lawmakers Call for Crackdown on AI Deepfakes after Grok Backlash.” The Hill, August 27, 2024. https://thehill.com/policy/technolog y/4850752-lawmakers-crackdown- ai-deepfakes-grok-backlash/.[1] 
Dual-Use Solar for New York: a Win-Win for Energy Development and AgricultureBy Harrison Sachs, hls89@cornell.eduEstablishing a dual-use solar policy for New York State will allow for the expansion of solar energy infrastructure needed to meet existing goals, promote the protection of agricultural land, and diversify farmer’s incomes.
Background      Dual-use solar also known as agrivoltaics is the practice of using the same land for solar energy and agricultural production. Solar grazing is the practice of raising livestock, mostly sheep on solar land. Policies are expanding solar and renewable energy, yet solar array sites need to be maintained through fossil fuels to run lawnmowers and the spraying of pesticides.1,2,3 By 2030, New York State must source 70% of its electricity through renewable sources and, by 2040, commit to a zero-emission electric grid per the 2019 New York Climate Act.1,4      In 2021, there were 2,113 farms in the state raising sheep, and as of January 1st 2024, there were 86,000 sheep in the state.2 Currently, contracting farmers with solar providers is challenging due to small herd sizes in the state; developers would rather talk with one entity that can represent several different farms rather than having to coordinate with many farms to manage solar sites.2 Additionally, solar panels for agricultural purposes have higher upfront costs for developers, which can discourage investment in agrivoltaics. In 2021, New York ranked second to last in average farm real-estate value per acre compared to other northeastern states.5      
In 2013, the state established the New York Sun Act to expand solar energy in New York by offering incentives for installations, lowering energy costs, and creating jobs.6 However, New York State has no policies to specifically address or incentivize agrivoltaic production, despite the benefits and the region’s high demand.Amending New York’s renewable energy policies to include agrivoltaics is crucial for reaching clean energy goals while preserving farmland—an opportunity New York cannot overlook.Policy Idea      Amend the New York Sun Act to establish a program that promotes dual-use solar. The program should directly target farmers and solar providers for maximum impact. Solar companies should be incentivized to build agriculturally focused projects through a payment on top of the base rate. The program will grant preservation status to farms that join, preventing future land development. As farmers cannot often establish relationships with other farms interested in agrivoltaics and with solar companies, the Department of Agriculture and Markets and Energy Research and Development Authority (NYSDERA) should involve staff to manage the
initiative. New York State should begin with a two-year, multi-phase pilot program featuring quarterly assessment and input sessions.Then, the policy should be adapted, such as alterations to budget and staff allocation, before being turned into permanent legislation. The ten- year goal of this policy is for 5% of all NY solar acreage to be dual-use.Policy Analysis      Solar grazing offers diverse benefits that solve climate problems, such as managing the landscape without fossil fuels, increasing biodiversity, improving soil health, and promoting local sheep farmers.1 The policy mitigates small-scale farmers’ limited access to solar sites by providing agency support staff to bridge the gap between farmers and energy providers. In addition, strong incentives for solar providers ensure that their sites become dual-use and they can lease the land for minimal cost. The program should be similar to the structure of the Solar Massachusetts Renewable Target (SMART) Project, which has achieved high levels of success and public perception.7 In Massachusetts 15%, of solar sites (7 sites) are incentivized by the SMART program to have dual-use solar, and there are additionally 14 more sites that are on their way to use the program to adopt agrivoltaic      
practices.8 The SMART program has received strong support by both policymakers and its stakeholders, which will lead to its continued funding.9 It is important to note the slow progress the SMART program had, implementing support staff will increase the number of farms joining the agrivoltaic initiative.Unlike policies in other states, this policy will have an agricultural focus in addition to an energy-based focus. As farms join the project, the land will become conserved, with the ability to conserve hundreds of thousands of acres of New York farmland in just the first decade of implementation. This could lead to the creation of more jobs, a stronger local economy of farmers, and more resilient farms.Highlightsï A dual-use solar policy will conserve agricultural land and diversify farmers’ incomes.2ï The role of designated staff at NY Ag and Markets and NYSERDA will be vital to connecting farmers with energy companies.ï The adoption of solar grazing practices will lead to increased carbon sequestration, biodiversity, pollinator populations, and soil health.1ï Agricultural producers can help meet New York state’s goals in switching to renewable energy.2Implementation      This policy would likely get strong bipartisan support. For example, the New York Sun Act S8415 passed the New York State Senate with 59 votes in favor and only three against.6 An additional
program would probably get as good or greater support from New York policymakers due to their similar goals. As solar infrastructure rapidly expands across the state, now is the ideal time to addressdual-use solar incentives. In 2021, two bills were proposed to address solar grazing in New York State.10 However, both failed, as the policy was likely too small to gain broad support. Coupling the bill with the NY Sun Act could attract enough attention for support from the New York state legislature.      A key legislator could be State Senator Rachel May.11 She is the Chair of the Legislative Commission on Rural Resources and has co-sponsored a bill (S7081) focused on providing funding for dual-use solar research. The American Farmland Trust would also likely be a main actor in having this bill pass.12 They could use their national resources to promote the bill, contact legislators, and get farmers to give testimonies. They have done work around the country in supporting policy that promotes dual-use solar and could potentially partner with the American Farmland Trust, which has several staff members in New York.      In the pilot, NYSERDA and NY Ag and Markets will establish focus groups with farmers and solar providers to address viability concerns. The first year of the pilot would focus on education and awareness, with both agencies hosting workshops to explain how to form relationships and fair contracts between farms and solar providers. The second year of the pilot will aim to resolve conflicts between farmers and energy providers and continue to limit barriers. The policy would be funded through a joint budget
between the New York Department of Agriculture and Markets and the Department of Energy Research and Development. This project appears to be very feasible with their budgets and aligns with both of the agency’s missions. Funding would mainly come from the state through rate-payer funding. Utility companies collect money from customers' monthly electricity bills to support various state energy programs. Unlike in the broader funding for the NY Sun Act, this project’s budget would be managed by NY Ag and Markets, in addition to NYSERDA. The project would also rely on public-private partnerships with energy companies that own the solar array sites. The policy would result in increased relationships between agricultural producers and energy companies.Legislators should view this act as a way to conserve agriculture while recognizing its benefits in expanding solar energy infrastructure. This approach will also help gain the support of legislators who may be resistant to expanding solar array sites in rural landscapes.Works Cited[1] Kochendoerfer, Nikola, and Michael Thorney. “Grazing Sheep on Solar Sites in New YorkState: Opportunities and Challenges.” Department of Animal Science, Cornell University, February 2021, 10. https://solargrazing.org/wp- content/uploads/2021/02/Solar-Site- Sheep-Grazing-in-NY.pdf.[2] Harris, Lisa. “NEW YORK STATE: Leading the Flock.” American Solar Grazing Association, January 15, 2022. https://solargrazing.org/new-york- state-leading-the-flock/.[1] 
[3] Gashler, Krisy. “Electric Sheep: Grazing in Arrays Supports Economy, Climate,” October 14, 2021.https://news.cornell.edu/stories/202 1/10/electric-sheep-grazing-arrays- supports-economy-climate[4] NY Climate Act, Pub. L. No. Senate Bill S6599 (2019). https://www.nysenate.gov/legislatio n/bills/2019/S6599.[5] USDA, NASS. “Northeastern Region Land Values Report.” United States Department of Agriculture National Agricultural Statistics Service,2021.	https://senecacountycce.org/agriculture/northeastern-region- land-values-report.[6] Harckham, Peter. NY Sun Act (2022).https://www.nysenate.gov/newsroo m/press-releases/2024/pete- harckham/harckham-bill-help-mu
nicipalities-create-renewable.[7] “Solar Massachusetts Renewable Target (SMART).” Massachusetts Department of EnergyResources, n.d. https://www.mass.gov/solar- massachusetts-renewable-target- smart.[8] “Solar Massachusetts Renewable Target (SMART) Programmatic Review.” SustainableEnergy Advantage, LLC, May 16, 2024.https://www.mass.gov/doc/evaluati on-of-potential-smart-program- improvements/download.[9] Palano, Gerald, MA Ag Energy Specialist, interview by Sachs,Harrison, Oct. 30, 2024[10] NY Dual Use Energy Bills (2021).
https://advance.lexis.com/document/?pdmfid=1519360&crid=e7a1991d-d87f-4bd2-9363-14c12 b51465&pddocfullpath=%2Fshared%2Fdocument%2Fstatutes- legislation%2Furn%3AcontentIte m%3A64MH-6RH1-F27X-63NM- 00000-00&pdcontentcomponentid=4988& pdteaserkey=sr1& pditab=allpods&ecomp=hc- yk&earg=sr1&prid=f0a5832d-42f5- 44d3-b085-155be82c6d5d.[11] NY State Senate. “Senator Rachel May,” n.d. https://www.nysenate.gov/senators/ rachel-may.[12] American Farmland Trust. “Smart Solar,” n.d. https://farmland.org/solar/.[1] 
Essential Car Service: Renewing America’s Commitment to Rural Communities Through EV ChargingBy Jack Turner, jt797@cornell.eduThe US spends billions of dollars on subsidies for gas cars, air service, and farmers. Though all are undoubtedly crucial services, the lack of direct subsidization of charging infrastructure has hampered the transition to renewable transportation, particularly in rural America.
Background      Rural America produces upwards of 36% of all domestic CO2 emissions.1 Many of these communities are based around agricultural practices where adaptation to climate-friendly practices is slow.2 An excessive urgency exists to make changes so that electric vehicles can be affordable to drive without seeking out chargers in distant locations.Rural drivers consume 25.6% of all light-duty gas (typically smaller cars) despite only constituting 18.8% of drivers in the US, and only 17% of rural Americans live within a mile of an electric vehicle charger.3 Even worse, rural drivers who drive the most— roughly 3.6% of the US population —consume around 1,950 gallons of gas annually, or nearly 13% of total gas consumption in the United States.4 This consumption, in turn, leads to a lack of vertical equity in gas purchasing. Rural “superusers” — many of whom earn below the national median income— are spending roughly a quarter of their income on gas alone.4 In rural America, where incomes are often below the national median, electric vehicles save families upwards of$1,900 to $2,800 a year.5      The United States has been relatively aggressive under the
Biden Administration in transitioning towards a decarbonized transportation sector. The Inflation Reduction Act allotted hundreds of millions of dollars towards electric vehicle initiatives, and earlier this year, the Biden Administration announced grants upwards of $623 million to construct new electric vehicle charging stations.6 This is progressive but does not sustain charging in extremely sparsely populated communities. The public investment from federal dollars has so far not spread deep into rural America though it has still only been three years since the passage of the Inflation Reduction Act.Rural drivers have a 40% lower adoption rate of electric vehicles than non-rural counterparts, and this divide continues to grow.7Policy Idea      Using the Essential Air Service program as a template, the United States Federal Government should expand upon the initial spending of the Biden Administration and fully subsidize the construction and long-term usage of electric vehicle chargers in rural areas more than 20 miles from a public electric vehicle charger.      The program will primarily involve implementing charging
stations in areas currently not served or near chargers, and the funding will continue to subsidize chargers in areas that are not commercially viable in the long term. Similar to the Essential Air Service, states should condition continued deployment of charging on minimum usage thresholds that can vary depending on distance from the next closest existing, non- subsidized charging station.Policy Analysis      The success of charging stations in rural America is built around the greater adoption of electric vehicles and a sustained reduction in carbon emissions from motor vehicles more broadly.Access to an electric vehicle charger is the greatest factor in an individual’s decision to switch from gasoline cars; according to the Pew Research Center, 49% of those who live within a mile of an electric vehicle charging station support switching their car to electric.3      The greater density of chargers in rural America potentially tackles the extremely pressing range issue that EVs face: drivers are hesitant to use electric vehicles for long drives out of fear that there will be long gaps without access to chargers. A Harvard Business study found that the      
largest concern over electric vehicles among drivers today is the insatiable pricing at charging stations driven by the inconsistent supply of electricity and charging infrastructure.8      This program will have lasting economic benefits for rural drivers. Switching to electric vehicles is estimated to save rural drivers, who drive the most, upwards of $4,000 a year in gasoline costs.9 The return on investment for the subsidies will likely take time as demand for electric vehicles grows with the program. That said, a recent study found that drivers spending money at local businesses while waiting for their vehicles to charge boosted local revenue by 0.8 percent from January 2021 to June 2023 for an average charging location, and this number is higher for chargers near a greater density of businesses.10Highlightsï A lack of electric vehicle charging capacity in rural America has stalled an otherwise quick transition from gas-guzzling cars to carbon-friendly transport in the U.S.ï Congress should increase direct subsidies to states for the implementation of electric vehicle charging stations that are unprofitable.ï Access to charging stations increases the propensity of drivers to switch to EVs. A 2022 Consumer Report survey found that 61% of drivers choose not to switch because of charging logistics and 55% choose not to switch due to range anxiety.11
ImplementationThis policy has political appeal to both moderate Republicans and Democrats.12 The environmental and economic benefits that the policy targets would be broadly popular among liberals and progressives owing to their prior support of similar components of the 2021 Bipartisan Infrastructure law. Moreover, the key target demographics are rural, gas-car- owning Americans who typically skew conservative.13 While some initial reluctance to switch is expected given prior trends, the gradual switch among those in rural America prior to the implementation of this policy is encouraging. There is still a sizable portion of Republicans in Congress including Senator-Elect John Curtis (R-UT) who are members of the Conservative Climate Caucus, and several key elements of this proposal will address needs of their districts/states.      To obtain the money for subsidization, the best course of action is for Congress to shift federal funds for highway expansion and, instead, invest in EV fast chargers. The US has historically invested heavily in highway expansions that, while necessary for many smaller cities, often increase traffic in large cities.14 15 While this policy is likely to be broadly popular among constituents, who will not be taxed additional money for its implementation, hardline conservative Republican lawmakers may have a difficult time supporting an initiative that caves into people they view as climate change alarmists. The Republican caucasus is highly fractured on support for
climate change legislation, but Democrats will not have to win over each one to push the new legislation across the finish line. As many major automakers are now well-established in the electric vehicle market, they will likely support the policy too, as it might induce non-car owners to purchase an EV as their first car. A bipartisan group of senators, akin to the legislative process for the Bipartisan Infrastructure Bill, could be highly effective at working out a comprehensive framework that appeals to conservatives invested in climate solutions.      The implementation of the policy can follow the existing legislation signed into law by President Biden subsidizing EVs (the 2021 Bipartisan Infrastructure Law), but this new legislation will have to be more spatially targeted. The legislation will have to target communities of concern, namely those that are not located near any existing charging stations, and the legislation language will have to be strict that funds are conditional on being spent in said communities.Works Cited[1] “Report: The Overlooked Climate Impact of Rural America.” Rural Climate Partnership. Accessed October 11, 2024. https://ruralclimate.org/rural- emissions-report-2024/[2] “The Hard Truths of Trying to ‘Save’ the Rural Economy.” The New York Times. Accessed October 11, 2024. https://www.nytimes.com/interactiv e/2018/12/14/opinion/rural- america-trump- decline.html?action=click&module=Opinion&pgtype=Homepage.[3] Shah, Samuel Bestvater and Sono. “Electric Vehicle Charging[1] 
Infrastructure in the U.S.” Pew Research Center (blog), May 23, 2024.https://www.pewresearch.org/data- labs/2024/05/23/electric-vehicle- charging-infrastructure-in-the-u-s/.[4] Simmons, Daisy. “How Rural Families Are Saving Thousands with Electric Vehicles.” Yale Climate Connections, July 2, 2024. http://yaleclimateconnections.org/2 024/07/how-rural-families-are- saving-thousands-with-electric- vehicles/.[5] The Equation. “5 Ways Rural Drivers Benefit from Electric Vehicles,” November 4, 2021. https://blog.ucsusa.org/cecilia- moura/5-ways-rural-drivers-benefit- from-electric-vehicles/.[6] “Biden-Harris Administration Announces $623 Million in Grants to Continue Building Out Electric Vehicle Charging Network”. FHWA.https://highways.dot.gov/ne wsroom/biden-harris- administration-announces-623- million-grants-continue-building- out-electric.[7] “Driving an EV in Rural America: What You Should Know.” CarMax.[8] 
Harvard Business School. “The State of EV Charging in America: Harvard Research Shows Chargers 78% Reliable and Pricing like the ‘Wild West’. Institute for Business in Global Society,” June 26, 2024. https://www.hbs.edu/bigs/the-state- of-ev-charging-in-america.[9] “New Research Shows Climate and Economic Benefits in Rural Transition to EVs.” Rural Climate Partnership. Accessed October 11, 2024. https://ruralclimate.org/new- research-rural-transition-to-evs/.[10] “New MIT Study Suggests That EV Charging Stations Boost Business.” Accessed October 11, 2024.https://www.caranddriver.com/news/a62371896/mit-study-suggests-ev- chargers-improve-business/.[11] Administrator. “EV Charging Infrastructure: Trends, Requirements & Costs.” SEPA, February 8, 2024. https://sepapower.org/knowledge/ev-charging-infrastructure/.[12] Chien, Lia. “U.S. Senate Panel Looks for Ways to Aid Electric Vehicle Industry • Missouri Independent.” Missouri Independent (blog), August 1, 2024.
https://missouriindependent.com/20 24/08/01/u-s-senate-panel-looks- for-ways-to-aid-electric-vehicle- industry/.[13] Wolf, Michael. “Rural Identity Emerging as Key Factor in Politicsï Indiana Capital Chronicle.” Indiana Capital Chronicle (blog), June 27, 2024.https://indianacapitalchronicle.com/ 2024/06/27/rural-identity-emerging- as-key-factor-in-politics/[14] “It’s Time to Stop Pretending That Roads Pay for Themselves.” Streetsblog USA, November 25, 2015.https://usa.streetsblog.org/2015/11/ 25/its-time-to-stop-pretending-that- roads-pay-for-themselves.[15] Cervero, Robert. “Road Expansion, Urban Growth, and Induced Travel: A Path Analysis.” Journal of the American Planning Association 69, no. 2 (June 30,2003): 145–63.https://doi.org/10.1080/0194436030 8976303.
Building Resilience through a Climate Change SuperfundBy Connor Weiss, cjw273@cornell.eduNew Jersey is warming faster than any other state in the Northeast United States. It is time for the New Jersey State Legislature to pass a climate change superfund law to hold corporations accountable for climate change.
Background      While most states around the US have seen increases in temperature around 2.5ºF since 1970, New Jersey has seen a rise of3.5ºF.1 Dense urban development creating an urban heat island effect is particularly responsible for this vast increase.1 Studies have found that Newark, the largest and most densely populated city in New Jersey, has the second worst urban heat island effect in the US, with an average temperature increase of 8.4ºF, in comparison to what the temperature would be without the effect.2      As a small coastal state that sees jobs and tourism generate $40 billion each year at the shore, increases in temperature uniquely jeopardize New Jersey. While the state generates revenue through the pharmaceutical and financial services industries, New Jersey is most widely recognized for its shore.4 A study by Climate Costs 2040 found that the safeguarding of homes, businesses, and livelihoods under a moderate sea level rise scenario would cost the state $25 billion by 2040.5 This sea level rise would not only affect those at the shore, but also harm communities along the Delaware River and New York Bay as well. Moreover, private insurance companies only cover a small fraction of the damage of climate change, leaving the American taxpayer to pay three
times the amount of private insurance to cover the costs of extreme weather events.6      Unless New Jersey starts to invest now, there is no clear way for the state to raise $25 billion to safeguard our cities without causing harm to its citizens. Yet, the top five US-based oil and gas companies have seen record profits since 2021, making more than $250 billion combined.7 This disparity shows the urgent need for policy action to build resilience in our communities.Policy Idea      The New Jersey State Legislature should pass a law that creates a Climate Change Superfund under the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP). The law will require companies that significantly contribute to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to pay into a fund that will support climate change resilience and infrastructure initiatives, like flood resistance. It will be the responsibility of the agency to determine who is “responsible” for the damages caused, and how much they will owe. The NJDEP must also proliferate methodologies to calculate how much and who will owe the money to the state. The state must only collect compensatory payments from companies who have emitted more than 1 billion global GHG
emissions from 2000 to 2024, and have a physical or economic connection with the state.Policy Analysis      This type of policy is novel, and currently, most implementations across states and nations are either in infancy or currently in legal trouble.8 To ascertain the effectiveness of this type of policy, lawmakers should look to the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) passed by the US Congress in 1980. This law created a tax on the toxic waste industry to be put into the Superfund so that the EPA could act when something happened that threatened public health or the environment.9 When these events occur, the EPA is given the power to seek out potentially responsible parties and compel them to perform the cleanup or pay for the cleanup to be done.9 This allows the EPA to quickly contain the contaminated area once identified and provide restitution to those who need it. In 2023 alone, the EPA sought out more than $900 million in responsible party commitments, showing that 44 years later, the policy is still effective.10 In application to my proposed policy, this framework from CERCLA shows that this type of policy is effective in collecting funds and providing restitution to      
those who are affected by negative events, such as in my case, from extreme weather.      Other research has found that after the cleaning of a Superfund site, homeowner’s property values rose by 14.7% if they lived within 3 blocks of the site.11 Superfunds have a quantifiable positive impact on the local communities’ health, by cleaning up a toxic site, and helping them economically by raising their land prices.Highlightsï The New Jersey State Legislature should pass a law allowing the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection to collect funds and damages from oil and gas companies to help pay for damage associated with climate change.ï Research has found that it would take nearly $25 billion by 2040 to safeguard the livelihoods of New Jerseyans under a moderate sea level rise scenario, given New Jersey’s increased susceptibility to climate change.5ï A similar federal policy in the US, called the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, has collected funds from toxic chemical companies to aid with cleanup when they were responsible for toxic contamination and has seen extensive success.ï This policy should act as a model for potentially interested lawmakers to see
the positive effect the Superfund has had on local communities. After a Superfund site had been cleaned up, homeowners saw their property values rise by 14.7%.11Implementation      The law’s passage is contingent on a simple majority vote by both the Assembly and Senate, followed by the New Jersey Governor’s signature. Incumbent Governor Phil Murphy has supported climate action and has set a goal of reducing emissions by 100% by 2035. Democrats also hold solid majorities in both chambers of the legislature, which bodes well for the policy.      In the NJ State Legislature, a similar version of this bill has been introduced (S3545/A4696), which recently passed out of the Senate Environment Committee and was referred to the Senate Budget and Appropriations Committee. The author of the bill, Senator John McKeon, said in an interview that he believes that his version of the bill will definitely make it out of committee and the Assembly will most likely pass it, but he was unsure about the Senate.12 To rally support, important state environmental organizations and lobbyists, such as the New Jersey League of Conservation Voters and the New Jersey Environmental Lobby, should reach out to lawmakers and help organize civic action. Significant effort must be put into organizing support for the bill among lawmakers within the NJ State Legislature to ensure that the votes are there to pass the bill. The bill has not seen any significant opposition yet because it is in committee, but there is a possibility
that as the bill progresses, it will see opposition from industry associations and trade groups about its potential impact on the oil industry. A common critique of the bill is that the oil and gas industry will pass on the price to the consumer, increasing prices. The Fiscal Policy Institute analyzed the similarly structured New York bill and found that the policy would not lead to fossil fuel companies increasing prices for consumers.13 The bill would punish them for previous behaviors, which would not influence current or future decisions from fossil fuel companies. If a specific large emitter were to raise its prices in response to being charged by the Superfund, other companies would simply outcompete them.      Once the law is passed, the state of New Jersey should direct the DEP to create specific guidelines detailing how a party’s responsibility is evaluated and how to calculate their emissions. The DEP will have to create a set of regulatory guidelines that allows the state to collect money proportionally to the amount of GHG emissions and the costs incurred by the state from the event. The DEP should also specifically define what makes a “responsible party” and have guidelines to ensure that this party has the necessary economic or physical ties to the state. These guidelines ensure that the laws will be applied equally to companies, enabling quick and accurate application.Works Cited[1] Howard, Hilary. “New Jersey Is One of America’s Fastest-Warming States, Data Shows.” The New York Times, July 3, 2024. https://www.nytimes.com/2024/07/[1] 
03/nyregion/new-jersey-warming- climate-change.html.[2] Hsu, Angel, Vivek Shandas, Diego Manya, and Daniel Vecellio. “Urban Heat Hot Spots.” Climate Central. Accessed October 11, 2024.https://www.climatecentral.org/clim ate-matters/urban-heat-islands- 2023.[3] Goel, Samaksh (Sam). “Ecotourism at the Jersey Shore... Will It Work?” Youth STEM 2030, March 11, 2024. https://www.youthstem2030.org/yo uth-stem-matters/read/ecotourism- at-the-jersey-shore-will-it- work#:~:text=The%20Jersey%20Sh ore%20generates%20%E2%80%9C%2440,in%20New%20Jersey%20in creases%20exponentially.[4] “What Are New Jersey’s Principal Industries?” Business.NJ.gov. Accessed October 17, 2024.https://business.nj.gov/faqs/what- are-new-jerseys-principal- industries.[5] LeRoy, Sverre, and Richard Wiles. “New Jersey - Climate Costs in 2040.” Climate Costs 2040, June2019.https://www.climatecosts2040.org/f iles/state/NJ.pdf.[6] 
Lashof, Daniel, and Andy Stevenson. “Who Pays for Climate Change? U.S. Taxpayers Outspend Private Insurers Three-to-One to Cover Climate Disruption Costs.” Natural Resource Defense Council, May 2013.https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/fi les/taxpayer-climate-costs-IP.pdf.[7] Delouya, Samantha. “Why Oil Companies Are Raking in Record Profits under Joe Biden.” CNN, June 11, 2024.https://www.cnn.com/2024/06/11/e conomy/oil-industry-profits-under- biden/index.html.[8] “Vermont and New York Climate Acts Are First in a Wave of Likely Climate Change Cost Recovery Laws.” Insights | Sidley Austin LLP, June 20, 2024. https://www.sidley.com/en/insights/ newsupdates/2024/06/vermont-and- new-york-climate-acts-are-first-in- a-wave-of-likely-climate-change- cost-recovery-laws.[9] “Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA).” Legal Information Institute, September 2023.https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/co mprehensive_environmental_respon
se_compensation_and_liability_act_(cercla).[10] Benincasa, Meghan. “EPA’s Superfund Program Turns 44 This Year: It’s Making a Difference.” Nobis Group, April 22, 2024. https://nobis-group.com/blog/epas- superfund-program-turns-44-this- year-its-making-a-difference/.[11] Gamper-Rabindran, S., & Timmins, C. (2013). Does cleanup of hazardous waste sites raise housing values? Evidence of spatially localized benefits. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 65(3), 345–360. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2012. 12.001[12] D’Alessandro, Dave. 2024. “Making Big Oil Pay for Climate Damage in N.J.: A Q&a with Sen. John McKeon.” Nj.com. August 7, 2024.https://www.nj.com/opinion/2024/0 8/making-oil-companies-pay-for- climate-damage-in-nj-a-qa-with- sen-john-mckeon.html.[13] Gusdorf, Nathan. 2024. “Fact Sheet: Climate Change Superfund Act - Fiscal Policy Institute.” Fiscal Policy Institute. September 23, 2024. https://fiscalpolicy.org/fact- sheet-climate-change-superfund-act.[1] 
FOREIGN POLICY       Director: Bingsong Li Assistant Directors: Olivia LaBonte andKrystlove YeboahAnalysts: Zaki Ahmad, Zain Ali, Naina Kalra, Jorge Mariño, and Olivia Pham
Foreign Doctors Can Save Italy’s Vulnerable Healthcare SystemBy Zaki Ahmad, zmaa4@cornell.eduItaly currently faces a shortage of doctors that increasing student enrollment alone cannot solve. Therefore, Italy should introduce a Skilled Workers Act to directly recruit foreign doctors and advertise the new streamlined bureaucracy to them.
Background      Italy’s rapidly aging population, with 22.8% of its people over the age of 65—the second- highest percentage worldwide—has led to a growing demand for healthcare services.1,2 Meanwhile, 31% of general practitioners are estimated to have left the industry since 2021, while funding and planning issues have prevented those positions from being filled.1,3,4 Healthcare provider shortages are associated with increased wait times and poorer quality of care for patients, and grueling shifts and limited benefits for providers.5,6,7 The severity of the current situation was seen during a doctors’ strike in 2023 over working conditions.6 While population aging and increases in health expenditures are potent challenges across the European Union, Italy’s unique circumstances make its healthcare system extremely vulnerable.8,9      The Italian government has now allocated 3.3 billion euros for healthcare worker contract renewals after years of underinvestment; however, this funding fails to fully address the healthcare shortage.4 Only one-third of contracts were filled between 2023 and 2024, despite increased training contracts over the past three years.4 Current residents’ criticisms of the Italian residency system may
disincentivize the already small population of Italian students from entering the industry.6      Many European countries have implemented specific policies to recruit doctors to alleviate shortages.8,10,11 In contrast, Italy has not introduced a comprehensive plan to do so and has one of the lowest percentages of foreign doctors, at 0.9%.12 The Italian government is generally anti- immigration and has not taken cohesive action to recruit migrant workers.13 Further, language barriers, slow recognition of foreign degrees, and the complex process for obtaining a visa are barriers for interested migrant doctors.14,15,16 Italy should consider taking cohesive steps to recruit foreign doctors to address its current healthcare shortage.Policy Idea      While Italy is increasing medical school enrollment, they cannot fill all vacant positions with students alone.17 To address the immediate shortage of doctors and mitigate the associated risks for providers and patients, the Italian government should implement a modified version of Germany’s Skilled Workers Act (SWA). This centralized policy would increase the recruitment of foreign doctors to fill vacant positions that students
are unable or unwilling to fill. Italy would directly recruit of foreign doctors, which is not currently part of the German SWA, and advertise the advantages of their new streamlined migration process.These advantages include reducing language training barriers, recognizing degrees from abroad, and increasing access to EU Blue Cards.Policy Analysis      Italy recognizes that increasing migration and expanding its workforce are necessary to reverse the migratory trend that began with a surplus of doctors.18,19,20 Italy has an interest in bolstering the medical industry and, despite its anti-immigration stance, has taken steps to increase migrant doctors, raising the likelihood of an Italian SWA.18,20      Development-oriented partnerships that recruit foreign workers by promoting location and settlement program advantages are effective, leveraging existing initiatives without incurring additional costs.21,22,23 This recruitment would give Italy an edge, as countries like Germany do not recruit directly.21 Recruitment benefits Italy, as policy shifts alone do not trigger migratory pull effects.24 The lack of pull effects would alleviate concerns about      
illegal immigration from the policy, allowing directly recruited migrant doctors to fill roles that students and current doctors avoid due to their unattractiveness.25,26      Recruitment would be effective because the SWA tackles obstacles disincentivizing skilled worker migration. The SWA would increase funding for teaching Italian abroad and supporting Italian abroad upon arrival.13,27 Furthermore, more foreign degrees would be recognized faster, and vocational training would fill gaps to meet Italian standards.13,27 Once foreign doctors are in Italy, access to the EU Blue Card would be expanded by adding eligible jobs and lowering salary requirements to 45% of the annual pension insurance contribution, allowing family unification for Blue Card holders.28      Employing migrant doctors is also a low-cost option that could help achieve Italy’s recommended 7% of GDP spending on health.29 The low cost would alleviate the economic concern that immigrants can trigger a recession, a primary reason for Italian opposition to immigration.26 The SWA would be a centralized policy, enabling Italy to address regional healthcare inequities by strategically placing foreign doctors.30,31Highlightsï Italy’s pressing shortage of doctors, which causes a decrease in quality ofcare, must be addressed to care for its rapidly aging population.1,2,3,4,5,6,7ï Italy should implement a Skilled Workers Act to directly recruit foreign doctors from abroad to strategically fill vacancies
nationwide that current doctors and students find unattractive.14,15,16,17,18,20,24,26ï Recruiting foreign doctors is cost-effective and would enable Italy to achieve their recommended 7% of GDP on public health.29ï During recruiting, Italy should advertise the streamlined bureaucratic process that makes migrating to Italy more efficient and attractive.13,27,28Implementation      To engage public opinion and key stakeholders, the Italian government should emphasize the SWA’s potential benefits for patients and healthcare providers. Outreach through media and healthcare advocacy groups could foster community support.32 This support is important to overcome potential objections to the current relatively anti-immigration climate in Italy.33 To gain buy-in from healthcare unions, the government should demonstrate how the SWA complements initiatives that alleviate burdens on current doctors and improve working conditions through the German example.Furthermore, since the policy enables strategic alignment with EU objectives to tackle illegal migration while promoting necessary and legal migration, Italy could receive funding for the SWA through the EU’s Asylum, Migration, and Integration Fund.29 EU funding would further reduce cost-based opposition to the policy.      Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni has strong approval ratings and is known for a tough stance on illegal immigration. However, she has shown the ability to advance moderate reform proposals without
alienating her anti-immigration supporters.29,34 Meloni has specifically decried immigration while simultaneously taking steps to expand skilled workers in other industries.36 Thus, Prime Minister Meloni and Minister of Health Orazio Schillaci, should use their political capital to introduce the bill in the Chamber of Deputies.Through individual meetings, they should appeal to the left-wing Democratic Party and the centrist Five Star Movement, which collectively accounts for 120 members of the Chamber of Deputies, to increase support.Furthermore, Meloni and Schillaci should encourage young doctors who went on strike to stage rallies in favor of the bill to demonstrate popularity. Young doctors would likely do so because the bill addresses many of the concerns that caused them to strike. To address criticism of immigration, they should emphasize that the policy specifically targets a doctor shortage that Italians alone cannot resolve. By emphasizing this aspect, the Italian government can reduce opposition to the plan and limit hostility towards foreign doctors.32 Additionally, they can highlight how Germany has implemented similar policies while increasing border controls, demonstrating that passing the SWA does not signal weakness in immigration policy.Another potential criticism is that hiring foreign doctors may strain resources. Prime Minister Meloni and Minister Schillaci should emphasize the policy’s cost- effectiveness and how migrant doctors would contribute economically by filling positions left vacant by locals.33 Although Italy’s right-wing government may be more inclined than others to pass
a Skilled Workers Act, no right- wing government with anti- immigration rhetoric has yet passed a pro-immigration bill. Thus, the bill is unlikely to pass in the near future but could pass if a more centrist or left-wing government was elected.Works Cited[1] “Countries With the Oldest Populations in the World.” 2020. Population Reference Bureau. https://www.prb.org/resources/coun tries-with-the-oldest-populations-in- the-world/.[2] Breyer, F., J. Costa-Font, and S. Felder. “Ageing, Health, and Health Care.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 26, no. 4 (December 1,2010): 674–90.https://doi.org/10.1093/oxrep/grq03 2.[3] Cristea, Mirela, Gratiela Georgiana Noja, Petru Stefea, and Adrian Lucian Sala. “The Impact of Population Aging and Public Health Support on EU Labor Markets.” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 17, no. 4 (February 24,2020): 1439.https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17041 439.[4] Greco, Giuseppe, Antonio Giulio de Belvis, Michela Meregaglia, Giovanni Fattore, and Walter Ricciardi. Feburary. “Challenges for the Italian National Health Service in 2024. How to plan the future health workforce?” European Health Observatory. https://eurohealthobservatory.who.i nt/monitors/health-systems- monitor/analyses/hspm/italy- 2023/challenges-for-the-italian- national-health-service-in-2024.- how-to-plan-the-future-health- workforce.[5] 
Melchiorre, Maria Gabriella, Marco Socci, Sabrina Quattrini, Giovanni Lamura, and Barbara D’Amen. 2022. "Frail Older People Ageing in Place in Italy: Use of Health Services and Relationship with General Practitioner" International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 19, no. 15: 9063. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19159 063.[6] Paterlini, Marta. “Young Doctors in Italy Protest and Threaten to Strike over Working Conditions.” BMJ, September 29, 2023, p2259.https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.p2259.[7] Smith, Yolanda. 2023. “Effects of Physician Shortage.” News- Medical. https://www.news- medical.net/health/Physician- Shortage.aspx.[8] Morina, Drenusha. 2024. “7 EU Countries in Dire Need of Doctors & Nurses Are Offering Visas to Foreign Medical Professionals.” Schengen News. https://schengen.news/7-eu- countries-in-dire-need-of-doctors- nurses-are-offering-visas-to- foreign-medical-professionals/.[9] Paterlini, Marta. “Warnings over Doctor Shortages amid Italian Health Reforms.” The Lancet 399, no. 10341 (June 2022): 2093.https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140- 6736(22)01009-1.[10] European Commission. 2015. “Recruitment and Retention of the Health Workforce in Europe.” European Comission. https://health.ec.europa.eu/system/fi les/2016- 11/2015_healthworkforce_recruitm ent_retention_frep_en_0.pdf.[11] “Skilled immigrants: an asset to our country.” n.d. Federal Ministry of the Interior and Community. Accessed December 2,
2024.https://www.bmi.bund.de/EN/topics/migration/immigration/labour- migration/skilled- immigration/skilled-immigration- node.html.[12] “Health at a Glance 2023.” n.d. OECD. https://www.oecd- ilibrary.org/sites/7a7afb35- en/1/3/8/11/index.html?itemId=/con tent/publication/7a7afb35- en&_csp_=6cf33e24b6584414b817 74026d82a571&itemIGO=oecd&ite mContentType=book.[13] Meloni, Giorgia. 2023. “President Meloni’s opening address at the International Conference on Development and Migration.” Italian Government. https://www.governo.it/en/articolo/ president-meloni-s-opening- address-international-conference- development-and-migration/23279.[14] Ciato, Leopoldo, Luigi Bertinato, Irene A. Glinos, and Elisa Boscolo. 2011. “Oversupplying doctors but seeking carers: Italy’s demographic challenges and health professional mobility.” European Observatory. https://who-sandbox.squiz.cloud/	data/assets/p df_file/0017/152324/Health- Professional-Mobility-Health- Systems.pdf#page=276.[15] “Italy Work Visa.” n.d. Visaguide.world. https://visaguide.world/europe/italy- visa/long-stay/work/.[16] “Flows 2023-25: new quotas for entering Italy to work.” Integrazione Migranti, Accessed 28 October 2024. https://www.integrazionemigranti.g ov.it/en-gb/Dettaglio- approfondimento/id/54/Flows- 2023-25-new-quotas-for-entering- Italy-to-work.[17] European Commission - OECD. 2023. “Italy: Country[1] 
Health Profile 2023.” European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies. https://eurohealthobservatory.who.i nt/publications/m/italy-country- health-profile-2023.[18] Balmer, Crispian, and Angelo Amante. 2023. “Italy's Meloni faces reality check as migrant flows rise relentlessly.” Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/world/euro pe/italys-meloni-faces-reality- check-migrant-flows-rise- relentlessly-2023-07-13/.[19] Nowak, Sylwia. 2023. “Italy: Selected Issues in: IMF Staff Country Reports Volume 2023 Issue 274 (2023).” IMF eLibrary. https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/j ournals/002/2023/274/article-A001- en.xml.[20] World Health Organization. 2023. “The health workforce crisis in Europe is no longer a looming threat – it is here and now. The Bucharest Declaration charts a way forward.” World Health Organization (WHO). https://www.who.int/europe/news/it em/22-03-2023-the-health- workforce-crisis-in-europe-is-no- longer-a-looming-threat---it-is-here- and-now.-the-bucharest-declaration- charts-a-way-forward.[21] Genrich, Tom. 2023. “Germany is Looking for Foreign Labour.” Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik.https://www.swp- berlin.org/10.18449/2023RP03/.[22] Lobasso, Fabrizio. 2021. “Italy and Africa: "Value Oriented Diplomacy" in Action.” Istituto Affari Internazionali. https://www.iai.it/en/pubblicazioni/i taly-and-africa-value-oriented- diplomacy-action.[23] Tuscany Regional Government. n.d. “Bando “Residenzialità in montagna 2024”:
contributi per l'acquisto di un immobile come residenza e dimora abituale.” Regione Toscana.Accessed October 9, 2024. https://www.regione.toscana.it/-/bando-residenzialit%C3%A0-in- montagna-2024-contributi-per-l- acquisto-di-un-immobile.[24] Tjaden, Jasper, and Tobias Heidland. “Did Merkel’s 2015 Decision Attract More Migration to Germany?” European Journal of Political Research, March 6, 2024,1475-6765.12669.https://doi.org/10.1111/1475- 6765.12669.[25] Longo, Francesco, Franco Locatelli, Mario Del Vecchio, Paola Di Giulio, Silvia Giordano, Anna Odone, Vito Marco Ranieri, and Paolo Vineis. “Tackling the Crisis of the Italian National Health Fund.” The Lancet Public Health 9, no. 1 (January 2024): e6–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2468- 2667(23)00277-3.[26] OECD and European Union. Health at a Glance: Europe 2018: State of Health in the EU Cycle. Health at a Glance: Europe. OECD, 2018.https://doi.org/10.1787/health_glanc e_eur-2018-en.[27] Federal Ministry of the Interior and Community. n.d. skilled immigration. Accessed October 8, 2024.https://www.bmi.bund.de/EN/topics/migration/immigration/labour- migration/skilled- immigration/skilled-immigration- node.html.[28] German Federal Government. 2024. “The new Skilled Immigration Act at a glance.” Make it in Germany.https://www.make-it-in- germany.com/en/visa- residence/skilled-immigration-act.[29] 
Bludau, Heidi. “Article: Aging Societies Rely on Immigrant Health.” Migration Policy Institute, 26 January 2024, https://www.migrationpolicy.org/art icle/health-care-worker-migration- trends. Accessed 28 October 2024.[30] Salachi, Emma, "The Immigration Crisis in Italy: A Convergence of Crises and What it Means for Globalization" (2019). Honors Theses. 53. https://digitalcommons.assumption. edu/honorstheses/53.[31] Franzini, Luisa, and Margherita Giannoni. “Determinants of Health Disparities between Italian Regions.” BMC Public Health 10, no. 1 (December2010): 296.https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458- 10-296.[32] Parsons, Cristopher. “What's the best policy to attract high- skilled migrants?” The World Economic Forum, 9 June 2015, https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2 015/06/whats-the-best-policy-to- attract-high-skilled-migrants/. Accessed 28 October 2024.[33] European Commission. n.d. “EU funds for migrant integration 2021-2027 | European Website on Integration.” European Website on Integration. Accessed November 13, 2024.https://migrant- integration.ec.europa.eu/funding/eu- funds-2021-2027-period_en.[34] Bubola, Emma. “Meloni's Balancing Act: Centrist Abroad, Right Wing at Home.” The New York Times, 17 October 2024, https://www.nytimes.com/2024/10/ 17/world/europe/meloni-surrogacy- migrants-italy.html. Accessed 28 October 2024.[36] Pollina, Elvira, and Alvise Armellini. 2023. “Italy's Meloni talks tough on migrants while
opening up to foreign workers.” Reuters.
https://www.reuters.com/world/euro pe/italys-meloni-talks-tough-
migrants-while-opening-up-foreign- workers-2023-12-06/.
Instability and Insecurity in Pakistan: Addressing Police Brutality and CorruptionBy Zain Ali, zmaa4@cornell.eduThe police force is perceived to be the most corrupt institution in Pakistan, broadly accused of bribery, intimidation, torture, and extrajudicial killings.Reforming training standards, oversight, and constructing new cultural and legal frameworks in policing would build trust in police and government.
Background      Abusive policing in Pakistan traces to the Colonial Police Act of 1861, designed to form a repressive police force for the British Empire, and the Anti-Terrorism Act of 1998 (ACA), designed to address violence by enabling violations of citizen’s constitutional rights by law enforcement.4,5,6 Calls for reform eventually resulted in Police Order 2002, which aimed to standardize and modernize policing by introducing new standards of oversight, accountability, training, and conduct.7 The implementation of this act has been limited due to the lack of political will and opposition by police leadership.6,8,9      The lack of urgency can be partially attributed to widespread internal security threats.10 Police often justify torture and staged killings as necessary to maintain order, combat terrorism, and out of fear of suspects escaping punishment.11 The first half of 2023 saw 27 reported cases of deaths from police torture.12 Former Inspector General of Sindh explained the prevalence of extra- judicial killings as an expected side- effect of an ineffective judicial system.13 This militarized attitude is conspicuously advertised on province police websites where officers killed in the line of duty are referred to as “shuhada” or martyrs. This wartime rhetoric is echoed by
leaders like President Zardari, who honored fallen officers for fighting on a “frontline” against criminals and terrorists.14      The most consequential aspect of policing in Pakistan is the broad and deep-rooted “thana” culture. Thana culture—“thana” meaning “police station”—is a catch-all term for police abuses ranging from verbal abuse to illegal detention and torture.15 This has resulted in polls showing that 92% of residents disagree that the Lahore police are trustworthy.16 Despite recognition of the issues by police leadership and the public, inadequate training, a culture of physical force, and ineffective grievance processes have persisted, undermining both police effectiveness and public trust in the Pakistani government.17Policy Idea   Reforms must be conducted at the provincial and district levels to implement cultural changes, change training curriculums, and complaint processes. These reforms should include:ï Revising police recruitment to emphasize community service and de-emphasize militaristic culture, while reforming the training curriculum to allocate at least half of instruction to de-escalation, conflict
resolution, human rights, investigative standards, and community engagement.ï Create opportunities at home and abroad for current officers to be retrained and gain advanced skills in areas like policing, forensics, and criminology to overcome established norms in police leadership and incentivize policing reform at lower levels.ï Creating transparent independent civilian oversight boards (COBs) at the district level with broad investigative and disciplinary powers.ï Creating a publicly accessible national database of police officers, including all investigated complaints against them.Policy Analysis      The thana culture in Pakistani policing significantly shapes public perceptions of the government and undermines trust in the justice system. Addressing this culture is key to rebuilding trust, starting with recruitment and initial training as well as additional training opportunities for junior officers. Recruits trained in a more academic, non-stress environment perform better in the field, report higher job satisfaction, and improve      
public satisfaction.18,19 In contrast, stress-based training creates defensive, impersonal officers, reinforcing problematic and entrenched cultural norms.17,18,20 Some police departments in the US have used similar frameworks to build trust and create community programs such as ‘Ceasefire,’ which resulted in a 37% reduction in homicides in Oakland, CA.21 Recruitment strategies and advertisements also influence the type of candidates who apply, shaping their motivations and expectations for the profession.22,23      COBs provide numerous benefits to improve policing, such as helping complainants feel heard, holding police departments accountable, creating means for mediation, increasing transparency, and educating the public on police work.24,25 However, they can be expensive, depending on the size and expertise of the staff, and localities must have the flexibility to consider cost as they form COBs. Trust and effectiveness of COBs vary and often are seen as inconsistent when they lack authority, access, or transparency in their processes and rulings.Government leadership should preserve these elements, regardless of cost to preserve their effectiveness.25,26,27      A national database of officers would help increase accountability, improve tracking of abuse data, and highlight regions’ highest complaints and abuse rates. Making this information fully public comes from the necessity of building trust in an institution that is seen as untrustworthy.1 Pakistan mobile application. “Pakistan Citizen’s Portal” (PCP), centralizes complaints by citizens, but has only 1.7% participation.28 While the data
collected tracks the number of complaints for a broad range of government and private actors, there is no focus on tracking individual police officers and departments. Tracking this data may help hold police accountable and improve citizen awareness.29Highlightsï Despite the Police Order of 2002, reform efforts in Pakistan's police force have been hindered by poor implementation. A legacy of colonial practices, combined with modern security challenges, has fueled corruption, abuse, and violence, leading to deep mistrust and fear among the public.ï Overhauling training and recruitment standards that emphasize community service, professionalism, and advanced investigative skills would start building a new culture around policing with each successive cohort of junior officers.ï Civilian Oversight Bodies (COBs) would allow the civilian population to express grievances and file official complaints. These reports would be investigated by civilians independent of the police force and would act as an investigative body to determine fault and enforce punishments.ï A national database would create a transparent avenue for the public to review the performance of their local police force and hold police and political leaders accountable for hiring or
retaining poor-performing officers.Implementation      The focus must start at the recruitment and training stage to shift police culture. Recruitment efforts, developed at the provincial level leadership, should highlight civilian protection, professionalism, and high standards while downplaying crime-fighting and counterterrorism.30 Expanding job marketing can also attract a broader range of quality candidates and improve selectivity. Police training centers should reformulate training standards to reduce stress and address key issues of “thana culture.” For example, de-escalation techniques would help officers avoid unnecessary violence, while community engagement training would foster professionalism and strengthen trust between police and communities. Both strategies should emphasize the importance of effective policing and community relations.31      Police training programs should give junior officers opportunities to develop investigative skills, reducing the reliance on higher-ranking officers to implement modern policing practices from the top down.32 Efforts should also be made to expand training partnerships with foreign police forces, such as the NYPD and Karachi Police, and broaden their scope to community policing.33 Additionally, officers should be encouraged to apply for international programs like the UK’s Chevening Scholarship, which offers valuable opportunities for officers to pursue advanced studies in forensic investigation, policing, or criminology.34 These efforts,, alongside creating new exchange initiatives, can help      
cultivate a cohort of professionally educated officers.      Strong enforcement mechanisms will hold police officers accountable and reinforce the culture shift. Civilian oversight boards (COBs) at the tehsil, or county, level should have independent review powers, full- time staff, investigative access, and the authority to issue punishments. To ensure impartiality and avoid the perception of bias or corruption, COB members should be elected locally and prohibited from having close family ties to law enforcement or political parties. Investigative and sanctioning authority is essential for accurate case reviews and appropriate punishments. To prevent challenges to COB authority, police leadership should face administrative or criminal consequences for failing to comply with COB decisions and respect their investigative authority.Additionally, COB positions should offer competitive wages relative to local income to reduce the risk of bribery.35      Lastly, the Federal Investigation Agency (FIA) should create a database that tracks all police officers and members of the Civil Armed Forces, a paramilitary internal security force. The FIA would require regular reports on police complaints investigated by COBs and resulting punishments. This data should be published annually and made publicly available. While a similar application exists for government services, a dedicated system for the police force is needed.      Stakeholders must prioritize local changes since enforcement of the Police Order 2002 at the federal level has been anemic. Organizing citizens at the district and provincial
levels through NGOs like the Human Rights Council and Human Rights Commission of Pakistan can pressure local leaders and circumvent national political challenges. Efforts should focus on regions with the greatest potential for success and support, such as Punjab and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, where reform efforts have made progress despite challenges and setbacks.36,37,38 Collecting data from these areas will help demonstrate the effectiveness of the programs, motivating change in other regions and gradually improving police professionalism and broader institutional reform at the nationally.Works Cited[1] Transparency International- Pakistan. National Corruption Perception Survey 2023. Transparency International- Pakistan, 2023. https://transparency.org.pk/NCPS_ REPORTS/NCPS-2023/National- Corruption-Perception-Survey- 2023-Report-TI-Pakistan.pdf[2] “‘This Crooked System.’” Human Rights Watch, March 28, 2023.https://www.hrw.org/report/2016/09/27/crooked-system/police-abuse- and-reform-pakistan.[3] Waseem, Zoha. “The Problems with Policing Pakistan.” dawn.com, May 9, 2021.https://www.dawn.com/news/16228 64.[4] Wassem, Zoha. “Inside the Punitive State: Governance through Punishment in Pakistan.” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, June 20, 2024.https://carnegieendowment.org/rese arch/2024/06/pakistan-punitive- state-terrorism-police?lang=en.[5] 
“Human Rights Watch World Report 1998.” Human Rights Watch. Accessed October 7, 2024. https://www.hrw.org/legacy/worldr eport/Asia-09.htm.[6] Zaman, Muhamma. “Police Order 2002 and Institutional Reform: An Analysis,” Master’s thesis. Pakistan Institute of Development Economics School of Social Sciences, 2022. https://file- thesis.pide.org.pk/pdf/mphil-public- policy-2019-muhammad-zaman-- police-order-2002-and-institutional- reform-an-analysis.pdf[7] “The Police Order, 2002 (as of 2007): An Order to Reconstruct and Regulate the Police.” International Human Rights Law Database, August 2007. https://ihl- databases.icrc.org/en/national- practice/police-order-2002-2007.[8] Rao, Shahid. “IHC Directs for Implementation of Provisions of Police Order 2002.” The Nation, November 24, 2021. https://www.nation.com.pk/25-Nov- 2021/ihc-directs-for- implementation-of-provisions-of- police-order-2002.[9] Anjum, Shakeel. “What Hampered Implementation of Police Order 2002.” thenews, June 18,2020.https://www.thenews.com.pk/print/ 674504-what-hampered- implementation-of-police-order- 2002[10] “Chapter 10 The History of Terrorism in Pakistan.” Essay. In The Cambridge History of Terrorism, 223. CambridgeUniversity Press, 2021.[11] “Pakistan Legalizing the Impermissible: The New Anti- Terrorism Law.” Amnesty International, 1997: 7-8. https://www.amnesty.org/en/wp- content/uploads/2021/06/asa330341 997en.pdf.[1] 
[12] “2023 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Pakistan .”U.S. Department of State, 2023. https://www.state.gov/reports/2023- country-reports-on-human-rights- practices/pakistan/.[13] Mohanty, Tushar Ranjan. “South Asia Intelligence Review: Karachi - Uncertain Gains.” South Asia Terrorism Portal, August 24, 2015. https://www.satp.org/south- asia-intelligence-review-Volume- 14-No-8.[14] “Youm-e-Shuhada-e-Police: PM, Others Laud Sacrifices of Police Force.” The News International, August 4, 2024. https://www.thenews.com.pk/latest/ 1216540-youm-e-shuhada-e-police- pm-shehbaz-others-laud-sacrifices- of-police-force.[15] “Annual Policing Plan 2023-24- District Dera Ghazi Khan.” Annual Policing Plans 2023-24 | Punjab Police. Accessed October 8, 2024.https://punjabpolice.gov.pk/system/ files/D.G.Khan%202023-24.pdf.[16] Jackson, Jonathan, Muhammad Asif, Ben Bradford, and Muhammad Zakria Zakar. “Corruption and Police Legitimacy in Lahore, Pakistan.” British Journal of Criminology 54, no. 6September 16, 2014: 1067–88. https://doi.org/10.1093/bjc/azu069.[17] Hussain, Mahar Murrawat. “The Problem with Pakistan’s Police.” DAWN.COM, July 7, 2024.https://www.dawn.com/news/18443 29.[18] Bickel, Karl. “Recruit Training: Are We Preparing Officers for a Community Oriented Department?” COPS Office. Accessed October 9, 2024. https://cops.usdoj.gov/html/dispatch/06-
2013/preparing_officers_for_a_com munity_oriented_department.asp.[19] Earle, Howard. In Police Recruit Training Stress vs. Non- Stress: A Revolution in Law Enforcement Career Programs.,145. Springfield, IL, 1973.[20] Conti, Norman. “A Visigoth System.” Journal of Contemporary Ethnography 38, no. 3 (March 17,2009): 427–427.https://doi.org/10.1177/0891241608 330092.[21] Gilbert, Daniela, Stewart Wakeling, and Vaughn Crandall. 2015. “Procedural Justice and Police Legitimacy: Using Training as a Foundation for Strengthening Community-Police Relationships” https://bja.ojp.gov/sites/g/files/xyck uh186/files/bwc/pdfs/procedural- justice-and-police-legitimacy- paper-cpsc-feb-2015.pdf.[22] Koslicki, Wendy M. “Recruiting Warriors or Guardians? A Content Analysis of Police Recruitment Videos.” Policing and Society 31, no. 6 May 19, 2020:702–20.https://doi.org/10.1080/10439463.2 020.1765778.[23] Burrus, Trevor. “How Militarized Police Can Attract the Wrong Officers.” Cato.org, 2020. https://www.cato.org/commentary/h ow-militarized-police-can-attract- wrong-officers#.[24] Finn, Peter. “Citizen Review of Police : Approaches and Implementation.” U.S. Department of Justice - Office of Justice Programs, 2001. https://www.ojp.gov/pdffiles1/nij/1 84430.pdf.[25] “Civilian Oversight - Assessing the Evidence.” Council on Criminal Justice - Task Force on Policing, 2021. https://counciloncj.foleon.com/polic
ing/assessing-the-evidence/xi- civilian-oversight. [26]“Community Oversight Paves the Road to Police Accountability - National Association for Civilian Oversight of Law Enforcement.” National Association for Civilian Oversight of Law Enforcement.Accessed October 9, 2024. https://www.nacole.org/community_oversight_paves_the_road_to_poli ce_accountability.[27] Seyffert, Pamela. “Can Professional Civilian Oversight Improve Community-Police Relations?” The Police Chief Online, 2017. https://www.policechiefmagazine.or g/can-professional-civilian- oversight-improve-community- police-relations/.[28] “Prime Minister’s Performance Delivery Unit -PMDU.” PM’s Performance Delivery Unit. Accessed October 9, 2024. https://citizenportal.gov.pk/index.ph p#about.[29] Gardner, Betsy. “How Can Data Increase Police Accountability?” Data-Smart City Solutions, June 11, 2020. AccessedDecember 12, 2024. https://datasmart.hks.harvard.edu/ne ws/article/how-can-data-increase- police-accountability.[30] “Changing Police Recruitment Messages Attracts a Larger and More Diverse Applicant Pool - Council on Criminal Justice.” Council on Criminal Justice, October 8, 2024. https://counciloncj.org/changing- police-recruitment-messages- attracts-a-larger-and-more-diverse- applicant-pool/.[31] Beck, Charlie. “Relationship- Based Policing.” Police Chief Online. Accessed November 15, 2024.https://www.policechiefmagazine.or
g/relationship-based- policing/?ref=d5d99e04318a8a8726 68c66f0b6e0461.[32] Abbas, Hassan. “Reforming Pakistan‘s Police and Law Enforcement Infrastructure: Is It Too Flawed to Fix?” United States Institute of Peace, 2011. https://www.usip.org/sites/default/fi les/SR266- Reforming_Pakistan%E2%80%98s_Police_and_Law_Enforcement_Inf rastructure.pdf.[33] “NYPD Offers to Train Sindh Police.” The Express Tribune, May 6, 2024.https://tribune.com.pk/story/246544 0/nypd-offers-to-train-sindh-police.[34] 
“Who Can Apply for a Chevening Scholarship?” Chevening. Accessed November 15, 2024.https://www.chevening.org/scholars hips/who-can-apply/.[35] Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Michael Lokshin, and Vladimir Kolchin. “Effects of Public Sector Wages on Corruption: Wage Inequality Matters.” Journal of Comparative Economics 51, no. 3 (September2023): 941–59.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jce.2023.0 3.005.[36] Bahadar, Nawab, Shakir Ullah, Ingrid Nyborg, and Tahir Maqsood. 2019. “Community-Oriented Policing: Political, Institutional and
Technical Reforms in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) Police.” Journal of Human Security 15 (2). https://doi.org/10.12924/johs2019.1 5020041.[37] “KP Cabinet Okays Proposed Amendments to Transfer IGP’s Powers back to CM.” DAWN.COM. October 10, 2024.https://www.dawn.com/news/18642 00.[38] “Punjab Police Launches Project on Internal Police Reforms.” ANI News. September 23, 2024. https://www.aninews.in/news/natio nal/general-news/punjab-police- launches-project-on-internal-police- reforms20240923213234/..[27] 
Restoring ASEAN Principles: Why Expelling Myanmar Could End the Junta’s Oppressive ReignBy Naina Kalra, nk599@cornell.eduThe Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) must suspend Myanmar’s membership to uphold its commitment to human rights and regional stability, leveraging economic exclusion and a coordinated arms embargo to pressure the junta into halting violence against the Rohingya population.
Background      The ongoing military junta’s persecution of the Rohingya people is a grim illustration of ethnic cleansing in Myanmar. In 1974, Myanmar’s military government, led by a Buddhist nationalist group, revoked the citizenship of the Rohingya, a Muslim ethnic minority group.1 Over the past 50 years, the Rohingya have endured relentless violence, including the burning of villages, sexual violence, mass killings, and loss of rights.1 This persecution peaked in 2017, when military-led violence forced over 700,000 Rohingya to flee to Bangladesh, leaving 9,000 dead.1 Despite the Rome Statute from the International Criminal Court requiring countries to prevent and address genocide, and the United Nations labeling the Rohingya crisis as genocide, ASEAN’s response has been unacceptably poor.2,3,4      ASEAN’s mission emphasizes promoting peace and upholding the rules and standards of the United Nations.5 However, ASEAN’s failure to effectively address Myanmar’s atrocities has violated these core principles.While ASEAN barred Myanmar from participation in certain summits and signed a five-point consensus with Myanmar in 2021 to end violence, Myanmar has continued its violent repression.6      
Currently, 914,000 Rohingya live in overcrowded refugee camps in Bangladesh with no path to citizenship.1 Another 630,000 remain in Myanmar in extreme danger and are unable to escape to Bangladesh, which has forcibly returned 6,000 Rohingya since August 5, unable to support the refugees.7 If decisive action is not taken now, this entire ethnic group risks losing their homeland and chance to preserve their identity.      ASEAN’s failure to expel Myanmar reflects their deep economic ties with Singapore-based companies that supplied Myanmar with $254 million in arms between 2021 and 2022, placing ASEAN members among the top arms providers to Myanmar’s junta.8 Allowing Myanmar to resume participation in ASEAN summits signals that ASEAN tolerates human rights abuses.9 Expelling Myanmar from ASEAN is an essential prerequisite to ending the authoritarian regime in Myanmar.Policy Idea      Given Myanmar’s failure to adhere to ASEAN’s five-point consensus — particularly its disregard for the ceasefire agreement, commitment to peaceful resolution, and worsening human rights abuses against the Rohingya people — ASEAN should suspend
Myanmar’s membership.6 This suspension aligns with ASEAN’s foundational principles of mutual respect, peaceful cooperation, and human rights and serves as a crucial step toward mitigating the conflict. To reinforce this stance, ASEAN should implement a region-wide arms embargo on Myanmar, with a clear mandate that member states who continue trading arms with Myanmar risk their own membership status. This coordinated approach would underscore ASEAN’s commitment to upholding human rights and regional stability and exclude Myanmar from the crucial economic benefits of membership, pressuring the regime to reduce hostilities and align with ASEAN’s standards of governance and peace.Policy Analysis      ASEAN has mainly hesitated to expel Myanmar because doing so would eliminate crucial communication channels for diplomatic dialogue, humanitarian aid, and negotiation.10 However, these channels are failing to mitigate Myanmar’s violence: since ASEAN’s five-point consensus, the military junta has killed at least 5,000 more Rohingya.11,12,13 ASEAN’s current approach is ineffective and there is an urgent need for more drastic action.      
Removing Myanmar would deny it the economic benefits of ASEAN membership, weakening its military capacity. Southeast Asia’s GDP is expected to grow at an annual rate of 5.1%, outpacing China, the US, and Europe.14,15,16 This is largely due to ASEAN initiatives, such as the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA), which enables tariff-free trade, protects investments, and secures market access among members.17 ASEAN has also invested $34 billion in research, sharing advancements among members through programs like the One-Shot Campaign, which provides vital vaccination, and invest in environmentally sustainable develepment.14 Myanmar’s exclusion would remove its access to these critical resources, pressuring the junta to change course.This approach aligns with historical precedent: London’s government cited South Africa’s forced withdrawal from the British Commonwealth during apartheid as pivotal in catalyzing global sanctions and isolation, essential for eventual change.18 Similarly, expelling Myanmar would signal that arms deals and economic ties with the junta are unacceptable.Removing Myanmar alongside a clear declaration of removal from the association for member states that partake in trade with Myanmar would affirm ASEAN’s stance against human rights abuses and strain the junta’s resources.8Highlights:ï Since 1974, the Rohingya have faced brutal repression, peaking in 2017 when over 700,000 were forced to flee Bangladesh due to military- led violence.1ï 
ASEAN’s failure to effectively address Myanmar’s atrocities violates its core mission to uphold regional peace, stability, and adherence to international law.5ï Myanmae’s access to ASEAN’s economic benefits, including tariff-free trade and regional investments, strengthens its regime and undermines ASEAN’s credibility.17ï ASEAN must suspend Myanmar’s membership and implement a region-wide arms embargo to underscore a commitment to human rights while pressuring Myanmar’s regime to reduce violence.Implementation      The rotating ASEAN chair position provides significant influence over the association’s agenda, with Malaysia’s upcoming chairmanship in 2025 poised to play a pivotal role in advancing a more assertive stance on Myanmar.19 With increasing pressure for decisive action against Myanmar’s military junta, Malaysia would drive a coordinated approach to suspend Myanmar’s membership, promoting ASEAN’s commitment to human rights and regional stability.19      As chair, Malaysia could bring the proposal for Myanmar’s suspension to a formal vote within ASEAN. While this would require unanimous consent, Malaysia can leverage ASEAN’s foundational principles of peace and human rights to build counsense.5 Notably, five of nine ASEAN member states currently support the UN-led arms embargo on Myanmar, including
Singapore who is most economically tied to Myanmar.8 Despite Singapore’s economic ties to Myanmar, its vote on the embargo highlights a prioritization of international credibility over complicity in genocide. If a suspension vote is called, Singapore and other ASEAN member states with lesser economic ties are likely to support the measure to avoid international condemnation or isolation as the sole dissentingvote.      Malaysia’s former foreign minister Saifuddin Abdullah set a progressive president by openly addressing the humanitarian crisis in Myanmar and building cabinet support for such initiative, laying the groundwork for the current foreign minister, Datuk Seri Mohamad Hasan.20 Hasan has emphasizes ASEAN’s responsibility to act decisively on Myanmar, framing the oppression of Muslims in Myanmar as a crisis that transcends internal affairs and demanded unified regional action.21 Malaysia’s theme for its chairmanship “Inclusivity and Sustainability” reinforces its commitment to addressing Myanmar’s genocide, positioning the country to lead efforts to demand accountability from the Myanmar’s junta, opening to door for ideas such as removal of the state from ASEAN. Additionally, the newly established Troika mechanism, comprising Indonesia, Malaysia, and Laos—the previous, current, and future ASEAN chairs—provides a coordinated platform to address the Myanmar crisis.22 This mechanism signals ASEAN’s intent to strengthen its response to the junta's violations and explore solutions beyond the ineffective five-point consensus.      
      Advocating for Myanamr’s suspension aligns with ASEAN’s historical principles and enhances its credibility on the global stage. A suspension would signal ASEAN’s intolerance for human rights abuses and restrict Myanmar’s access to arms and economic resources. This unified regional stance would exert significant pressure on the junta, challenging its ability to sustain the oppressive regime and advancing efforts to resolve the humanitarian crisis.Works Cited[1] “A Timeline of Rohingya History: Burma’s Path to Genocide.” United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. n.d. https://exhibitions.ushmm.org/burm as-path-to-genocide/timeline.[2] OHCHR. n.d. “Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.” https://www.ohchr.org/en/instrumen ts-mechanisms/instruments/rome- statute-international-criminal-court.[3] Baker, Jalelah Abu. 2023. “Indonesia ‘Proactive’ but ‘Slow’ in Dealing With Myanmar as ASEAN Chair, Say Analysts.” CNA, April 14, 2023.https://www.channelnewsasia.com/ asia/myanmar-crisis-air-strike- indonesia-asean-chair-needs-do- more-3417706.[4] “UN Rights Council Condemns Myanmar Abuses, Urges Immediate Action.” 2024. UN News. July 10,2024.https://news.un.org/en/story/2024/0 7/1151966.[5] ASEAN “What We Do: ASEANMain Portal.” ASEAN Main Portal. June 7, 2024.https://asean.org/what-we-do.[6] “ASEAN Must Take Stronger Stance Beyond Five-Point Consensus, Southeast Asian MPs Say” n.d.
https://aseanmp.org/publications/po st/asean-must-take-stronger-stance- beyond-five-point-consensus- southeast-asian-mps-say.[7] Human Rights Watch. 2024. “Bangladesh: New Rohingya Refugees Lack Protection, Aid,” October 23, 2024. https://www.hrw.org/news/2024/09/ 25/bangladesh-new-rohingya- refugees-lack-protection-aid.[8] Ewe, Koh. 2023. “Why Southeast Asia Just Can’t Seem to Cut off Myanmar’s Junta.” TIME, October 20, 2023. https://time.com/6326274/asean- myanmar-junta-trade/.[9] Writer, Staff. 2024. “Myanmar Seeks ASEAN Compromise to Join First Summit Since Takeover.” Nikkei Asia, October 2, 2024. https://asia.nikkei.com/Spotlight/M yanmar-Crisis/Myanmar-seeks- ASEAN-compromise-to-join-first- summit-since-takeover.[10] Matamis, Joaquin. 2023. “Myanmar Reveals ASEAN’s Weak Spot Again.” Stimson Center, July. https://www.stimson.org/2023/mya nmar-reveals-aseans-weak-spot- again/.[11] “Over 5,000 Civilians Killed Since Myanmar Military Coup.” 2024. UN News. September 17,2024.https://news.un.org/en/story/2024/0 9/1154436.[12] Human Rights Watch. 2024. “Myanmar: New Atrocities Against Rohingya,” August 28, 2024. https://www.hrw.org/news/2024/08/ 22/myanmar-new-atrocities-against- rohingya.[13] “ASEAN to Conduct Comprehensive Review on 5 Point Consensus on Myanmar.” n.d. BERNAMA.https://www.bernama.com/en/news. php?id=2322605.[14] 
“The ASEAN Region Is the World’s Economic Dark Horse, Here’s Why.” 2024. World Economic Forum. September 10, 2024.https://www.weforum.org/stories/20 23/08/asean-economic-growth/. [15]“Southeast Asia Outlook.” 2024.https://www.bain.com/globalassets/ noindex/2024/bain_report_navigati ng_high_winds_southeast_asia_outl ook_2024_34.pdf.[16] “Asian Development Outlook 2023.” ADB. July 2023.https://www.adb.org/sites/default/fil es/publication/896606/asian- development-outlook-july- 2023.pdf.[17] “ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA).” n.d.https://www.enterprisesg.gov.sg/gro w-your-business/go- global/international- agreements/free-trade- agreements/find-an-fta/afta.[18] “Forced Withdrawal of South Africa From the Commonwealth.” the O’Malley Archives. n.d. https://omalley.nelsonmandela.org/i ndex.php/site/q/03lv01538/04lv016 00/05lv01617/06lv01620.htm.[19] Usmani, Sameena. 2024. “The Future of the U.S. ASEAN Relationship.” Amnesty International USA. October 31, 2024.https://www.amnestyusa.org/blog/th e-future-of-the-u-s-asean- relationship/.[20] Daniel, Thomas. 2022. “Will Malaysia Change Its Policy on Myanmar?” ISIS. October 17, 2022. https://www.isis.org.my/2022/10/13/will-malaysia-change-its-policy- on-myanmar/.[21] “ASEAN to Scrutinise Effectiveness of 5PC to Address Myanmar’s Humanitarian Crisis.”n.d. Thesun.my.
https://thesun.my/malaysia- news/asean-to-scrutinise- effectiveness-of-5pc-to-address- myanmar-s-humanitarian-crisis- mohamad-LE13428542.[22] 
“ASEAN Establishes New Troika to Find Solution on Myanmar Crisis.” n.d. Jakarta Globe. https://jakartaglobe.id/news/asean-
establishes-new-troika-to-find- solution-on-myanmar-crisis.
Mexico President Claudia Sheinbaum Must Reform Her National GuardBy Jorge Mariño, jam894@cornell.eduMexico’s Congress should lobby for President Claudia Sheinbaum to adhere to the Organization of American States’ Inter-American Commission on Human Rights’ propositions regarding implementing accountability reforms in Mexico’s National Guard.
Background      Mexico’s National Guard’s commitment to human rights remains unsatisfactory. Despite former President Andres Manuel López in 2019 proposing that the National Guard would be a 60,000- member joint civilian-military organization to tackle cartel violence, the majority of Mexico’s National Guard are former members of the federal police, known for their incompetence and human rights violations.1 Nevertheless, sitting Mexican President Claudia Sheinbaum has affirmed her support for her predecessor’s militarization of the National Guard, stating that the military has acted within the law and can respond to violence in whatever way seen fit.2 Since its creation, the National Guard has been highly problematic in adhering to human rights.      Furthermore, the Organization of American States’ Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) revealed that Mexico has largely not adhered to its human rights suggestions. In 2022, the IACHR recommended that Mexico ensure investigations into cases of forced disappearances, extrajudicial executions, and torture involving the National Guard, holding both the direct perpetrators and those in the chain of command accountable.3 The IACHR report noted that no senior civilian or
military officials were sentenced by Mexico for torture or forced disappearances in 2020 or 2021.3 Moreover, military and government figures allegedly tried to manipulate legal outcomes for favors during the Tlatlaya massacre in which Mexican soldiers killed 22 suspects in a grain warehouse, including 12 to 15 who were executed after surrendering.3,4 IAHCR’s report conveys that Mexico’s militarization of the National Guard has enabled armed forces to operate without transparency or accountability, leading to more human rights violations.Policy Idea      Mexican senators and deputies not aligned with Sheinbaum’s Sigamos Haciendo Historia political alliance should lobby President Sheinbaum to implement accountability measures in Mexico’s National Guard, pressuring her to implement long overdue public security measures outlined by the Organization of American States’ Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR). First, deputies should lobby for the state to report civilian casualties and prosecute national guardsmen or their superior officers involved in any human rights abuse cases. Next, Mexican senators should raise the same concern with the president, urging her to comply
with the IACHR’s policy recommendations that Mexico has yet to address, such as establishing an independent body to oversee public security operations to ensure accountability within the National Guard.Policy Analysis      Mexico adopting IACHR recommendations will help combat human rights abuses by establishing a framework for Mexico to implement accountability reforms. For example, in 2019, the IACHR ruled that Mexico must adopt a law regarding the use of force per international human rights standards.3 In the same year, Mexico adopted the National Law on the Use of Force, which requires detailed reporting and accountability measures for superiors in cases of unlawful force.3 IACHR concluded that Mexico has fully adhered to their suggestion ever since.5 While Mexico implemented this IACHR recommendation, Sheinbaum’s fervent support for militarization conveys that the Mexican Senate and Chamber of Deputies should lobby for the president to implement more IACHR reforms to address the National Guard’s human rights abuses, given that they are the direct channel between communities experiencing human rights violations and the      
government. Although Mexico has adopted some IACHR reforms, further action is needed to hold the National Guard accountable.      IACHR’s involvement in the Barrios Alto case in Peru demonstrates how their reforms can hold Latin American militaries accountable. On November 3rd, 1991, Peruvian military officials killed 15 people in the Barrios Alto neighborhood on false suspicions of terrorism.6 Later, the Peruvian Congress adopted an amnesty law that exonerated army members who committed human rights violations between 1980 and 1995.6 In 2001, the IACHR ruled that Peru’s law violated the American Convention on Human Rights.6 Following the ruling, Peru created the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (CVR) to monitor human rights violations, and in 2005, the CVR formalized the Comprehensive Reparations Plan which compensates individuals who were subjects of human rights violations.7 Given Mexico’s ongoing inability to hold its National Guard accountable, oversight from the IACHR is a logical approach to convince Sheinbaum to implement more accountability reforms.Highlightsï Mexico has struggled to balance militarizing its National Guard and addressing the Organization of American States’ Inter- American Commission on Human Rights’ concerns over human rights abuses in the military.ï Mexican senators and deputies who are not members of Mexican President Claudia Sheinbaum’s Sigamos
Haciendo Historia political alliance should lobby the President to implement IACHR’s reforms to hold the National Guard accountable.ï Mexico has successfully implemented some IACHR reforms relating to human rights in the past, such as the National Law on the Use of Force, which Mexico has consistently been adhering to since its implementation in 2019.ï IACHR’s involvement in the Barrios Alto case in Peru, which saw Peru create the Truth and Reconciliation Commission to monitor human rights violations in 2001 after military officials killed 15 people on false suspicions of terrorism in 1991, demonstrates its ability to hold Latin American military officials accountable to humanrights.Implementation      Implementing reforms to the National Guard will require deputies from different parties not affiliated with Sigamos Haciendo Historia, such as Víctor Manuel Pérez Díaz of the National Action Party and Laura Hernández García of the Citizens’ Movement, to begin lobbying support in Mexico’s lower house. During the September general Chamber of Deputies session that put the National Guard under military oversight, Pérez Díaz voiced his opinion against the reform, citing that when the military assumes civilian functions, they violate rights and increase repression.8 Much like Pérez Díaz, Hernández García stated that in
regards to the National Guard, the Mexican government neither has the capacity nor will to create a civil authority with the ability to address Mexico’s security problems Although the militarization reform did pass, Pérez Díaz and Hernández García can mobilize their respective parties to push for accountability reforms, such as those that IACHR has recommended, in a completely new multipartisan effort to increase the likelihood of building future support for reforms when Sheinbaum’s term is up in 2030.Having deputies from multiple parties lobbying for accountability reforms is the first step to making the National Guard accountable.      Building on the Chamber of Deputies’ work, Mexico’s senators also not aligned with Sigamos Haciendo Historia, such as Senator Cristina Ruíz Sandoval of Mexico’s Institutional Revolutionary Party, should pressure Sheinbaum directly to implement accountability measures. Like her deputy counterparts, Sandoval opposed militarizing the National Guard, stating that Mexico will risk international sanctions by permanently militarizing its armed forces without adhering to the IACHR ruling that the use of armed forces in public security must be exceptional and temporary.9 Given that Sandoval is on the Senate Human Rights Commission, she is best suited to gather support from like-minded senators and lobby Sheinbaum to implement IACHR reforms. Gathering Senate support to convince the president to implement IACHR reforms remains key to improving accountability in the National Guard.      Given Mexico’s failure to fully enforce accountability within its National Guard, Sheinbaum’s      
unwavering support of militarization, and a unified government dominated by Sheinbaum’s party, MORENA, Mexican legislators should not lobby for accountability reforms in the National Guard during the next six years of Sheinbaum’s presidency. On November 11, 2024, Mexico’s Senate approved Sheinbaum’s constitutional reform to empower Mexico’s Secretariat of Security and Citizen Protection (SSPC).10 Approving this reform expands powers of criminal investigation oversight to the SSPC and National Guard.10 Sheinbaum’s reform likely allows the National Guard to continue denying human rights violations, obstructing the IACHR’s call for independent accountability mechanisms in public security operations. Despite the need for reform to ensure the National Guard upholds human rights, the current government’s support for militarization suggests that efforts to push for accountability reforms will likely yield minimal substantive progress. To increase the chance of success, legislators should wait until this sexenio (the six-year single term a Mexican president serves) expires and begin to lobby members today to hold the National Guard accountable.Works Cited[1] H.Escamilla-Hamm , Patricia. “The Guardia Nacional (National Guard): Why a New Militarized Police in Mexico.” Small Wars Journal by Arizona State University, August 12, 2020. https://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/ar
t/guardia-nacional-national-guard- why-new-militarized-police- mexico.[2] Herrera, Olivia Vázquez. “Claudia Sheinbaum lanza promesa ante las Fuerzas Armadas: ‘Nunca emitiré orden que vulnere la Constitución o los derechos humanos.’” infobae, October 3, 2024.https://www.infobae.com/mexico/2 024/10/03/claudia-sheinbaum- lanza-promesa-ante-las-fuerzas- armadas-nunca-emitire-orden-que- vulnere-la-constitucion-o-los- derechos-humanos/.[3] Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. “Follow-up of Recommendations Issued by the IACHR Inn Its Country or Thematics Reports.” Annual Report 2022. Organization of American States, 2022. https://www.oas.org/en/iachr/docs/a nnual/2022/Chapters/14- IA2022_Cap_5_MX_EN.pdf.[4] The Guardian. “Mexican Soldiers Charged with Killing 22 People Acquitted, Rights Group Reveals.” March 30, 2016, sec. World news. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/30/mexico-soldiers- acquitted-killing-22-people- tlatlaya.[5] Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. “Follow-up of Recommendations Issued by the IACHR in Its Country or Thematics Reports.” Annual Report 2023. Organization of American States, 2023.https://www.oas.org/en/iachr/docs/a nnual/2023/chapters/IA2023_Cap_5_Mexico_ENG.DOCX.[6] 
Cançado Trindade, Antônio A. , Máximo Pacheco Gómez, Hernán Salgado Pesantes, Alirio Abreu Burelli, Sergio García Ramírez , and Carlos Vicente de Roux Rengifo. Case of Barrios Altos v Peru (Inter-American Court of Human Rights March 14, 2001). https://opil.ouplaw.com/display/10. 1093/law:ihrl/1458iachr01.case.1/la w-ihrl-1458iachr01.[7] Lehne, Maria Emilia. “The Truth and Reconciliation Commission in Peru – The Victims’ Right to Truth and Justice.” International Journal on Rule of Law, Transitional Justice and Human Rights 11, no. 11 (2020):37–50.https://www.ceeol.com/search/articl e-detail?id=932538.[8] Cámara de Diputados del Honorable Congreso de la Unión, LXVI Legislatura. “Versión estenográfica de la sesión ordinaria del jueves 19 de septiembre de 2024,” September 19, 2024. https://cronica.diputados.gob.mx/Ve 19sep2024.html.[9] Senado de México. “Sesión nocturna de la Cámara de Senadores, del 24 de septiembre de 2024.” YouTube. Senado de México, September 24, 2024. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v= BP_T6U2bSHs.[10] Esquivel, Israel Aguilar. “Avanza en el Senado iniciativa para fortalecer la SSPC con nuevas facultades en seguridad.” infobae. infobae, November 11, 2024. https://www.infobae.com/mexico/2 024/11/11/avanza-en-el-senado- iniciativa-para-fortalecer-la-sspc- con-nuevas-facultades-en- seguridad/.[1] 
Breaking the Cycle: Strengthening Police Response to Domestic Violence in KyrgyzstanBy Olivia Pham, omp24@cornell.eduThe Kyrgyz government should implement mandatory, specialized police training to enhance law enforcement’s effectiveness in protecting domestic violence victims, increasing reporting rates, and building trust to ensure justice is served.
Background      Kyrgyzstan ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) in 1997, committing to uphold women’s rights and combat discrimination.1 However, the country has struggled to meet these obligations, particularly in addressing domestic violence.2,3 Police often focus on reconciliation rather than victim protection, and families commonly pressure victims to reconcile instead of pursuing legal action. 4,5,6 This lack of enforcement leaves victims vulnerable and without proper legal recourse.      In rural areas, cultural stigma and a strong emphasis on family unity deter women from approaching law enforcement, which limits forensic evidence collection and prevents many cases from reaching court.7 Sexual violence crimes are often only prosecuted when physical injuries or biological evidence are present, reflecting a narrow interpretation of “violence” in Kyrgyz law thatexcludes psychological or economic harm.8 Consequently, many forms of abuse remain unaddressed.      Moreover, the legal term “helplessness” in cases of sexual assault lacks a clear definition, leaving victims without legal recourse if they cannot physically
resist. Approximately 86% of domestic violence cases are retracted, often due to police inaction, financial dependency, and a lack of shelter—factors that leave victims with few options but to return to unsafe situations.9      Alarmingly, the Ministry of Internal Affairs reported a 20% increase in domestic violence cases in 2023 compared to the previous year, while the number of domestic violence victims increased by 5.1 times from 2010 to 2021.10,11 Women in rural areas are most affected due to the legal and cultural barriers. Children also suffer under this system, with 104 cases of child violence documented in 2021, many of which were prematurely closed.12      Current policies, such as the Law on Domestic Violence, still have weak law enforcement that fails to provide adequate protection through restraining orders and prioritizes reconciliation.13Policy Idea   To improve law enforcement's response to domestic violence in Kyrgyzstan, the government should implement a mandatory, ongoing specialized training program that includes the following:1. Mandatory training for all law enforcement officers on domestic violence, focusing on recognizing
psychological and economic abuse as well as physical violence.142. Regular refresher courses are held annually to ensure officers stay up to date on best practices and are fully equipped to handle domestic violence cases effectively.153. Comprehensive curriculum covering the enforcement of restraining orders and prioritizing victim safety over reconciliation, emphasizing rural areas where enforcement is weakest.164. Accountability mechanisms to assess officers’ performance and ensure compliance with the training, including routine evaluations.175. Collaboration with local and international organizations, such as UN Women and Bir Duino (a human rights organization protecting civil liberties and advocating for marginalized groups) to provide resources and support for the training program.18Policy Analysis      The implementation of mandatory, ongoing specialized training for police officers in Kyrgyzstan would enhance law      
enforcement's ability to respond to domestic and sexual violence cases. A study by the Australian Institute of Criminology demonstrates that training focused on recognizing coercive control (a pattern of controlling behaviors that create an unequal power dynamic), psychological abuse, and economic violence has led to more effective handling of cases, resulting in higher arrest rates and better enforcement of restrainingorders.19 Additionally, such training enhances officers' ability to identify the primary aggressor in complex domestic violence situations, helping to reduce repeat offenses and prevent further harm.19      Practical, scenario-based training, including mock interviews and real-life simulations, has been shown to enhance police skills in managing domestic violence cases.19 This training equips officers to navigate the complexities of these situations, leading to higher prosecution rates and more accurate investigations. Incorporatingtrauma-informed approaches— which emphasize understanding and sensitivity toward survivors’ experiences—further improves interactions, reducing victim- blaming and increasing victims’ willingness to report abuse.      A study by the National Policing Institute found that procedural justice training not only reduced crime but also improved public perceptions of the police, which is crucial for building trust with vulnerable populations.20 This model is essential for Kyrgyzstan, where interviews indicate that only about 10% of domestic violence cases are reported to the police via102. Distrust in law enforcement, cultural stigma, and financial
dependence often lead survivors to seek support elsewhere.21      By partnering with organizations like Bir Duino and utilizing resources from the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Kyrgyzstan can lower the costs of developing and maintaining police training programs.22 These collaborations provide access to expertise, training materials, and funding that reduce the need for Kyrgyzstan to invest heavily in creating its own training infrastructure.23Highlightsï Since ratifying CEDAW in 1997, Kyrgyzstan has struggled to meet its obligations, with weak enforcement of domestic violence laws leaving victims unprotected and many cases dismissed.24ï Kyrgyzstan should implement a mandatory, nationwide police training program to ensure accountability and improve protection and support for domestic violence victims.25ï Addressing cultural and structural barriers, particularly in rural areas, is vital to building trust and encouraging reporting through sensitive, victim- centered approaches.26ï Drawing from successful international models, Kyrgyzstan should adopt scenario-based and trauma- informed training to equip law enforcement with the skills needed for effective and compassionate interventions.27Implementation      
While past legislation, such as the 2017 Law on Protection and Defense Against Domestic Violence, expanded protections on paper, its enforcement has been inadequate.28 Between January 2019 and April 2021, only 14% of reported cases reached the courts, with most dismissed due to ineffective intervention.29 This policy aims to close these gaps by introducing a comprehensive framework that prioritizes victim safety over reconciliation, addressing both structural and cultural barriers.      To achieve this, amendments to the 2017 Law will be introduced through the Zhogorku Kenesh (Parliament of Kyrgyzstan) by partnering with progressive legislators and advocacy groups.Leveraging committees on human rights and gender equality, the policy will be framed as a measure aligning with Kyrgyzstan’s international obligations under CEDAW, emphasizing societal stability and the importance of addressing domestic violence as a public safety issue. This strategic framing will help navigate opposition rooted in traditional norms.      Moreover, sustainable funding will be secured through government allocations and international grants, with support from organizations such as the UNDP, UNODC, and Bir Duino.30 Drawing on successful international models, this policy incorporates practices like Mexico’s CRIMJUST program, which improved officers’ skills by 28% and increased victim cooperation and trust in law enforcement.31 These approaches highlight the effectiveness of linking funding to measurable outcomes, such as higher victim reporting rates and more effective      
law enforcement responses. In Kyrgyzstan, where only 10% of domestic violence cases are reported due to fear of inaction, similar training programs could raise reporting rates and foster a supportive environment for survivors. 32, 33 Tailoring these strategies to Kyrgyzstan’s cultural and institutional context will help ensure practical implementation and long-term impact.      The proposed training curriculum will emphasize trauma- informed, scenario-based learning, including mock interviews and real- life simulations to strengthen practical skills and empathy among officers.34 This approach has proven effective in the U.S., where a four- hour victim-support training led to a 32% increase in positive victim interactions and improved report accuracy.35 By equipping officers to handle cases sensitively, the policy seeks to reduce victim-blaming and encourage survivors to report abuse. Additionally, implementation will begin with pilot programs in urban and rural areas, allowing for iterative improvements before scaling nationwide.      Beyond skill-building, the policy includes sustained engagement with local religious and community leaders to address cultural resistance, particularly in rural areas where family unity is often prioritized over victim safety.36 Recent initiatives provide a model for success: in August 2023, the UNDP and the Academy of the Ministry of Internal Affairs conducted field training as part of the SDG Partnership to address gender-based violence.37 Expanding this training nationally through a continuous program is essential to ensure lasting change.
In essence, by establishing these practices as standard within law enforcement training, this policy would foster a sustainable, systemic response to gender-based violence across Kyrgyzstan, embedding trauma-informed, community- centered practices within the country’s policing framework.38, 39 Moving beyond temporary solutions, it aims to transform domestic violence response into lasting protection for survivors.Works Cited[1] United Nations,“Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women,” accessed October 10, 2024, https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewD etails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_n o=IV-8&chapter=4&clang=_en.[2] Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. “Dialogue with Kyrgyzstan: Experts from Committee Against Torture Commend Legislative Progress.” Press Release, November 12, 2021.https://www.ohchr.org/en/press- releases/2021/11/dialogue- kyrgyzstan-experts-committee- against-torture-commend- legislative.[3] Human Rights Watch. “Kyrgyzstan: Pressure Builds to Protect Women and Girls.” News Release, May 28, 2019. https://www.hrw.org/news/2019/05/ 28/kyrgyzstan-pressure-builds- protect-women-and-girls.[4] Human Rights Watch. 2015.“Call Me When He Tries to Kill You”: State Response to Domestic Violence in Kyrgyzstan. October 28, 2015.https://www.hrw.org/report/2015/10/28/call-me-when-he-tries-kill- you/state-response-domestic- violence-kyrgyzstan.[5] 
Human Rights Watch. 2006. Reconciled to Violence: State Failure to Stop Domestic Abuse and Abduction of Women in Kyrgyzstan. September 27, 2006. https://www.hrw.org/report/2006/09/27/reconciled-violence/state- failure-stop-domestic-abuse-and- abduction-women.[6] RFE/RL, “Kyrgyzstan: Abusive Marriage Tradition and the Push for Reconciliation,” accessed October 10, 2024,https://www.rferl.org/a/kyrgyzstan- abusive-marriage-tradition- reconciliation/31071481.html.[7] PubMed Central, “Study on Police Training and Family Violence,” accessed October 10, 2024,https://doi.org/10.1007/s40609-022- 00226-x.[8] Equality Now, “Disability in Kyrgyzstan: Intersectionality and Access to Justice,” accessed October 10, 2024, https://equalitynow.storage.googlea pis.com/wp- content/uploads/2023/05/12094124/ EN-Disability-in-Kyrgystan-07- ENG-PDF.pdf.[9] RFE/RL, “Kyrgyzstan: Domestic Violence Cases Rising,” accessed October 10, 2024, https://www.rferl.org/a/kyrgyzstan- domestic-violence-cases- rising/32026482.html.[10] Central Asia Barometer. 2021. Central Asia Barometer: Wave 12 Kyrgyzstan Report. https://ca- barometer.org/assets/files/froala/20 7fb9867dee0c7a6e8f0968e4cd2acd 4a16895d.pdf.[11] UN Women. 2023. Gender Snapshot: Kyrgyzstan and the Sustainable Development Goals. https://data.unwomen.org/sites/defa ult/files/documents/Publications/20 23/Kyrgyz-SDG-gender.pdf.[1] 
[12] U.S. Department of State. 2023. Kyrgyz Republic 2022 Human Rights Report. February 2023. https://www.state.gov/wp- content/uploads/2023/02/415610_K YRGYZ-REPUBLIC-2022- HUMAN-RIGHTS-REPORT.pdf.[13] Abdulkhafizova, Zalin. 2022. "Legal Response to Domestic Violence in Kyrgyzstan." Master's thesis, Central European University.[14] PubMed Central, “Study on Police Training and Family Violence,” accessed October 10, 2024,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/ articles/PMC10249667/.[15] International Association of Chiefs of Police. 2020. Enhancing Law Enforcement Response to Domestic Violence: A Guide for Policy Makers. June 29, 2020. https://www.theiacp.org/sites/defaul t/files/2021- 07/Domestic%20Violence%20FUL L%20-%2006292020.pdf.[16] UNODC, “Handbook on Effective Prosecution Responses to Violence Against Women and Girls,” accessed October 10, 2024, https://www.unodc.org/documents/j ustice-and-prison- reform/Handbook_on_effective_pro secution_responses_to_violence_ag ainst_women_and_girls.pdf.[17] UN Women, “Guide on How to Assess Essential Services for Gender-Based Violence Survivors,” accessed October 10, 2024, https://asiapacific.unwomen.org/site s/default/files/2022-03/bd-Guide- on%20How-to-Assess-Essential- Services-for-GBV-survivors-s.pdf.[18] Learning Partnership, “Bir Duino: Partnership for Human Rights,” accessed October 10, 2024, https://learningpartnership.org/who- we-are/partnership/bir-duino.[19] 
Australian Institute of Criminology, “Police Training in Responding to Family, Domestic and Sexual Violence,” accessed October 10, 2024, https://www.aic.gov.au/sites/default/files/2024- 04/ti689_police_training_in_respon ding_to_fdsv.pdf.[20] National Policing Institute, “Study: Intensive, Specialized Training of Police Officers Leads to Reduced Crime, Fewer Arrests, and More Positive Interactions,” accessed October 10, 2024, https://www.policinginstitute.org/pr ess-releases/study-intensive- specialized-training-of-police- officers-leads-to-reduced-crime- fewer-arrests-and-more-positive- interactions-and-community- evaluations/.[21] Central Asia Barometer, “Social Indicators and Domestic Violence Reporting,” accessed October 10, 2024, https://ca- barometer.org/assets/files/froala/20 7fb9867dee0c7a6e8f0968e4cd2acd 4a16895d.pdf.[22] UNODC, “Training Curriculum on Effective Police Responses to Violence Against Women,” accessed October 10, 2024,https://www.unodc.org/pdf/criminal_justice/Training_Curriculum_on_E ffective_Police_Responses_to_Viol ence_against_Women.pdf.[23] DCAF, “Gender and Security Sector Toolkit,” accessed October 10, 2024,https://www.dcaf.ch/sites/default/fil es/publications/documents/GSToolk it_Tool-2%20EN%20FINAL_0.pdf.[24] United Nations Kyrgyzstan. 2022. “UN Calls on Kyrgyzstan to Intensify Curbing Violence against Women and Girls.” United Nations. https://kyrgyzstan.un.org/en/189361-un-calls-kyrgyzstan-intensify-
curbing-violence-against-women- and-girls.[25] Human Rights Watch. 2022. “Kyrgyzstan: Submission to the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child.” Human Rights Watch. https://www.hrw.org/news/2022/12/ 12/kyrgyzstan-submission-un- committee-rights-child.[26] Kessler, R. C., et al. 1995. “Lifetime and 12-Month Prevalence of DSM-III-R Psychiatric Disorders in the United States: Results from the National Comorbidity Survey.” Archives of General Psychiatry 51(1): 8–19.https://doi.org/10.1177/1077801223 1186814.[27] United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 2023. “UNODC and Association of Women Judges Introduce Innovative Training Techniques to Promote Victim- Oriented and Trauma-Informed Investigation and Prosecution of Human Trafficking in the Kyrgyz Republic.” UNODC. https://www.unodc.org/roca/en/new s/unodc-and-association-of-women- judges-introduce-innovative- training-techniques-to-promote- victim-oriented-and-trauma- informed-investigation-and- prosecution-of-human-trafficking- in-the-kyrgyz-republic.html.[28] Amnesty International. 2023. “Europe and Central Asia 2022 Report.” Amnesty International. https://www.amnesty.org/en/locatio n/europe-and-central-asia/report- europe-and-central-asia/.[29] March, Andrew, and Emily Bazelon. 2021.“Incarceration and Development in Central Asia.” In Central Asia: Between Tradition and Modernity, edited by Laurent Couillard and Marissa Zajac, 13: 219–239. Cham: Springer. https://link.springer.com/chapter/10. 1007/978-3-031-16659-4_13.[1] 
[30] Peace Insight. 2022. “Bir Duino Kyrgyzstan (BDK).” Peace Insight. https://www.peaceinsight.org/en/or ganisations/bir-duino-kyrgystan- bdk/?location=kyrgyzstan&theme.[31] United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 2022. “UNODC: Strengthening Police Responses to Gender-Based Violence in Mexico Proven to Have Strong Positive Impact.” UNODC. https://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/dr ug-trafficking/crimjust/news/unodc- strengthening-of-police-responses- to-gender-based-violence-in- mexico-proven-to-have-strong- positive-impact.html.[32] Center for Justice. 2023. “Kyrgyzstan Court Violated Domestic Abuse Survivor’s Rights.” Center for Justice. https://cfj.org/news/kyrgyzstan- court-violated-domestic-abuse- survivors-rights/.[33] Kessler, Ronald C., et al. 2023. “An Overview of the Epidemiology
of Depression.” PMC. https://doi.org/10.1080/02634937.2 022.2147146.[34] Gundacker, Christian. 2020. “How Can We Bridge the Gap between Academia and Clinical Practice?” Family Medicine 52 (3):215–223.https://journals.stfm.org/media/443 0/gundacker-2020-0619.pdf.[35] Mourtgos, Scott M., Ian T. Adams, and Sharon H. Mastracci. “Improving Victim Engagement and Officer Response in Rape Investigations: A Longitudinal Assessment of a Brief Training.” Journal of Criminal Justice 74 (May–June 2021): 101818.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcrimjus.20 21.101818.[36] Barkley, Leah. 2021. “Domestic Violence in Central Asia: Comparative Case Studies.” Journal of Comparative Social Studies 70 (4): 623–638.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcrimjus.20 21.101818.[37] 
United Nations. 2020. “Community Engagement Guidelines on Peacebuilding and Sustaining Peace.” United Nations. https://www.un.org/peacebuilding/s ites/www.un.org.peacebuilding/files/documents/un_community- engagement_guidelines.august_202 0.pdf.[38] Spotlight Initiative. 2023. Spotlight Global Annual Report 2022. June 2023.https://www.spotlightinitiative.org/s ites/default/files/publication/2023- 06/2022%20SPOTLIGHT%20GLO BAL%20ANNUAL%20REPORT.pdf.[39] Violence Against Women Act Measuring Effectiveness Initiative. 2024. Coordinated Judicial Outcomes: Conceptual Framework. February 2024. https://www.vawamei.org/wp- content/uploads/2024/02/CJO_Conc eptual-Framework_080222.pdf.[1] 
HEALTHCARE POLICYDirector: Kaitlyn Z Varriale Assistant Director: Zoë O’HalloranAnalysts: Arjun Anugole, Tanirika Choudhry, and Kimia Shahriyar
Care for Colorectal Cancer: Establishing Self- Service FIT Kiosks to Diminish Racial InequitiesBy Arjun Anugole, aa2823@cornell.eduThe rates of colorectal cancer are considerably disproportionate for minority populations compared to their white counterparts. To address this disparity, the federal government should implement a policy establishing self-service testing kiosks as an effective alternative to traditional screenings.
Background      In 2020, the World Health Organization reported that there were approximately 1.9 million new cases of colorectal cancer (CRC) and over 930,000 resulting deaths, making it the second-leading cause of cancer-related mortalities in the world.1 However, for minority populations in the US, this number is significantly greater. African Americans have a 20% higher incidence and a 40% higher mortality rate for CRC compared to other racial groups.2 This inequality can be attributed to structural barriers, including mistrust, maltreatment, and the lack of access to health insurance or a primary care provider.3      Despite its alarming prevalence in the US, CRC is among one of the most preventable cancers through proper screenings and early detection.4 The most common screening modality is a colonoscopy; however, these methods tend to be invasive and lower quality for minority individuals.5,6 Mistreatment and biases inflicted on by physicians contribute to inferior screenings coupled with discomfort, lack of social support, cultural norms, and socioeconomic factors that notably enhance the reluctance of minorities to participate in CRC screenings.5 The negative perceptions and lack of education on CRC screenings
form a glaring racial disparity that needs to be addressed by establishing comfortability and different screening methods.      The advent of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act in 2010 served to increase CRC screening rates, yet Hispanic, African American, and Native populations remain disproportionately underserved.7 With minimal movement aimed at improving overall CRC screening rates, there has been even less implemented legislation for minority groups.8 To improve CRC- related outcomes among minority populations, different screening approaches need to be put in place to overcome the systemic obstacles minorities face.Policy Idea      To address the disparities in CRC treatment, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Colorectal Cancer Control Program (CRCCP) should implement a policy to enhance CRC screenings by administering self-service kiosks that distribute at-home stool-based Fecal Immunochemical Test (FIT) kits to residents in the recommended age range of 45 to75.9 These kiosks should be placed in high-traffic, non-clinical settings to optimize accessibility for minority populations. The FIT kits should be culturally tailored
towards those minority groups, containing instructions and educational materials to address language barriers, discomfort, and any negative perceptions towards screenings. Along with these materials, a return envelope should be provided to mail the FIT kit to its respective testing site with a follow- up process for individuals that test positive to receive a colonoscopy.In accordance with these kiosks, community outreach groups will be constructed to advise how to improve distribution and other aspects of the screening process.Policy Analysis      A policy implementing self- service kiosks that distribute FIT kits would require commitments from the CRCCP, community outreach groups, and participants. Placing automated kiosks in high- traffic areas would be practical and can be modeled on the administration of prior self-service COVID-19 and Influenza testing kiosks.10,11 This innovative approach to CRC screening increases convenience for residents and does not require access to health insurance or a primary care provider. Automated kiosks can be applied to various public health initiatives, such as screenings for HIV, to provide more equitable access to minority populations.12          
      At-home stool-based tests serve as viable substitutes to conventional screening methods in both their efficacy and distribution. The FIT kit is a unique method of screening that tests for occult blood in the stool with an overall 95% accuracy.13 Pilot trials conducted by the National Cancer Institute have shown improved completion of CRC screenings by distributing FIT kits through a mailing process, finding higher and quicker response rates with FIT kit outreach compared to colonoscopy distribution.14 Other private or state- level initiatives present a pragmatic approach to distributing low-cost testing kits, including FIT implementation guides that demonstrate the feasibility of their use and return.15,16 In addition, the FIT kit is a noninvasive alternative to colonoscopies that is currently underutilized among all populations.17      The community outreach program associated with the screenings will help ensure that the distribution methods are culturally competent, inclusive, and accessible to minority populations. A study that implemented a culturally tailored navigator intervention program found increased screening rates led by multilingual navigators that educated patients on CRC, addressed barriers to screening, translated information, and organized appointments.18 Using a hands-on approach to understand the perceptions and accommodate for the individual circumstances of participating community residents can enhance overall screening outcomes.19Highlightsï Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second-leading cause of
cancer-related deaths; however, the rates of diagnoses and mortalities are substantially amplified for minority populations.1,2ï CRC is one of the most preventable cancers through adequate early screenings.4 However, typical screening methods, such as colonoscopies, are invasive and lower quality for minority individuals and lead to reduced screening participation among these groups.5,6ï To address disparities in CRC treatment, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Colorectal Cancer Control Program (CRCCP) should administer self-service kiosks in high- traffic areas for minority populations that distribute culturally tailored Fecal Immunochemical Test (FIT) kits.ï Establishing self-service kiosks that distribute FIT kits should be feasible and convenient based on prior implementation of screening kiosks for other diseases and the employment of past FIT kit initiatives; the introduction of community outreach programs should help ensure accessibility for minority populations.10,14,15,16,18,19Implementation      Congress should enact the CRCCP’s proposed policy for self- service kiosks. With the CRCCP’s mobilized support from Congress and current funding to “20 states, 8 universities, 2 tribal organizations, and 5 other organizations,” the
CRCCP already serves a substantial portion of the general public and diversifies its support coalition.20 Furthermore, its partnerships with various healthcare organizations allow the CRCCP to improve CRC screening strategies and promote the federal administration of self- service kiosks.20 These pre-existing support networks can be pivotal in promoting the policy through federal avenues. The policy can receive added assistance from the American Cancer Society National Colorectal Cancer Roundtable, an organization that supports policy action in key issues surrounding CRC by increasing public awareness and sharing implementation strategies from healthcare organizations.21 Additionally, congressional support for federal screening services, such as the House Ways and Means Committee’s unanimous passage of multi-cancer early detection billH.R. 2407 that continues to gain momentum to potentially be passed in Congress, demonstrates such policies’ viability.22      To ensure proper allocation of the self-service kiosks, the CRCCP should conduct pilot trials to determine which high-traffic areas are optimal and convenient for their target populations; the CRCCP can further place machines in prior kiosks’ locations, such as “food banks, transit stations, churches, schools, and libraries.”23 In addition, these pilot programs should develop culturally competent FIT kits that minimize language barriers, are comprehensible for a wide audience, and provide simple instructions for comfortable screenings. The aforementioned community outreach groups can also play a vital role in highlighting community residents’ perceptions      
and potential methods for improving screening outcomes, leading to the program’s overall expansion and refinement.Healthcare organizations can assist in forming advisory boards by directly hosting meetings in local communities and engaging minority residents, ensuring that their input is applied to the screenings and will benefit those specific areas.      There are several other practical considerations for the program’s operation. If modeled off of prior testing kiosks, the maintenance of automated CRC screening kiosks should be minimal given the high proportion of FIT kits in each machine and few costs associated with the actual tests.23 In addition, the kiosk administration should coordinate with laboratories that already process FIT kits or create new centralized laboratory settings to process incoming stool samples.16 After the kit has been tested, creating a follow-up process that minimizes participants’ potential emotional strain in the case of positive results will be crucial. Therefore, trained community health workers from partnered health organizations should deliver positive FIT results in the manner most preferred by the participant and inform them of accessible colonoscopy options if necessary.16 Overall, proper implementation of this policy through a wide array of constituent support will lead to diminished CRC racial disparities.Works Cited[1] “Colorectal cancer.” 2023. World Health Organization (WHO).https://www.who.int/news- room/fact-sheets/detail/colorectal- cancer.[2] 
“Colorectal Cancer Rates Higher in African Americans, Rising in Younger People.” 2020. American Cancer Society. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/lates t-news/colorectal-cancer-rates- higher-in-african-americans-rising-in-younger-people.html.[3] Shiman, Lauren J., Fatoumata Diallo, Christina I. Nieves, Brandon Brooks, Rachel Dannefer,Sheena Dorvil, Maria Lejano, and Jennifer Pierre. 2023. “Be honest and gain trust”: apopulation health study to understand the factors associated with building trust in local government related to COVID-19 and vaccination in three historically disinvestedneighborhoods in New York City.” Frontiers in Public Health 11:1285152.https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2023. 1285152.[4] Brenner, Hermann, and Chen Chen. 2018. “The Colorectal Cancer Epidemic: Challenges and Opportunities for Primary, Secondary and Tertiary Prevention.” British Journal of Cancer119:785-792.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41416-018- 0264-x.[5] Ajufo, Afomachukwu, Aisha O. Adigun, Majed Mohammad, JulietC. Dike, Abidemi O. Akinrinmade, Temitayo M. Adebile, Chioma Ezuma-Ebong, Kafayat Bolaji, and Okelue E.Okobi. 2023. “Factors Affecting the Rate of Colonoscopy Among African Americans Aged Over45 Years.” Cureus 15(10): e46525. https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.4652 5.[6] Alagoz, Oguzhan, Folasade P. May, Chyke A. Doubeni, A. M. Fendrick, Vahan Vahdat, Chris
Estes, Travelle Ellis, Paul J. Limburg, and Durado Brooks. 2024. “Impact of racial disparities in follow-up and quality of colonoscopy on colorectal cancer outcomes.” Journal of the National Cancer Institute djae140. https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djae140.[7] May, Folasade P., Liu Yang, Edgar Corona, Beth A. Glenn, and Roshan Bastani. 2020. “Disparities in Colorectal Cancer Screening in the United States Before and AfterImplementation of the Affordable Care Act.” Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology 18 (8):1796-1804.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2019.0 9.008.[8] Kling, Sarah M., Simran Kripalani, Valeda Yong, and Juan Lucas Poggio. 2024. “The Impact of Federally Legislated Colon and Rectal Cancer Screening Programs and Policy in the United States.” Seminars in Colon and Rectal Surgery 35 (3): 101040. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scrs.2024.1 01040.[9] “Screening for Colorectal Cancer.” 2024. CDC.https://www.cdc.gov/colorectal- cancer/screening/index.html.[10] “Testing Kiosks.” n.d. Washington State Department of Health. https://doh.wa.gov/emergencies/cov id-19/testing-covid-19/testing- kiosks.[11] “DCHD Celebrates the Launch of "Test and Go" Kiosks with Ribbon-Cutting Ceremony -Health Department.” 2024. Delaware County. https://delcopa.gov/health/news/dch dtestandgoceremony.html.
[12] Rothman, Richard E., Megan Gauvey-Kern, Alonzo Woodfield, Stephen Peterson, BorisTizenberg, Joseph Kennedy, Devon Bush, et al. 2014. “Streamlining HIV Testing in theEmergency Department— Leveraging Kiosks to Provide True Universal Screening: A Usability Study.” Telemedicine and e-Health 20 (2): 122-127.https://doi.org/10.1089/tmj.2013.00 45.[13] Lee, Jeffrey K., Elizabeth G. Liles, Stephen Bent, Theodore R. Levin, and Douglas A. Corley. 2014. “Accuracy of Fecal Immunochemical Tests for Colorectal Cancer: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” Annals of Internal Medicine 160(3): 171–81.https://doi.org/10.7326/M13-1484.[14] “Fecal Immunochemical Test (FIT) and Colonoscopy Outreach.” 2023. Evidence-BasedCancer Control Programs (EBCCP).https://ebccp.cancercontrol.cancer.g ov/programDetails.do?programId=2 6900022.[15] 
“Where Can I Get Screened for Colon Cancer?” 2024. Texas Cancer Information. https://www.texascancer.info/prevs crntreat/colonscreen.html.[16] “Mailed FIT Implementation Guide.” 2023. https://chronicdisease.org/wp- content/uploads/2023/01/60851- Mailed-FIT-Guide-v50.pdf.[17] Issaka, Rachel B., Nkem O. Akinsoto, Erica Strait, Van Chaudhari, David R. Flum, and JohnM. Inadomi. 2020. “Effectiveness of a mailed fecal immunochemical test outreach: a Medicare Advantage pilot study.” Sage Journals 13. https://doi.org/10.1177/1756284820 945388.[18] “Culturally Tailored Navigator Intervention Program for Colorectal Cancer Screening.”2024. Evidence-Based Cancer Control Programs (EBCCP). https://ebccp.cancercontrol.cancer.g ov/programDetails.do?programId=1 493683.[19] Castañeda, Maira A. 2024. “Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Use of Colorectal Cancer
Screening Among Adults With Chronic Medical Conditions: BRFSS 2012–2020.” CDC.https://www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/202 4/23_0257.htm.[20] “About Colorectal Cancer Control Program.” 2024. CDC. https://www.cdc.gov/colorectal- cancer-control/about/index.html.[21] “How We Work - American Cancer Society National Colorectal Cancer Roundtable.” 2024. https://nccrt.org/who-we-are/about- us/how-we-work/.[22] Congress.gov. "H.R.2407 - 118th Congress (2023-2024): Nancy Gardner Sewell Medicare Multi-Cancer Early Detection Screening Coverage Act." June 27, 2024.https://www.congress.gov/bill/118t h-congress/house-bill/2407.[23] “Department of Health Unveils Kiosks That Offer Free COVID-19 and Flu Tests.” 2024.Washington State Department of Health. https://doh.wa.gov/newsroom/depar tment-health-unveils-kiosks-offer- free-covid-19-and-flu-tests.
Addressing Florida’s Hidden Epidemic in PolypharmacyBy Tanirika Choudhry, tc769@cornell.eduThe Florida Department of Health should implement a Polypharmacy Reduction Initiative (FPRI) to reduce polypharmacy risks in elderly populations through pharmacist-led reviews, and deprescribing protocols. This would improve health outcomes, lower costs, and enhance quality of life statewide.
Background      Polypharmacy, the use of five or more medications simultaneously, is common among older adults managing multiple chronic conditions.1 While comprising only 14% of the United States population, individuals 65 years and older account for over one-third of outpatient prescription medication.2 Polypharmacy is a growing concern with negative health consequences such as increased risk of adverse drug reactions, higher hospitalization rates, healthcare costs, and lower quality of life.3 For example, in conditions like heart failure, certain medications may offer little benefit or cause harm while increasing the risks of cognitive impairment, falls, and drug-disease interactions (instances where a drug prescribed for one condition exacerbates another). 1	Inappropriate use of medications increases the risk of complications and places financial burdens on patients and caregivers. A 2017 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey found that polypharmacy was associated with nearly double the total healthcare costs (198%) and almost triple the pharmacy- related costs (287%) compared to patients without polypharmacy. 4 Adjusted data show patients with polypharmacy incur average annual costs of $19,068, versus $8,815 for others.4 Medicare and Medicaid
shoulder much of this financial strain as polypharmacy increases the risk of medication-related problems (MRPs). An NIH study reported that patients on 11+ medications under Medicare are nearly twice as likely to experience MRPs, with each additional medication raising the risk by 10%.5 However, Medicare’s Medication Therapy Management services demonstrate the potential to reduce costs and adverse outcomes through improved medication adherence.5      Florida's elderly population is the second largest state in the United States, with over 36.9% over50.6 Yet, no comprehensive statewide programs specifically address polypharmacy management for elderly residents. The lack of a standardized mechanism to deprescribe unnecessary or harmful medications leaves patients vulnerable to the detrimental effects of inappropriate drug use and financial burden.Policy Idea      To mitigate and prevent the adverse effects of polypharmacy, the Florida Department of Health should implement a Florida Polypharmacy Reduction Initiative (FPRI). This program addresses the risks of polypharmacy, particularly in elderly residents of long-term care facilities across Florida, who
face a heightened risk for harmful drug interactions with multiple prescription medications.2 FPRI will prioritize pharmacist-led medication reviews, where pharmacists conduct quarterly assessments, utilize their expertise in drug interactions, engage patients in discussions about side effects and treatment goals, and with prescribing doctors providing final oversight.      The initiative will use a multi-faceted publicity strategy for effective outreach. It incorporates mandatory Medication Therapy Management services, standardized deprescribing protocols, and statewide public awareness campaigns. Provider-directed financial incentives would encourage deprescribing only when healthcare providers, such as physicians or pharmacists, determine that medications may be unnecessary or harmful. This approach safeguards low-income elderly patients from any pressure to stop beneficial treatments.Policy Analysis      Mandatory pharmacist-led medication reviews every three months are crucial for identifying and removing unnecessary or harmful medications, particularly for elderly patients in long-term care settings. A UPMC study found that over four years, integrating      
pharmacists into primary care teams improves medication management and fosters trust among healthcare providers and patients.7 Pharmacists enhance patient outcomes by identifying and resolving medication therapy problems, including nonadherence, which accounts for up to $289 billion inU.S. healthcare costs annually.8 This interprofessional approach promotes coordinated care among providers, patients, and caregivers while promoting improved care for elderly patients who can advocate more consistently for their medication treatment plan.9 Mandatory Medication Therapy can include financial incentives for healthcare providers who prescribe unnecessary medications, further promoting safer prescribing and more collaboration between pharmacists and providers.10      Deprescribing is a patient- centered approach tailoring medication regimens to individual needs. Standardized deprescribing guidelines, developed by a task force of geriatricians, pharmacists, and specialists, would offer providers safe pathways for reducing unnecessary medications. A statewide public awareness campaign would inform seniors and caregivers about the risks of polypharmacy and offer resources for advocating medicationreviews. FPRI is comparable to programs established in other states, such as New York. The United Hospital Fund, supported by the Mother Cabrini Health Foundation and TD Bank Charitable Foundation, has collaborated with seven nursing homes in New York City, where participants implemented quality improvement interventions to reduce polypharmacy.11 Their work proved
effective in deprescribing practices and decreasing inappropriate medication use, ultimately improving health outcomes for elders in nursing homes.11 The program has begun the next phase based on the first phase’s success. By expanding these evidence-based practices statewide, the different initiatives outlined in FPRI can mitigate the dangers of polypharmacy and improve healthcare outcomes for Florida’s elderly population.Highlightsï Polypharmacy, defined as the use of five or more medications at once, is common among older adults, who account for over one-third of outpatient prescriptions in the U.S. This practice is linked to increased adverse drug reactions, hospitalizations, and healthcare costs, which ultimately lower the quality of life.1,2,3,4,5ï To address these issues, the Florida Department of Health should implement the Florida Polypharmacy Reduction Initiative (FPRI), which includes quarterly pharmacist-led medication reviews, mandatory Medicare Medication Therapy Management, standardized deprescribing protocols, and public awareness campaigns to educate seniors about polypharmacy risks.ï Pharmacist intervention in healthcare teams can significantly reduce inappropriate prescribing and adherence to manageable healthcare
treatment. Studies have shown that integrating pharmacists into patient care can reduce prescribing errors by 25% and enhance patient outcomes, demonstrating improvement in efficiency in managing polypharmacy.12Implementation      The Florida State Department of Health must engage various stakeholders to implement the FPRI, including pharmacists, healthcare providers, geriatricians, long-term care facility administrators, legislators, and patient advocacy groups. In the first six months, the initiative should focus on an awareness campaign across multiple channels—local news outlets, senior centers, and healthcare facilities—to educate the public and healthcare providers on the benefits of polypharmacy reduction and safe deprescribing.This initiative will involve developing educational materials for seniors and caregivers about the risks of polypharmacy. Throughout the next six months, the FPRI will be a pilot in high-need areas with dense elderly populations, such as Miami-Dade and Palm Beach counties.13 Pharmacists in these regions would begin quarterly medication reviews with prescribed oversight by primary care physicians. Pilot findings will guide further expansion.      This program would initially be funded through state healthcare grants and additional support from Medicare and Medicaid program funds to cover pharmacist-led services. Developing a supplemental grant proposal to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) can further      
financial support, specifically for regions with high elderly populations.14 Additionally, reallocating a portion of state healthcare funds can be used to provide reimbursements when incentivizing deprescribing when appropriate.      There are several possible obstacles to implementing the FPRI. One significant obstacle would be opposition from medical professionals, some of whom might be worried about patient safety or the potential loss of income linked to deprescribing. Therefore, policy development talks should involve workshops to educate providers on the long-term benefits of polypharmacy reduction, such as improved patient outcomes, fewer adverse drug events, and reduced healthcare costs. Highlighting how deprescribing can lead to better health outcomes for patients and decrease hospitalization rates will be vital in shifting provider perspectives. Furthermore, offering training sessions on safe deprescribing can ensure providers and pharmacists only prioritize hazardous or unnecessary prescriptions. Technical difficulties with Electronic Health Records (EHR) integration present another obstacle because thorough integration can be expensive and complicated.15 Thus, the initiative will begin with a trial phase. If complete EHR integration is not feasible, records will be maintained and shared via a centralized, secure medication-sharing platform.Furthermore, recognizing that Black, Indigenous, and People of Color communities are frequently disproportionately impacted by polypharmacy issues, the FPRI would work to guarantee that these communities have fair access to
deprescribing resources and assistance, especially in areas where they are more likely to encounter obstacles to healthcare access.16      A decrease in the average number of drugs per patient, fewer adverse drug responses (tracked by hospitalization rates), and reduced healthcare costs, particularly those associated with Medicaid and Medicare, are the specific measures to gauge FPRI’s performance.Furthermore, patients’ and caregivers’ quarterly questionnaires will evaluate gains in quality of life and satisfaction with the deprescribing process. They will also track cost savings and hospitalization rate reductions yearly to assess the program’s effectiveness. The FPRI will reduce the hazards of polypharmacy, improve life quality, and increase healthcare equality for Florida's senior citizens through this stepwise strategy, focused outreach, and established measurements.Works Cited[1] “The Dangers of Polypharmacy and the Case for Deprescribing in Older Adults.” National Institute on Aging, 24 Aug. 2021, https://www.nia.nih.gov/news/dang ers-polypharmacy-and-case- deprescribing-older-adults.[2] Varghese, Dona, et al. “Polypharmacy.” StatPearls, StatPearls Publishing, 2024. PubMed, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/ NBK532953/.[3] Halli-Tierney, Anne D., et al. “Polypharmacy: Evaluating Risks and Deprescribing.” American Family Physician, vol. 100, no. 1,July 2019, pp. 32–38.https://www.aafp.org/pubs/afp/issue s/2019/0701/p32.html.[4] 
Kwak, Min Ji, Mihyun Chang, Simbo Chiadika, David Aguilar, Elenir Avritscher, Ashish Deshmukh, Parag Goyal, Dae Hyun Kim, Rajender Aparasu, and HollyM. Holmes. “Healthcare Expenditure Associated With Polypharmacy in Older Adults With Cardiovascular Diseases.” The American Journal of Cardiology 169 (April 2022): 156–58.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjcard.20 22.01.012.[5] Almodóvar, Armando Silva, and Milap C. Nahata. “Associations Between Chronic Disease, Polypharmacy, and Medication- Related Problems Among Medicare Beneficiaries.” Journal of Managed Care & Specialty Pharmacy, vol. 25, no. 5, May 2019, pp. 573–77.doi.org, https://doi.org/10.18553/jmcp.2019. 25.5.573.[6] Florida Epidemiological Profile: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Issues. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, November 2016. https://acl.gov/sites/default/files/pro grams/2016- 11/Florida%20Epi%20Profile%20F inal.pdf.[7] Castelli, Gregory, Jennifer L. Bacci, Sarah Krahe Dombrowski, Maria Osborne, Aaron Difilippo, Patricia M. Klatt, and Melissa Somma McGivney. “Pharmacist- Delivered Comprehensive Medication Management Within Family Medicine Practices: An Evaluation of the SCRIPT Project.” Family Medicine 50, no. 8(September 6, 2018): 605–12. https://doi.org/10.22454/FamMed.2 018.391124.[8] Zullig, Leah L, Dan Blalock, Samantha Dougherty, Rochelle Henderson, Carolyn C Ha, Megan Oakes, and Hayden B Bosworth.[1] 
“The New Landscape of Medication Adherence Improvement: Where Population Health Science Meets Precision Medicine.” Patient Preference and Adherence Volume 12 (July 1, 2018): 1225–30.https://doi.org/10.2147/ppa.s165404.[9] Jandu, Jagmohan S., Arvindselvan Mohanaselvan, Ranjan Dahal, and Sangita Bista. “Strategies to Reduce Polypharmacy in Older Adults.” StatPearls - NCBI Bookshelf, August 11, 2024. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/book s/NBK574550/.[10] Rashidian, Arash, Amir- Houshang Omidvari, Yasaman Vali, Heidrun Sturm, and Andrew D Oxman. “Pharmaceutical Policies: Effects of Financial Incentives for Prescribers.” Cochrane Library 2015, no. 8 (August 4, 2015).
https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.c d006731.pub2.[11] United Hospital Fund. “Polypharmacy in NYC Nursing Homes | United Hospital Fund,”n.d. https://uhfnyc.org/our- work/initiatives/quality- institute/polypharmacy/.[12] Cortejoso, Lucia, Ralf Alexander Dietz, Gisela Hofmann, Markus Gosch, and Annette Sattler. “Impact of Pharmacist Interventions in Older Patients: A Prospective Study in a Tertiary Hospital in Germany.” Clinical Interventions in Aging Volume 11 (September 1,2016): 1343–50.https://doi.org/10.2147/cia.s109048.[13] FLHealthCharts. “Aging in Florida Dashboard - Overview,” n.d. https://www.flhealthcharts.gov/Cha rtsDashboards/rdPage.aspx?rdRepor
t=AgingInFlorida.Overview&tabid= Overview&islCounty=69.[14] CMS. “How to Apply for CMS Grants,” n.d. https://www.cms.gov/about- cms/work-us/grants-cooperative- agreements/how-apply-cms-grants.[15] Reisman, Miriam. “EHRs: The Challenge of Making Electronic Data Usable and Interoperable.” Pharmacy and Therapeutics 42, no. 9 (September 2017): 572. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/article s/PMC5565131/.[16] Bazargan, Mohsen, James Smith, Masoud Movassaghi, David Martins, Hamed Yazdanshenas, Seyede Salehe Mortazavi, and Gail Orum. “Polypharmacy among Underserved Older African American Adults.” Journal of Aging Research 2017 (2017): 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/60263 58.[1] 
Creating an International Recruitment Program to Increase Clinical Specialist Return to IrelandBy Zoë O’Halloran, zko2@cornell.eduSpecialists often leave Ireland for fellowships abroad, but their emigration is becoming concerningly more long-term. To encourage specialists to return and increase their retention, the National Doctors Training and Planning Unit (NDTP) must coordinate outreach to update them on available consultant positions and healthcare system improvements.
Background      Ireland is in a “paradoxical situation” involving medical students and healthcare workforce composition.1 Its numerus clausus policies allow unlimited international students to enter Irish medical schools, yet conflictingly provide little opportunity for their further clinical training.1 Consequently, the majority of these students leave after graduation.1 This loss, and the failure to retain medical graduates, classified as non-consultant hospital doctors (NCHDs) in later clinical training, contribute to Ireland’s reliance on foreign doctors. Ireland thus produces “relatively more medical graduates” than any other OECD country, yet recruits more “foreign- trained doctors than any other EU country.”1 This reliance contradictsits commitment to the World Health Organization Global Code of Practice on the International Recruitment of Health Personnel, requiring the pursuit of “a sustainable health workforce.”2      For context, NCHDs emigrate at all training stages, but the loss of NCHDs at later stages creates a striking “brain drain” problem. In Ireland, physicians receive a Certificate of Satisfactory Completion of Specialist Training (CSCST) after specialist training following medical school. CSCSTs,
besides general practitioners, typically complete subsequent fellowship training abroad.4 Traditionally, NCHDs temporarily emigrate to better advance in their career and then return to Ireland to work as consultants.1,4 Despite this historical “temporary emigration” pattern among CSCSTs, some researchers worry that long-term emigration has increased.1      Although physicians are encouraged to gain specialty experience abroad, there are also negative factors driving their departure, including “stressful working conditions” with insufficient time allocated to training and a shortage of both “suitable consultant posts” and “career progression opportunities.”3 In particular, there are insufficient “post-CSCST fellowships available in Ireland”: in 2022, there were only 68 such fellowships but 452 CSCST graduates.4 In 2015, researchers found that doctors working abroad were interested in returning if “working conditions in Ireland” improved substantially.3Policy Idea      In their Annual Medical Retention Report 2023, the National Doctors Training and Planning unit (NDTP) of the Health Service Executive emphasized that there are “no formal structures to maintain
contact with CSCSTs who leave Ireland” and suggested “targeted recruitment strategies” could encourage their return.4 The NDTP should create an international recruitment program for doctors who received CSCSTs in Ireland. The NDTP helps run the Doctors Integrated Management E-System (DIME) database, which records information about NCHDs working in the Irish public healthcare system and can be used to document when doctors “leave and return.”4 The NDTP should use the NCHD contact information stored in DIME to contact those who receive their CSCSTs in Ireland but are not actively registered with the Irish Medical Council (IMC) when (1) there are recruitment opportunities for consultants and (2) improvements are made in the Irish healthcare system to encourage their return and retention.Policy Analysis      No similar policies are known to exist in other countries. Ireland has a unique culture of migration among those in their 20s, including doctors.1,4 Most specialties even “encourage trainees to migrate to achieve career progression.”4 Ireland requires culturally conscious policies, such as this recruitment program built      
around the migrational culture of CSCSTs.      While the Irish government did not substantially implement previous policy reports proposing solutions to Ireland’s healthcare workforce issues, it is implementing the 2017 National Strategic Framework for Health and Social Care Workforce Planning (NSF).1 As the recruitment policy would fall under the “revising recruitment strategies” objective of “policies to address inflows and outflows” outlined in the NSF’s Health Labour Market Framework, it would align with current workforce planning goals.2For the 2016-2019 CSCSTrecipients, retention rates (measured by the number of recipients working as consultants in Ireland in 2023) were lower in “Radiology, Medicine and Anaesthesiology,” so the recruitment program should prioritize connecting with CSCSTs in these disciplines.4 Additionally, “retention rates of Irish cohorts are on average 12-13% higher than the EU/UK and non-EU cohorts,” so the program should prioritize communication with Irish CSCSTs whose increased retention may result in increased receptivity to outreach.4 Lastly, a 2016 research study found that “the longer a health professional remained abroad, the less likely they were to return to make their careers in Ireland.”3 The recruitment program should increase outreach “during the ‘critical period’ in the early years” following emigration.3      While factors such as career prospects lead Irish-trained physicians abroad, throughout post- graduate training, “the lack of substantive improvements in conditions back in Ireland ...keeps them abroad.”3 The Irish healthcare
system could better increase CSCST return by also using the recruitment program to update CSCSTs as NSF implementation results in developments.Highlightsï Ireland currently has a surplus of medical students yet an inadequate healthcare workforce.1 Ireland’s dependence on foreign- trained doctors is problematically drawing doctors away from low and middle-income countries.1 Despite the historical pattern of CSCSTs emigrating for fellowship training and subsequently returning to Ireland, some researchers worry that their emigration is becoming more common and more permanent.1,4ï The NDTP should create an international recruitment program for doctors who received their CSCSTs in Ireland. It should contact those who receive their CSCSTs in Ireland but are not actively registered with the IMC when (1) there are recruitment opportunities for consultants and (2) there are improvements made in the Irish healthcare system to encourage their return.ï As the NDTP monitors the DIME database for workforce planning, it should monitor the recruitment campaign's targets and conduct surveys of those who return to determine whether the outreach influenced their decision.Implementation      
The NDTP, which maintains DIME, could implement an international recruitment program. Gaining the support of the NDTP’s Medical Workforce Planning Lead, Dr. Roisin Morris, and of DIME Project Managers, Orla Smith and Aoife Nolan, would be instrumental in creating this program.6 As the NDTP, the IMC, postgraduate medical training bodies, and clinical sites collaborate to collect DIME data, critical officials in these other organizations must also champion this policy for it to be successful.5 DIME’s utility for tracking physicians leaving and returning from Ireland hinges on using each doctor’s IMC number as a “unique identifier” because it does not change as they migrate.4 As such, ensuring the IMC’s support in using this information and physician contact details to organize outreach is critical. In particular, obtaining encouragement from the IMC’s Registration and Continuing Practice Committee could facilitate the fastest possible implementation of the program.7 In addition, one avenue to ensure the aforementioned training bodies’ support could be to contact the Forum of Irish Postgraduate Medical Training Bodies, which could promote the policy to all such bodies together.1 In particular, establishing a connection with the Forum Trainee Subcommittee, which aims to improve the “standards of postgraduate training,” would be beneficial.8 As this subcommittee distributes information to trainees across all bodies, promoting the program through its avenues could increase awareness among trainees and encourage their future engagement with the outreach. Engagement with the aforementioned organizations      
will most likely lead to engagement with clinical sites.      The first step of implementing this policy will be engaging with these four critical organizations which collaborate on DIME. Upon their approval, the NDTP should create the outreach program for CSCSTs abroad.Personnel involved in DIME would assume the extra responsibility of keeping the contact information of CSCSTs abroad up to date and maintaining connections with them. For updates on available consultant positions that CSCSTs may apply to, DIME administrators would coordinate with the Consultants Division of the NDTP, which regulates such job postings.9 At the same time, all four organizations would contribute updates on improvements in workplace conditions.      As the NDTP monitors the DIME database for workforce planning, it should also monitor the recruitment campaign’s targets and conduct surveys of those who return to Ireland to determine whether the outreach influenced their decision. If personnel involved in DIME at the NDTP determine the workload associated with the recruitment program requires more support, they should form a CSCST Recruitment Committee with members across the organizations that contribute to DIME. This committee, led by the NDTP personnel who would initially establish the recruitment program,
would communicate with CSCSTs abroad and conduct the return surveys to determine the program’s effectiveness. The committee would also continue to develop the program as new ideas arise.      With support from the organizations which collaborate to maintain the DIME database, the NDTP can introduce and monitor an outreach program to increase the return and retention rates of physicians who move abroad after obtaining their CSCSTs in Ireland.Works Cited[1] OECD. 2019. “The Irishparadox: Doctor shortages despite high numbers of domestic and foreign medical graduates.” Recent Trends in International Migration of Doctors, Nurses and Medical Students. (pp. 67-87). OECD Publishing, Paris. https://doi.org/10.1787/ef8dbec2- en.[2] Department of Health, Government of Ireland. 2017. “Working Together for Health: A National Strategic Framework for Health and Social Care Workforce Planning.” (p. 10, 32, 33, 93, 111).https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/f 303a9-working-together-for-health- a-national-strategic-framework-for- healt/?referrer=https://www.health. gov.ie/wp- content/uploads/2018/04/Working- Together-Report.pdf.[3] Brugha, Ruairi, Frances Cronin, Nick Clarke, and RCSI Health Workforce Research Group. 2018.
“Retaining Our Doctors Medical Workforce Evidence, 2013-18. Full Report.” Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland. (pp. iii, vii, 12, 28, 40-42).https://doi.org/10.25419/rcsi.10776 569.v2.[4] HSE NDTP. 2024. “AnnualMedical Retention Report 2023.” (p. 2, 6, 8, 22, 24, 25, 28, 33).https://www.hse.ie/eng/staff/leaders hip-education- development/met/plan/annual- medical-retention-report-2023.pdf.[5] HSE. n.d. “HSE NDTP - DIMEand NER.” https://www.hse.ie/eng/staff/leaders hip-education- development/met/database/.[6] HSE NDTP. n.d. “Contact Details, National Doctors Training and Planning.” https://www.hse.ie/eng/staff/leaders hip-education- development/met/contact/.[7] Medical Council. n.d. “Medical Council Committees.” https://www.medicalcouncil.ie/abou t-us/medical-council- committees/medical-council- committees.html.[8] The Forum of Irish Postgraduate Medical Training Bodies. n.d. “Committees & Working Groups.” https://www.theforum.ie/committee s-working-groups/.[9] HSE NDTP. n.d. “Consultants Division.” https://www.hse.ie/eng/staff/leaders hip-education- development/met/consultantapplicat ions/.[1] 
Audit for Equity: Enhancing Accountability Across New Jersey’s Harm Reduction ServicesBy Kimia Shahriyar, ks2462@cornell.eduMisallocation of Opioid Settlement Fund grants in New Jersey exacerbates disparities in harm reduction access. Abuse of community-distributor portals necessitates the implementation of audits to protect the integrity of harm reduction and ensure equitable allocation of resources to underserved communities.
Background      The State of New Jersey’s Department of Health (DOH) grants agencies across the state harm reduction licenses and funding to enable them to buy and distribute services in their respective communities.1 On February 15, 2024, the DOH’s Division of HIV, Sexually Transmitted Diseases, and Tuberculosis Services (DHSTS) made funds available for harm reduction in NJ as per the Opioid Settlement Fund.2 To mitigate harms related to drug use, executive action supports harm reduction services in areas of unmet needs.3 In 2023 alone, the New Jersey Harm Reduction Coalition (NJHRC) distributed 10,000 doses of naloxone, effectively used in over 140 overdose reversals.7      Qualifying agencies are awarded funding if they can attest to their capabilities to provide the core suite of harm reduction: preventative care supplies, trauma- informed education, and access to drug-checking equipment.1 Providing these services is costly, and the maximum award per 12- month period to qualifying institutions is $350,000.4      Similar to organizations applying to receive funding from the DHSTS, persons looking to become community distributors must apply through forms specific to the needs of the population they
intend to serve.5 Individuals in contact with drug users are encouraged to request anywhere from a few dozen to a hundred kits of various harm reduction supplies like smoking kits, safer injection kits, and naloxone kits.6      The obligation of harm reduction agencies to fulfill requests on behalf of community distributors is a central aim of the expanding harm reduction mailing services.However, the lack of verification standards and processes makes resources liable to misallocation. Given the lack of current-day regulations on request portals, unassuming mailing service coordinators at harm reduction agencies are prone to abuse. There currently are no preventative measures against the very likely possibility of similarly funded agencies depleting supplies through another agency’s community distributor portal.Policy Idea      NJ’s DOH should impose distribution audits for all state- registered harm reduction agencies to address the lack of accountability for misallocated funds that drive programs to deplete similarly funded harm reduction agencies for supplies under the guise of a community distributor. Distribution audits would aim to report information about their resource
procurement, distribution, and finances to the NJ DOH. In this manner, the tracking would lead to the reprimanding of agencies procuring resources through other organizations’ community distributor allocations. The internal auditing system will work to impede excessive burden on providing organizations and straighten expectations for those responsible for the abuse. Should organizers who are provided the same funding under the designation of harm reduction agencies by the DOH wish to place requests to other agencies for harm reduction supplies, it should be a disqualification of their grant of$350,000.Policy Analysis      The notice of funds availability for New Jersey harm reduction expansion is partially an effort to address the unfortunate reality that over one-third of NJ counties have a harm reduction agency within their jurisdiction.? The $350,000 annual grant per agency could be better spent if monitored effectively, addressing the gap between the available funds and the actual delivery of services in underfunded areas.      By creating a clear and enforceable auditing system, the state can increase the reach and impact of its harm reduction      
programs. The proposed penalties for non-compliance, including disqualification from grant renewal, would deter potential abuses and incentivize agencies to maintain their commitment to equity and the core suite of harm reduction. This policy shift would foster a culture of greater accountability, ensuring that funds reach their intended recipients, and enhance the overall effectiveness of the Opioid Settlement Fund’s reparative efforts across New Jersey.      Should issues arise during the auditing process, harm reduction agencies should be made ineligible for renewal of funding.Concurrently, scrutiny of grant allocation and corrupt practices has arisen in the private sector of addiction rehabilitation, for which the State of New Jersey Commission of Investigation emphasizes the need to monitor public investments and ensure public funding in their February 2024 report.8 The case for safeguarding harm reduction agencies granted the Opioid Settlement Fund against abuse is clear: The appropriate use of resources will work to ensure that qualifying harm reduction agencies receive grant renewals and can continue the invaluable services they provide to people who use drugs and their communities.Ultimately, audits would force the reinstatement of said funding into communities where they are due.Highlightsï The New Jersey Department of Health (DOH) grants harm reduction licenses and funding to agencies to enable them to buy and distribute essential supplies. Organizations can receive
$350,000 annually if they qualify for the designation.1ï A lack of verification processes for community distributor requests can lead to potential resource misallocation, which makes meeting demands for supplies, such as naloxone and safer injection kits, difficult.ï NJ’s DOH should impose distribution audits for all state-registered harm reduction agencies to prevent community distributor request portals’ abuse by warning against inappropriate retrieval and distribution of supplies other agencies have paid for and protecting harm reduction’s integrity.ï Through state monitoring of public investments and appropriate fund usage, audits would ensure affected communities receive support and further grant renewals for qualifying harm reduction agencies.8Implementation      NJ’s DOH should impose distribution audits for all state- registered harm reduction agencies to enhance accountability and ensure proper allocation of resources. This policy aims to prevent funds’ and supplies’ misallocation, particularly by addressing the misuse of community distributor request portals. The audit policy should be introduced through the New Jersey State Legislature, ideally in collaboration with invested state legislators Assemblyman Conway, Assemblywoman Jaffer, and Assemblywomen Speight quoted
supporting legalization of fentanyl test strips and bolstered naloxone distribution as proposed by Senator Cory Booker.1,9 Stakeholders in this matter include harm reduction agencies, verified community distributors, the DOH, and New Jersey’s greater population.      Implementing distribution audits statewide would require establishing verification standards for community distributor requests. This policy proposes the creation of metrics that directly evaluate the success of audits imposed, such as performance monitoring for distribution. As outlined in the Commission of Investigation, multiple government agencies oversee separate components of the addiction rehabilitation industry and participating operations.8 To tackle this fragmented framework, a unified task force incorporating a diverse board of industry experts and professionals was proposed to effectively identify problems and or complaints.8      The DOH would ideally implement the auditing system before the next grant application or reapplication cycle. Furthermore, in the context of competing budget priorities, legislators might oppose the dedication of additional funds to harm reduction audits. However it should be emphasized that these are to be a mere reallocation of a population of existing resources.Funding for the anticipated expenses associated with auditing can be obtained through existing harm reduction grant funding as part of the Opioid Settlement Fund. There is confidence in securing adequate funding for this process as it is in the settlement’s tenets to provide a bridge for people using drugs to social support services, which are integral aspects of harm
reduction agencies.1,3 Long-term benefits associated with reallocating funding to the auditing process will outweigh any initial monetary loss.      The DOH can increase satisfaction among agencies and previously underserved clientele through the successful implementation of the policy.Furthermore, the DOH can then develop access to a statistically observable move towards equitable resources in the form of overdose reversal rates and quantifiable decreases in healthcare costs associated with drug-use-related hospitalizations. Effective implementation of distribution audits will protect the integrity of harm reduction and ensure equitable allocation of resources to underserved communities.Works Cited[1] 
“Funding Opportunities Through Settlement Dollars.” Opioid Settlements, https://www.nj.gov/opioidfunds/fun ding-opportunities/.[2] “Governor Murphy Announces Allocation of $95 Million from New Jersey’s Opioid Recover and Remediation Fund”. https://nj.gov/governor/news/news/ 562024/approved/20240215a.shtml.[3] “Harm Reduction Principles.” National Harm Reduction Coalition, https://harmreduction.org/about- us/principles%20-of-harm- reduction/.[4] Naloxone Leave Behind Program. https://dmhas.dhs.state.nj.us/NDP.[5] “Next Distro.” NEXT Distro, https://nextdistro.org.[6] Get Syringes - NJ Harm Reduction Coalition.
https://njharmreduction.org/get- syringes/[7] Impact Report: Naloxone365 First Year Review. June 2024, https://www.nj.gov/humanservices/ news/publications/NJ%20Human% 20Services%20Impact%20Report% 20-%20Naloxone%20365%20First%20Year%20Review.pdf[8] NJ State Commission of Investigation “SCI Report: The Dirty Business Behind Getting Clean.” Accessed November 17, 2024. https://nj.gov/sci/home/sci- report-the-dirty-business-behind- getting-clean/.[9] Congress.gov “Text-S.2483-118th Congress (2023-2024): Expanding Nationwide Access to Test Strips Act.” July 25, 2023. https://www.congress.gov/bill/118t h-congress/senate-bill/2484/text.
