MenuHome Crime, justice and law  Domestic abuseGuidanceDomestic abuse: how to get helpFind out how to get help if you or someone you know is a victim of domestic abuse.From: Home O?cePublished 5 October 2018Last updated 21 March 2025 — See all updatesRelated contentDefinition of domestic violence and abuse: g uide for local areasApply for the migrant victims of domestic abuse concessionDomestic Abuse Act 2021Domestic abuse: recognise the signs Indefinite leave to remain or enter(  domestic violence or abuse)Translated guidanceIf English is not your first language, information has been translated into several languages as well as an easy read version.Women’s Aid also have g uidance documents on domestic abuse and coronavirus available in a number of languages for victims, family and friends, and community members of those a?ected.If you are deaf, you can access a British Sign Lang uage video that explains how to get help if you or someone you know is a victim of domestic abuse.Recognise domestic abuseDoes your partner, ex-partner or someone you live with: cut you o? from family and friends and intentionally isolate you?  bully, threaten, or control you? take control of your finances? monitor or limit your use of technology?  physically and/or sexually abuse you?Domestic abuse is not always physical violence. It can also include: coercive control and ‘gaslighting’  economic abuse online abuse threats and intimidation  emotional abuse sexual abuseAnyone can be a victim of domestic abuse, regardless of gender, age, ethnicity, religion, socio-economic status, sexuality or background.If you believe that you are a victim of domestic abuse, there are signs that you can look out for including: being withdrawn, or being isolated from your family and friends  having bruises, burns or bite marks on you having your finances controlled, or not being given enough to buy food, medication or pay bills not being allowed to leave your house, or stopped from going to college or work having your internet or social media use monitored, or someone else reading your texts, emails or letters being repeatedly belittled, put down or told you are worthless  being pressured into sex or sexual contact being told that abuse is your fault, or that you’re overreacting See more signs to look for.Get help and supportAll forms of domestic abuse are not acceptable in any situation.If you’re experiencing domestic abuse and feel frightened of, or controlled by, a partner, an ex-partner or family member, it’s important to remember that it’s not your fault and there is no shame in seeking help.It may seem like a di?cult step to take, but there is support available and #YouAreNot Alone.Free, confidential support and advice is available to victims and their concerned family members or friends, 24 hours a day.Nation Helpline	Contact
England Refug e’s National Domestic Abuse HelplineNorthern Domestic and Sexual Abuse
0808 2000 247Online live chat Web form0808 802 1414
Ireland
Helpline
Online live chat help@dsahelpline.org
Scotland Domestic Abuse and Forced Marriage HelplineWales Live Fear Free WelshGovernment funded, 24 hour, 365 day service with
0800 027 1234Online live chat helpline@sdafmh.org.uk0808 80 10 100Online live chat Text
specialists who make referrals info@livefearfreehelpline.wales and link to other services andadvice.
UK-wide The Men’s Advice Line run by Respect is a confidential helpline specifically for male victims.
0808 801 0327info@mensadviceline.org.uk
Bright Sky appBright Sky is a mobile app and website for anyone experiencing domestic abuse, or who is worried about someone else.The app can be downloaded for free from the app stores. Only download the app if it is safe for you to do so and if you are sure that your phone isn’t being monitored.Women’s Aid local support services directoryWomen’s Aid have a  directory of domestic abuse support services across the UK.If you are experiencing domestic abuse or are worried about friends or family, you can access the Women’s Aid live chat service 7 days a week, 10am to 6pm.helpline@womensaid.org.ukVictim SupportVictim Support run these services for victims and survivors of any abuse or crime, regardless of when it occurred or if the crime was reported to the police: free, independent and confidential 24/7 Supportline 08 08 16 89 111  live chat service My Support Space - free online resourceSafe SpacesSafes Spaces are safe, confidential rooms where victims can take some time to reflect, access information on specialist support services or call friends or family.Safe Spaces are also available in Boots, Morrisons, Superdrug and Well pharmacies, TSB banks and independent pharmacies across the UK.Find your nearest Safe Space.Check whether someone has an abusive pastIf you are concerned that a new, former or existing partner has an abusive past you can ask the police to check under the Domestic Violence Disclosure Scheme (also known as ‘Clare’s Law’). This is your ‘right to ask’. If records show that you may be at risk of domestic abuse, the police will consider disclosing the information. A disclosure can be made if it is legal, proportionate and necessary to do so.If you are concerned about a friend or family member, you can apply for a disclosure on behalf of someone you know.You can make a request to the police for information about a person’s previous violent o?ending in person at the police station or elsewhere, by telephone, by email, online or as part of a police investigation. Support agencies and services can also help you ask the police about this.Get a court order to protect you or your childIf you’re a victim of domestic abuse you can apply for a court order or injunction to protect yourself or your child from: your current or previous partner  a family member someone you currently or previously lived with This is called a non-molestation or occupation order. You can apply online, by email or by post.Get a non-molestation or occupation order if you’ve been the victim of domestic abuse.Domestic abuse protection ordersA domestic abuse protection order (DAPO) can: stop someone coming to or near your home  decide who can stay or return to your home order the person to attend a behavioural change programme order the person to wear an electronic tag to check they’re keeping to the conditions of the orderThere are no court fees for applying.You can only apply for a DAPO if the person you need protection from lives in one of the following areas: Hartlepool, Middlesbrough, Redcar and Cleveland and Stockton-on-Tees  Greater Manchester the London boroughs of Croydon, Bromley or Sutton Apply for a domestic abuse protection order.Support someone you knowIf you are worried that a friend, neighbour or loved one is a victim of domestic abuse, you can call the National Domestic Abuse Helpline for free and confidential advice, 24 hours a day on 0808 2000 247.Or you can contact the other support services listed on this page.Seeking help for someone you know can be challenging but #YouAreNotalone. Domestic abuse advisers will o?er confidential, non- judgemental information and advice on the options available to you helping you to keep safe and make informed choices.If you believe there is an immediate risk of harm to someone, or it is an emergency, you should always call 999.If someone confides in you, there is more information on how to support a friend who is being abused.If you are an employerLet your employees know that if they are facing domestic abuse you want to help them to get help. Stay in regular contact with employees you know, or fear, may be facing abuse and if you lose contact with them, take swift action to visit them. If you believe there is an immediate risk of harm to someone, or it is an emergency, always call 999.Encourage employees to look out for others who may be facing domestic abuse and signpost them to support. Your sta? may also be worried about their own abusive behaviour at this time. There is no excuse for domestic abuse, no matter what stresses you are under and support is available.Hestia’s Respond to Abuse Advice Line is a free resource for employers. Employers can call 020 3879 3695 Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm, or email adviceline.eb@hestia.org for support, guidance or information about domestic abuse and how to support employees and colleagues experiencing domestic abuse.The  Employers’ Initiative on Domestic Abuse website provides resources to support employers including an employers’ toolkit.If you are a professional working in the domestic abuse sectorSafeLives provides guidance and support to professionals and those working in the domestic abuse sector, as well as additional advice for those at risk.Find additional information and supportIf you want to access help specifically to cater to your background and needs or want support and help for specific types of abuse there are several organisations that can help - see Domestic abuse: specialist sources of support.You can also find additional information and support here on topics including:  help for children and young people welfare benefits and housing advice help if you don’t have settled status in the UK  support for specific types of abuseGet help if you think you might be an abuserIf you are concerned about your behaviour or the behaviour of someone you know, there is support available.The  Respect Phoneline is an anonymous and confidential helpline for men and women who are abusing their partners and families. It is open Monday to Friday 9am to 8pm. The helpline also takes calls from partners or ex-partners, friends and relatives who are concerned about perpetrators.A webchat service is available Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays from 10am to 11am and from 3pm to 4pm.Telephone: 0808 802 4040How to call the police when you can’t speakIf you are in danger and unable to talk on the phone, call 999 and listen to the questions from the operator and, if you can, respond by coughing or tapping on the handset.Call 999 from a mobileIf prompted, press 55 to Make Yourself Heard and this will transfer your call to the police. Pressing 55 only works on mobiles and does not allow police to track your location.Call 999 from a landlineIf the operator can only hear background noise and cannot decide whether an emergency service is needed, you will be connected to a police call handler.If you replace the handset, the landline may remain connected for 45 seconds in case you pick up again.When 999 calls are made from landlines, information about your location should be automatically available to the call handlers to help provide a response.If you are deaf or can’t use a phoneYou can register with the emergencySMS. Text REGISTER to 999. You will get a text which tells you what to do next. Do this when it is safe so you can text when you are in danger.Published 5 October 2018Last updated 21 March 2025 + show all updatesExplore the topicDomestic abuseViolence against women and girlsServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Central Lancashire Online Knowledge (CLoK)TitleCalls for Police Service: Understanding the demand profile and the UK policeresponseTypeArticleURLhttps://clok.uclan.ac.uk/15638/DOIhttps://doi.org/10.1177/0032258X16671032Date2016CitationBoulton, Laura, McManus, Michelle Ann, Metcalfe, L., Brian, David John and Dawson, I (2016) Calls for Police Service: Understanding the demand profile and the UK police response. The Police Journal: Theory, Practice andPrinciples. ISSN 0032-258XCreatorsBoulton, Laura, McManus, Michelle Ann, Metcalfe, L., Brian, David John andDawson, IIt is advisable to refer to the publisher’s version if you intend to cite from the work. https://doi.org/10.1177/0032258X16671032For information about Research at UCLan please go to http://www.uclan.ac.uk/research/All outputs in CLoK are protected by Intellectual Property Rights law, including Copyright law. Copyright, IPR and Moral Rights for the works on this site are retained by the individual authors and/or other copyright owners. Terms and conditions for use of this material are defined in the http://clok.uclan.ac.uk/policies/
Calls for Police Service: Understanding the demand profile and the UK police response.Dr. Laura BoultonPolicing and Criminal Investigation, School of Forensic and Applied Science, University of Central Lancashire, Preston, PR1 2HE, email: lboulton1@uclan.ac.uk, tel: 00 44 (0)1772 894386Dr. Michelle McManus1Policing and Criminal Investigation, School of Forensic and Applied Science, University of Central Lancashire, Preston, PR1 2HE, email: mamcmanus@uclan.ac.uk, tel: 00 44 (0)1772 894154Lauren MetcalfePolicing and Criminal Investigation, School of Forensic and Applied Science, University of Central Lancashire, Preston, PR1 2HE, email: LMetcalfe@uclan.ac.ukDavid BrianPolicing and Criminal Investigation, School of Forensic and Applied Science, University of Central Lancashire, Preston, PR1 2HE, email : djbrian@uclan.ac.uk, tel: 00 44 (0) 1772893539Ian DawsonT/Superintendent – Head of Corporate Development & Futures, HQ Operations, Lancashire Constabulary | Preston PR4 5SB, email: ian.dawson@lancashire.pnn.police.ukTel: 00 44 (0) 1772 4126131 Corresponding author
Author BiographiesDr. Laura BoultonLaura is a Lecturer in Policing at University of Central Lancashire (UCLan). She completed her PhD in 2014 exploring how expertise, cognitive executive functioning, neuropsychology and human factors influence the decision making of Authorised Firearms Officers in order to develop a model of decision making during armed confrontations. Providing an evidence base that can be practically utilised by Police practitioners to impact change in practice was the underlying motivation for this research. Throughout her PhD she worked in collaboration with Merseyside Police, North West Ambulance Service and Merseyside Fire and Rescue Service. She now lectures on Master’s Degree programmes at UCLAN.Dr. Michelle McManusSenior Lecturer at University of Central Lancashire (UCLan). Completed her PhD in 2012 exploring risk factors for child sexual abuse within indecent image of children offending. Her doctoral research assisted with the creation of KIRAT (Kent Internet Risk Assessment Tool), a risk management tool for use by the police to assess the risk of contact abuse in those individuals accessing indecent images of children. This was rolled out for national use by CEOP in 2012. Due to the number of domestic abuse research projects completed with various constabularies across the UK, Dr. McManus sits on various groups such as: College of Policing Domestic Abuse Risk Assessment Task Force Group, Homicide Working Group Child Death Subgroup and Lancashire Evidenced Based Research Group. She is also Director of Studies for 3 PhD students exploring various aspects of Domestic Abuse.Lauren MetcalfeHaving studied in the field of policing for the past 7 years, Lauren has enthusiastically worked to undertake and promote Evidence Based Policing research. Lauren is currently submitting her PhD thesis surrounding the nature of gang related gun crime in Preston, Lancashire; assessing the complexities of the issue, profiling the individuals involved and working towards more effective preventative measures for the future. With the intention for the project having real world impact, she has collaborated with various organisations throughout the PhD, including Lancashire Constabulary and Lancashire Probation Service, to implement projects designed to assist in deterring such types of crime.
David BrianDave is a Lecturer at the University of Central Lancashire (UCLan). Dave was a police officer for 30years reaching the Rank of Detective Superintendent. He now lectures on Master’s Degree programmes at UCLAN and as an invited speaker at other universities. Dave is currently studying for a Professional Doctorate in Elite Performance and is a researcher in the field of policing and acts a supervisor to a number of Phd students undertaking research into multi agency working, domestic abuse, the protection of vulnerable people and early action, sexual consent and public engagement with police services.Ian DawsonIan is a Temporary Superintendent in Lancashire Constabulary. He has been a Police Officer for 23 years and developed the Constabulary’s approach to Evidence Based Policing which over the last 5 years has developed and delivered over 40 research projects, the majority of which have been in partnership with UCLan. As Head of Corporate Development and Futures Ian now leads on Evidence Based Policing for the Constabulary. The Constabulary also collaborates as part of Consortiums with Liverpool University, the N8 group of Universities and the Open University and has supported funding awards in excess of £6 million for Policing research. Ian has also acquired European Union funding for Domestic Abuse victim research. He is currently studying for a M.St. in Criminology and Police Management at Cambridge University
AbstractPurpose – The purpose of this research paper is to identify and understand the demand profile of a division of Lancashire Police Constabulary in order to assist Police administrators in the evaluation of demand and understanding of Policing response.Design/methodology/approach – Police data records regarding all offences within the Central Division of Lancashire Police Constabulary over the year of 2013 were examined. Descriptive statistics were used to identify the top ten demand addresses in five categories (residential, statutory bodies, retail, nightlife, and young people’s services), and the incident classifications, time frames and response codes that were most associated with these addresses. Further content analysis was conducted on the top ten residential addresses in order to identify specific characteristics of residential demand.Findings - The majority of Lancashire Constabulary resources are being spent dealing with non-traditional police demand. The most demanding residents were found to have one or more of the following properties; (i) to be of white – Northern European origin, (ii) to be unemployed, (iii) to be associated with mental health issues, domestic violence incidents or substance abuse, and (iv) to have previously had other agency involvement.Practical Implications - These results indicate that the police could potentially reduce the demand for service by enhancing work within two key areas; partnership working and early intervention.Originality/value – In this time of austerity and police budget cuts, it is important to understand the demand on the UK police service in an attempt to reduce it.Keywords – UK; police; mixed methods; demand; resource management; partnership working; early intervention.Paper type – Research paper
IntroductionAs a result of cuts to the police funding budget (HMIC, 2013), police administrators need to achieve a balance between reducing cost and maintenance of service quality whilst meeting service demands (Taylor Griffiths et al., 2014). Achieving such a balance is challenged by the polices expanding responsibilities, i.e. new roles in community policing, security, and emerging crimes such as cyber enabled crime, (College of Policing, 2015). Therefore, in order to strike an appropriate balance between competing priorities and tight budget constraints, police forces are seeking to identify major resource consumers in order to understand how they can be addressed to reduce the strain on the service.      Traditionally, reported crime statistics have served as a basis for police resource management analyses as a measure of workload (Wilson, 2012). However recently, the College of Policing (2015) have reported that forces feel that the use of reported crime statistics in this way is inadequate: such statistics only reflect what is commonly referred to as ‘traditional police business’ (typically associated with criminal offences and could rarely be solved by other agencies) and fail to consider that the ever increasing level of ‘non-traditional police business’ being dealt with by officers on a daily basis is also likely affect demand (Wilson, 2012). Despite evidence to suggest that crime has been decreasing since 1995 and that calls for police service received through the emergency ‘999’ number has decreased by 23% since their peak in 2006/7, there is a widespread perception across UK forces that the demand on officers and staff has been, at least, maintained (College of Policing, 2015). This effect may reflect a combination of the increase in certain serious and complex crime types (i.e. violence against the person, shoplifting, sexual offense, fraud and public order), the high number of convictions (nearly 1 million) and penalty notices (34,000) issued for non-notifiable offences, and the 14% (35,000) reduction in Police officers and staff in 2014 (College of Policing, 2015). Nonetheless, there have been few empirical studies that can fully account for and describe the current public demand profile on the UK police service.      Previous research that has examined citizen demand for police services has typically found that the majority of police calls (between 80% - 90%) were not directly related to crime prevention or control, but instead involved resolving disputes, noncriminal behaviour complaints and requesting public service assistance (Hill and Paynich, 2014; Johnson and Rhodes, 2009). However, whilst this statistic is strongly supported, it is important to consider the context of these calls. Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of the Constabulary (2012) state that      
despite not currently being classed as crime fighting activity, at least 80% of the officers time is spent dealing with incidents that involve protecting people from becoming victims of crime or to prevent crimes occurring.      Supporting this, the College of Policing (2015) have recently reported that the demand generated by public safety and welfare incidents is increasing, and within some forces represents the largest number of reported incidents. This suggests that there have been significant changes in the basic focus of policing from conventional reactive policing (i.e. crime detection and control, order maintenance, registering and investigating crime, patrolling and responding to emergency calls) to proactive community policing (HMIC, 2012; Vinod Kumar, 2014). Based on the theoretical framework of the Broken Windows theory (Wilson and Kelling, 1982), community policing seeks to address minor offences in order to prevent more serious offences and violent crime occurring (Srinivasan et al., 2013).      A preventative community policing approach is said to be critical because it reduces crime and the demands that go with it (HMIC, 2012). However, whilst reduced rates of property crime (Caudill et al., 2013) and violent crime (Ratcliffe et al., 2011) provides evidence to support the prioritisation of proactive community policing (Worrall and Kovandzic, 2010), doing so also requires additional police resources at a greater cost (College of Policing, 2015Vinod Kumar, 2014).Repeat and/or demanding callersThe ‘iron law of troublesome places’ claims that a small proportion of locations are likely to account for the majority of reported incidents of crime and disorder (Bichler et al., 2013; Wilcox and Eck, 2011). For instance, a minority of patients have been found to account for the majority of calls for the ambulance service (Edwards et al., 2014). Similarly, some ‘troubled families’ who often have many generations displaying the same problems, may require more resources than others (Home Office, n.d). Repeat and/or demanding callers can place a significant burden on emergency services in general; both in terms of time and financial resources, and many factors can influence how people interact with the police in particular. For example, community differences can strongly impact police resource requirements with urban settings associated with more public demand that rural policing (Johnson and Rhodes, 2009; Taylor Griffiths et al., 2014), with this further linked to social deprivation, low collective efficacy and cohesion (Sampson et al., 1997)      Personal characteristics may also influence whether a person is likely to be a repeat caller. Key areas have been found to be those associated with alcohol/drugs and those with      
mental health issues. A recent UK report made by the College of Policing (2015) estimates that that mental health issues account for at least 20% of police time. This pattern suggests that dealing with individuals with mental health issues could be posing a considerable and increasing demand on police resources internationally (College of Policing, 2015; Health and Social Care Information Centre, 2014).Demand ManagementAs the police strive to meet the demands of their expanding roles and an increasingly expectant public (Fleming and Grabosky, 2009), there are a few ways in which the police aim to manage the demand on their service, including grading incidents appropriately to prioritise tasks, and using reviews to identify high demand areas in order to implement preventative measures to reduce reoccurring problems. The ‘troubled families’ programme, which involves intensive work with particularly resource demanding families, is a prime example of this. The government’s ‘troubled families’ programme has been found to reduce offending and antisocial behaviour and thus, reduce the demand on the police (Home Office, n.d).      Targeted policing can be seen as an effective tool for curbing demand by concentrating resources on specific crimes, criminals, victims and areas that are prone to cause high demand before calls for assistance occur (Karn, 2013). ‘Hot spot’ policing involves deploying more patrol resources at ‘hot spots’ defined as “small clusters of addresses with frequent hard crime calls as well as substantial soft crime calls for service” (Sherman and Weisburd, 1995, p. 630;). Similarly, problem orientated policing focusses on targeting strategies to specifically identified problems (Weisburd and Eck, 2004). Generally, studies show that increases of police presence in places where crime is more concentrated results in significant reductions in crime calls (Weisburd and Braga, 2006). In addition, this effect has been found to have a wider impact, as evidence indicates spatial diffusion benefits to the areas surrounding the policing intervention (Clark and Weisburd, 1994).Aims and Objectives of the Current StudyAs a result of police budget cuts and reduced staffing, it is important to take an evidence based approach to understand the demand on the police service in an attempt to optimise the use of resources (Srinivasan, 2013; Taylor Griffiths et al., 2014). It appears that the majority of calls to the police involve issues that are not inherently traditional police business (Hill and Paynich, 2014). However, this is based on results from dated or non-British based studies. Furthermore,
although it appears that some repeat callers hold specific traits, these are only loosely speculated at this stage. There are two key objectives to this research;(i) To give an overview of where the highest public demand for police resources in Lancashire Constabulary’s Central Division has come from; and(ii) To profile the most demanding addresses in this area in order to understand why these particular households/families have such a high demand for police services.Through increased understanding of who constitutes the main consumers of police resources and the reasons behind why there is such a demand from certain addresses, the police and their partner agencies will be more informed to better manage these high resource consumers, thus reducing the demand on the force (College of Policing, 2015).MethodologyData and Research ApproachLancashire Constabulary commissioned this research to identify and understand the demand profile across their Central Division. Lancashire County has an estimated population of nearly1.5 million with a rich diversity of communities, and Lancashire Constabulary covers 2,000 square miles and has 2889 Police officers and 1920 Police staff (Lancashire Constabulary, 2016). For this purpose, data was obtained from Lancashire Constabulary data warehouses. Raw data was extracted from Command and Control using a search criteria of all calls for service within the Central Division over the year of 2013 (01/01/13 – 31/12/13). This search resulted in 63,430 records being attained. These were then compiled into addresses and ordered according to the number of records for each address so that the top users could be identified. The top ten addresses for residential properties were compiled as were non-residential addresses within the following categories (see Table I). The second stage of data collection involved obtaining the details of those who were associated with the top ten residential addresses.[Table I. Property categories]AnalysisDescriptive results were calculated and analysed using total counts (n), percentages and appropriate measures of central tendency. Firstly, the top ten consumers within each of the five categories (see Table I) were examined in terms of; (i) incident classifications (see Table II),
(ii) the time frames these are occurring, and (iii) the response codes that were allocated to these incidents (see Table III).[Table II. Incident classifications and descriptions] [Table III. Response code grades and descriptions]Lastly, a content analysis was conducted on residential household and family characteristics. The profiling of residential addresses considered their local profiles to obtain key characteristics and warning markers. Individual incident logs were also examined to gain an understanding about the reasons why there was such demand from each address during the year.Results / FindingsThe top ten statutory bodies have the most incidents calling for police service (30%) compared with the top ten in the other address categories. This is followed by those in the retail category (24%) and nightlife (18%), with young people’s services and residential requiring the least resources (14% of the total each).Incident ClassificationThe majority of all reported incidents fell under the classification of ‘other’ (n = 1136, 28.35%) (see Table IV). For the coded classifications, the biggest demand was from welfare (n = 756, 18.87%), nuisance (n = 734, 18.32%), and acquisitive person crime (n = 667, 16.65%).[Table IV. Incident classification for all categories profiled]Most of the top ten residential addresses were found to associate with one specific incident classification. When exploring the residential demand (see Table V), welfare incidents accounted for the highest number of the reported incidents (n = 210, 37.91%). However, this was skewed by four addresses that accounted for 89.5% of the incidents. This suggests that welfare is a distinct problem area for some particular households, but that nuisance is causing problems across a wider amount of addresses.[Table V. Incident classification for individual address categories]
Incidents classified as ‘other’ were found to be the biggest call for services in statutory bodies (n = 565, 47.28%), and the largest coded incident classifications were welfare (n = 245, 20.5%) and nuisance (n = 178, 14.9%) (see Table V). However, this is skewed by the inclusion of a central hospital which generated a large number of welfare incidents. If this address is removed, statutory bodies accrue a larger amount nuisance incidents (n = 104, 20.47%) and ‘other’ incidents (n = 234, 46.06%). Despite this, welfare is still the third highest demand intensive classification accounting for 11.61% of the incidents (n = 59). For the top ten retail addresses, the most demand is focused on the acquisitive personal crime (n = 475, 49.63%). Again, ‘other’ (n = 192) and nuisance (n = 166) incidents were also highly demanding for retail addresses accounting for 20.06% and 17.35% respectively.      Within the top ten nightlife addresses, nuisance incidents required the highest demand (n = 208, 28.3%), accounting for an average of 21 incidents per address (see Table V). ‘Other’ incidents also account for a high volume of police resources (n = 200, 27.21%), followed by acquisitive (person) crime (n = 105, 14.29%) and violence against a person (n = 101, 13.74%).      The highest demand within the top ten young people’s services addresses was found to be welfare incidents (n = 231, 40.81%) (see Table V). In particular the top two addresses accounted for 176 of the 231 welfare incidents (76%). Both these addresses are children’s homes which indicated a potential need for a more robust partnership plan for dealing with such addresses      When comparing incident classifications across the five address categories it can be seen that welfare and nuisance incidents account for the highest number of coded incidents. In contrast, across all address categories, acquisitive (household) crime and sexual offences accounted for the least number of incidents, both of which are typically considered as traditional police business. When looking at the incident classifications collectively in terms of ‘traditional police business’ and ‘non-traditional police business’ (removing the ‘other’ classification) traditional police incidents (acquisitive person and household crime, conditions, vandalism/criminal damage, violence against the person and sexual offences) accounted for 26.89% of incidents whereas non-traditional police incidents (disputes, nuisance, domestic incidents, and welfare) make up 44.78% of incidents.Time Frame
Three time frames encompassed the largest demand: 11:01-14:00, 14:01-17:00 and 17:01- 20:00, therefore, with the exception of vandalism/criminal damage incidents, the period between 11:01 and 20:00 was found to be the most resource intensive (see Figure 1).[Figure 1: A chart showing the time frames for incident classifications across the top ten addresses for all categories]When looking at the five categories individually, a similar pattern can be seen. For residential addresses 17:01-20:00 and 20:01-23:00 were the most demanding time frames, for statutory bodies 11:01-14:00 and 14:01-17:00 required the most resources, for retail addresses 14:01- 17:00 and 17:01 – 20:00 required the most resources, and young people’s services had a high demand within the time frame 11:01-14:00. Across these four address categories, the majority of incidents fall within one of the three resource intensive periods, with the only exception being the nightlife addresses which held its peak demand at 02:01-05:00 (see Figure 2).[Figure 2: A chart showing the mode time frames for incidents occurring for the 5 categories]Response CodingAcross all address categories, the response code (see Table III) given the most was response code 3 (n = 1173, 29.27%) and the response code that was given the least was response code 1 (n = 276, 6.89%). This suggests that the majority of police resources are being used on planned response operations (code 3), and the least demand comes from the need for emergency response (code 1).      Response codes given for each of the address category were also examined. Response code 2 was the most frequently used code for responding to incidents at residential addresses (n = 208, 37.55%), whilst response code 5 was the least used (n = 21, 3.79%). For statutory bodies, response code 4 was found to be the most widely used (n = 406, 33.97%) and response code 1 was the least used (n = 59, 4.94%). Overall this indicates that for statutory services, there is little demand for emergency responses and most issues are resolved through a telephone resolution. For the retail category, response code 3 was the most used (n = 355, 37.1%), closely followed by response code 2 (n = 34.38%), whilst response codes 1 (n = 49, 7.94%) and 5 (n = 47, 7.04%) were the least used. Response code 5 was found to be the most widely used to answer nightlife calls for service (n = 208, 28.3%), whilst response code 1 is again the least (n= 40, 5.44%). Response code 3 was used the most to address issues at the top ten young
people’s services addresses (n = 237, 41.87%) and response code 1 used the least (n = 25, 4.95%). Therefore, there is rarely need for immediate response for incidents occurring at young people’s services addresses, with five addresses not requiring any emergency responses within the year. The residential addresses had a greater amount of code 1 emergency responses allocated to incidents (n = 103, 41.8%) than any of the other categories, suggesting that the incidents occurring at residential properties require a more rapid response.Residential ProfilingOut of the top ten demanding residential addresses, one was located within an area of high deprivation, seven were located in areas of medium deprivation, and two were located in areas of low deprivation. All addresses were located in urban residential areas; however they were spread out across the city. Four properties were flats, three were semi-detached housing and three were terrace houses. The number of residents in these properties ranged between 1- 8 people.      On analysing the socio-demographic qualities of the families, it was found that 100% of the family members across all ten households were of ‘White – Northern European’ ethnicity. The age range of those who were connected to the top ten addresses was between 0- 84 years old with an average 38 years old. Three of the ten addresses had under 18 year olds in the family. Regarding employment status, twenty people (43%) were listed as being unemployed and four people (9%) were employed. Four people (9%) were retired, six (13%) were school students and the occupation of thirteen people (28%) was unknown. Although there were an equal number of males and females across the sample, in 75% of cases the person calling for service was a female.      All of the ten addresses included at least one family member that had been involved domestic violence incidents, alcohol or substance abuse, or had experienced mental health issues. Eight out of ten addresses include someone in the family with mental health issues, six addresses included someone with alcohol addictions or who regularly partakes in alcohol abuse, five of the ten addresses were associated with cases of domestic violence, and four addresses included someone with substance abuse issues.The average number of referrals across the addresses was 90, with an average of31 referrals per family, and an average of 20 referrals per person. Seven out of the ten addresses had been involved with other agencies (e.g. Ambulance Service, Lancashire NHS Trust, Social Services). From these 90 addresses only five had utilised an intervention (i.e. crisis team, child
protection conferences, Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conference referrals, Multi Agency Safeguarding Hub referrals, etc.).DiscussionThe current study took an evidence based approach to understand the demand on the police service in Lancashire Constabulary’s Central Division in order to inform Police decision making regarding allocation of police resources (Srinivasan, 2013). Whilst recorded crime has been found to be decreasing on a national scale over the past decade, demand on the police service has been maintained in other ways (College of Policing, 2015).      Overall, the majority of incidents that the police are being requested to deal with are non-traditional police business, and therefore require the use of skills such as mediation and social service, rather than police statutory powers. In support of previous literature, only 26.89% of the reported incidents from highly demanding addresses were traditional police business (Scott, 1981). In particular, welfare and nuisance incidents were found to demand the majority of police resources. This supports reports of an 11.5% increase of demand generated by public safety and welfare incidents in Lancashire, West Yorkshire and South Yorkshire (College of Policing, 2015). As these types of incidents are often not seen as traditional police work, this is a contraction of the Home Secretary and Home Office’s (n.d) view that the police should be used largely in a law enforcement capacity, and therefore the police may not be the most appropriate service to deal with them. However, it cannot be contested from the findings in this report that the role of the police service in England andWales is changing due to the shift in requirements and expectations (Srinivasan et al., 2013). If police officers are trained to become better equipped to deal with these high frequency, but low-level problems or offenses, potential benefits could include the reduction of further crime and increased officer environmental knowledge to improve future problem solving (Walker and Katz, 2005).      Furthermore, included in the majority of calls for service that were grouped as non- traditional police incidents were calls concerning disputes and domestic incidents and as such, could potentially escalate into a criminal offence and/or pose risk to the people involved without the presence of a police officer. Therefore, the extent to which a tiered policing arrangement could respond to these calls should be considered in light of the potential risk involved and threat of incident escalation as a result of the absence of sworn Police officers.      Supporting previous research, the geographical profiling of demanding residential properties found that people in areas of medium deprivation are most likely to be repeat callers      
for police assistance (Johnson and Rhodes, 2009). Those living in areas of low deprivation have less need for the police as, generally, less crime and disorder occurs within these areas. Those living in areas with high deprivation may be more likely to experience crime and disorder, but may be less likely to call the police. This effect may reflect the commonality of these events, reduced collective efficacy, or may reflect the distrust of the police and strained police-community relations in these neighbourhoods (Weisburd and Eck, 2004). Therefore, those living in areas of medium deprivation tend to experience a moderate level of crime and disorder but still need the problems to be addressed by authorities, so are the most likely to call for service. The type of housing of the top ten addresses fell within three categories: flat, semi- detached and terrace. Whilst this could indicate relationships between housing types and cause to call the police, this effect may more simply reflect the area in which the addresses are situated.      Despite a void of cited links between employment status and service demand in previous literature, the current study found that 43% of family members within the top ten demanding residential addresses were unemployed, making unemployed people the single largest group likely to demand resources. All ten of these households were associated with previous issues (i.e. mental health issues, incidents of domestic violence, or alcohol and/or substance abuse); however, only seven had previously received other agency involvement and five had received interventions aimed to improve their family situation. This indicates that there is potential for agencies to work together more effectively with certain families at an earlier stage, when problems are first visible in order to attempt to prevent future high demand.Practical ImplicationsThese results indicate that the police could potentially reduce the demand for service by enhancing work within two key areas; (i) early intervention and, (ii)partnership working . Firstly, the majority of the residential repeat callers within this study were identified to have been struggling with a range of problems for some time. This highlights an area for early intervention to take place with children who show signs of behavioural problems and with those who start to display mental health issues, alcoholic dependencies or substance abuse before they reach crisis point and become high resource consumers. This has become a key aim of Lancashire’s Early Action Team. Early Action is a multi-agency intervention at the earliest opportunity, delivering sustained solutions to individual and family problems, which is hoped to ultimately build social resilience and create thriving communities. Early Action applies to both children and adults and aims to reduce vulnerability, improve health and wellbeing,
prevent crime and reduce demand across all public services, preventing problems rather than responding to them.      Secondly, as the majority incidents were not traditional police business, a large portion of the current workload could be more appropriately dealt with by other agencies or in partnership with other agencies. Not only could this improve incident resolution time, service and care for the caller, the demand on the police would be significantly reduced and resources could be more appropriately deployed to address traditional police business. For instance, co- responding police-mental health programs that are used to respond to ‘emotionally disturbed persons in the community’ have been found to facilitate strong community services partnerships and reduced justice system demands (Shapiro et al., 2014). In addition, police and mental-health clinician emergency response partnerships have been found to generate service improvements such as more efficient service transition, reduced police officer ‘down time’, and improved interagency knowledge transfer (McKenna, Furness, Oaks and Brown, 2015).      Furthermore, early interventions and partnerships should focus on promoting co- production. Co-production involves the development of an equal and reciprocal relationship between the service provider and service user in recognition that the experiences of those who use the services can be utilised to improve it (Clark, 2015). Co-production initiatives have been utilised successfully within the mental healthcare system, i.e. the Lambeth Living Well Collaborative (Innovation Unit, n.d). In order to promote co-production within Lancashire Constabulary, a new Early Action Support Volunteer role has been created for members of the public in which volunteers will provide support and mentoring services for individuals and families who have low to moderate needs and no longer require or receive support from agencies.Limitations and future researchOne limitation of this research is that the initial data search was based upon the number of incidents linked to addresses rather than the families reporting the incidents. As a result, the data might not include all calls for service from the families identified, or certain families that have high demand for services may not have been identified due to property relocation during 2013. In addition, the data in this study only included calls which were coded as incidents. There were approximately 700,000 calls received in Lancashire in 2013 which were classed as ‘non-incidents’ and these were not included in the current data set. Furthermore, this research is limited to incidents occurring only during 2013 and in the one specific area (Central Division). Future research could examine if the same families are continuing to demand a large
portion of police resources over a number of years in order to determine the effectiveness of any implemented interventions. This research does have the potential to be replicated across the different operating divisions with Lancashire Constabulary to examine if these themes are prevalent across the county. Finally, these results are based on quantitative data only and therefore lack full exploration of any contextual factors that may have impacted the findings. Future research should utilise qualitative data based on real-world examples (i.e. call for service logs), to advance understanding of the topic and any contributing factors.ConclusionsThe requirements and expectations of the police are constantly changing and it is important that the police stay relevant by addressing current demands. In order to efficiently achieve this, the demand profile for Lancashire should be continuously monitored to ensure services fit this demand. This research found that the majority of incidents being dealt with by the police within Lancashire Constabulary’s Central Division are not inherently traditional police work. Furthermore, incidents most typically associated with traditional police work were found to occur the least in this sample. This suggests that reducing demand and addressing key issues requires increased involvement with other agencies to enable the most appropriate and effective response regarding calls for service. This multi-agency early response could also free resources and reduce overall costs. Furthering the results of this study, Lancashire Constabulary are currently engaged in a large funded project around transforming Public Services within Lancashire by engaging with a range of public services who will collectively provide the most appropriate support, at the earliest point possible in that individuals life. Early identification and appropriate use of interventions are key to reduce the likelihood of individuals escalating to crisis point.ReferencesBichler, G., Schmerler, K. and Enriquez, J. (2013), "Curbing nuisance motels: an evaluation of police as place regulators", Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, Vol. 36 No. 2, pp. 437-462.
Caudill, J.W., Getty, R.., Smith, R., Patten, R. and Trulson, C.R. (2013), “Discouraging window breakers: the lagged effects of police activity on crime”, Journal of Criminal Justice, Vol. 41 No. 1, pp. 18-23.Clark, M. (2015), “Co-production in mental healthcare”, Mental Health Review Journal, Vol.20 No. 4.Clark, R.V. and Weisburd, D. (1994), “Diffusion of crime control benefits: Observations on the reverse of displacement”, in Clark, R.V. (Ed.), Crime Prevention Studies, Criminal Justice Press, Monsey, NY, pp. 165-183.College of Policing (2015), “College of policing analysis: estimating demand on the police service”, available at: http://www.college.police.uk/documents/demand_report_21_1_15.pdf (accessed 09March 2015).Edwards, M.J., Bassett, G., Sinden, L. and Fothergill, R.T. (2014), “Frequent callers to the ambulance service: patient profiling and impact of case management on patient utilisation of the ambulance service”, Emergency Medicine Journal, Vol. 0, pp. 1-5, available at: http://emj.bmj.com/content/early/2014/10/13/emermed-2013- 203496.full.pdf+html (accessed 27 January 2015).Fleming, J. and Grabosky, P. (2009), “Managing the demand for police services, or how to control an insatiable appetite”, Policing, Vol. 3 No. 3, pp. 281-291.Hill, B. and Paynich, R. (2014), Fundamentals of Crime Mapping, 2nd ed, Jones and Bartlett Learning, Burlington, Massachusetts.HMIC. (2012), “Taking time for crime: A study of how police officers prevent crime in the field”, available at: http://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmic/media/taking-time- for-crime.pdf (accessed 20 November 2015).HMIC. (2013), “Lancashire Constabulary’s response to the funding challenge”, available at: http://www.hmic.gov.uk/media/lancashire-response-to-the-funding-challenge.pdf (accessed 27 January 2015).
Home Office. (n.d), “Have you got what it takes? Tackling troubled families”, available at https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/117408/tackling-troubled-families.pdf (accessed 27 January 2015).Innovation Unit. (n.d.), Co-production in mental Health, [online], available at: http://innovationunit.org/our-projects/projects/co-production-mental-health (accessed 20 November 2015).Health and Social Care Information Centre, (2014) “Inpatients Formally Detained in Hospitals Under the Mental Health Act 1983 and Patients Subject to Supervised Community Treatment, England - 2013-2014, Annual figures”, available at: http://www.hscic.gov.uk/catalogue/PUB15812 (accessed 09 March 2015).Johnson, R.R. and Rhodes, T.N. (2009), “Urban and small town comparison of citizen demand for police services”, International Journal of Police Science & Management, Vol. 11 No. 1, pp. 27-38.Karn, J. (2013), Policing and Crime Reduction: The evidence and its implications for practice, The Police Foundation, London.Lancashire Constabulary, (2016) About Us, [online], available at: http://www.lancashire.police.uk/about-us (accessed 12 January 2016).McKenna, B., Furness, T., Oaks, J. and Brown, S. (2015), “Police and mental health clinician partnership in response to mental health crisis: A qualitative study”, International Journal of Mental Health Nursing, Vol. 24 No. 5, pp. 386-393.Ratcliffe, J.H., Taniguchi, T., Groff, E.R. and Wood, J.D. (2011), “The Philadelphia foot patrol experiment: a randomized controlled trial of police patrol effectiveness in violent crime hotspots”, Criminology, Vol. 49 No. 3, pp. 795-831.Sampson, R.J., Raudenbush, S.W. and Earls, F. (1997), “Neighbourhoods and Violent Crime: A Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy”, Science, Vol. 277, pp. 918-924.Scott, E.J. (1981), Calls for Service – Citizen Demand and Initial Police Response, National Institute of Justice, Washington, DC.
Shapiro, G.K., Cusi, A., Kirst, M., O’Camp, P., Nakhost, A., and Stergiopoulos, V. (2014), “Co-responding police-mental health programs: A review”, Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research, Vol. 42 No. 5, pp. 1-15.Sherman, L.W. and Weisburd, D. (1995), “General deterrent effects of Police patrol in crime “hot spots”: A randomized, controlled trial”, Justice Quarterly, Vol. 12 No. 4, pp.625-648.Srinivasan, S., Sorrell, T.P., Brooks, J.P., Edwards, D.J. and McDougle, R.D. (2013), "Workforce assessment method for an urban police department ", Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, Vol. 36 No. 4, pp. 702- 718.Taylor Griffiths, C., Pollard, N. and Stamatakis, T. (2014), “Assessing the effectiveness and efficiency of a police service: the analytics of operational reviews”, Police Practice and Research, working paper, Australian Institute of Police Management, Manly, 27 January.Vinod Kumar, T.K. (2014),"Differing services, rising expectations, and greater demands", Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, Vol. 37 No. 1, pp. 170-189.Walker, S. and Katz, C.M. (2005). The police in America: An introduction, McGraw Hill, Boston.Weisburd, D. and Braga, A.A. (2006), “Hot spots policing as a model for police innovation”, in Weisburd, D. and Braga, A.A. (Eds.), Police Innovation. Contrasting Perspectives, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 225-244.Weisburd, D. and Eck, J.E. (2004), “What can police do to reduce crime, disorder and fear?”,The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 593 No. 1,pp. 42-65.Wilcox, P. and Eck, J.E. (2011), “Criminology of the unpopular: implications for policy aimed at payday lending facilities”, Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 10 No. 2, pp. 473-482.
Wilson, J.M. (2012), "Articulating the dynamic police staffing challenge", Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, Vol. 35 No. 2, pp. 327- 355.Wilson, J. and Kelling, G. (1982), “Broken Windows”, Atlantic Monthly, Vol. 249 No. 3, pp.29-38.Worrall, J.L. and Kovandzic, T.V. (2010), “Police levels and crime rates: an instrumental variables approach”, Social Science Research, Vol. 39 No. 3, pp. 506-516.Figure 1: A chart showing the time frames for incident classifications across the top ten addresses for all categories
Figure 2: A chart showing the mode time frames for incidents occurring for the 5 categories
Category	DescriptionResidential	Residential addresses excluding children’s homes and residential care homes.Statutory Bodies	NHS facilities, prisons, probation, councilRetail	Supermarkets, clothing stores, convenience stores, convenience food outlets, department storesNightlife	Bars, clubs and pubs in the area Young People’s Services	Schools and children’s homesTable II. Incident classifications and descriptions.Incident classification	Description Acquisitive (household)	Burglary Acquisitive (person)	Theft, robberyConditions	Bail conditions, breach of bail/curfew/license, abscondedDisputes	Civil disputes, personalNuisance	Nuisance, hoax calls, abandoned calls, suspicious circumstancesVandalism/Criminal damage	Criminal damage, vandalism, vehicle crime, public order,arsonViolence against the person	Assault, wounding, ABH, GBH, homicide Sexual offences	Sexual offences, rapeDomestic incidents	Domestic incidentsWelfare	Concern for safety, collapse/illness/injury, missing from home, truancyOther	Any other classification not included previously, i.e. lost/recovered property, police generated activity and messages
Code	Grade	Description
1 Emergency Response2 Priority Response3 Planned Response4 Telephone Resolution5 Police Report Only
An incident where there is likely to be a risk of danger to life; use/immediate threat of use of violence; serious injury to a person; serious damage to property. Attendance usually within 15 minutes.A degree of importance or urgency associated with the initial police action but an emergency response is not required.Attendance usually within 1 hour.Response time is not critical in apprehending offenders so response given by a member of the Neighbourhood Police Teams, an appointment at a fixed surgery or an appointment by a scheduled car. Attendance usually within 48 hours, or at an agreed time.Resolution sorted at first contact. Does not require any further intervention outside the Communications Centre other than the passing of information or the recording of minor crimes.Where public assistance is not required, but an incident has occurred and a report needs to be written.

Table IV. Incident classification for all categories profiledIncident classificationn% of totalincidentsMSDMdnOther113628.3523.1847.0912Welfare75618.8716.0933.024Nuisance73418.3215.2914.3512.5Acquisitive (person)66716.6517.5522.47Disputes2095.224.985.463Violence against the person2035.075.645.174.5Vandalism/criminal damage972.422.852.022Domestic incidents952.375.289.221.5Conditions8024.717.272Sexual offences200.51.671.721Acquisitive (household)100.251.430.791
Table V. Incident classification for individual address categoriesIncident classificationCategoriesResidential addressesStatutory bodiesRetail addressesNightlife addressesYoung people’s servicesn (%)n (%)n (%)n (%)n (%)Other74 (13.36)565 (47.28)192 (20.06)200 (28.3)105 (18.55)Welfare210 (37.91245 (20.5)24 (2.51)46 (6.26)231 (40.81)Nuisance97 (17.51)178 (14.9)166 (17.35)208 (28.3)85 (15.02)Acquisitive (person)8 (1.44)51 (4.27)475 (49.63)105 (14.29)28 (4.95)Disputes55 (9.93)37 (3.1)57 (5.96)40 (5.44)20 (3.53)Violence against the person15 (2.71)47 (3.93)14 (1.46)101 (13.74)26 (4.59)Vandalism/criminal damage13 (2.35)22 (1.84)21 (2.19)22 (2.99)19 (3.36)Domestic incidents76 (13.72)7 (0.59)5 (0.52)5 (0.82)2 (0.35)Conditions4 (0.72)26 (2.18)1 (0.1)6 (0.82)14 (7.6)Sexual offences2 (0.36)13 (1.09)1 (0.1)1 (0.1)3 (0.53)Acquisitive (household)0 (0)4 (0.33)1 (0.1)1 (0.1)4 (0.71)
MenuHome Crime, justice and law  Domestic abuseGuidanceDomestic abuse: how to get helpFind out how to get help if you or someone you know is a victim of domestic abuse.From: Home O?cePublished 5 October 2018Last updated 21 March 2025 — See all updatesRelated contentDefinition of domestic violence and abuse: g uide for local areasApply for the migrant victims of domestic abuse concessionDomestic Abuse Act 2021Domestic abuse: recognise the signs Indefinite leave to remain or enter(  domestic violence or abuse)Translated guidanceIf English is not your first language, information has been translated into several languages as well as an easy read version.Women’s Aid also have g uidance documents on domestic abuse and coronavirus available in a number of languages for victims, family and friends, and community members of those a?ected.If you are deaf, you can access a British Sign Lang uage video that explains how to get help if you or someone you know is a victim of domestic abuse.Recognise domestic abuseDoes your partner, ex-partner or someone you live with: cut you o? from family and friends and intentionally isolate you?  bully, threaten, or control you? take control of your finances? monitor or limit your use of technology?  physically and/or sexually abuse you?Domestic abuse is not always physical violence. It can also include: coercive control and ‘gaslighting’  economic abuse online abuse threats and intimidation  emotional abuse sexual abuseAnyone can be a victim of domestic abuse, regardless of gender, age, ethnicity, religion, socio-economic status, sexuality or background.If you believe that you are a victim of domestic abuse, there are signs that you can look out for including: being withdrawn, or being isolated from your family and friends  having bruises, burns or bite marks on you having your finances controlled, or not being given enough to buy food, medication or pay bills not being allowed to leave your house, or stopped from going to college or work having your internet or social media use monitored, or someone else reading your texts, emails or letters being repeatedly belittled, put down or told you are worthless  being pressured into sex or sexual contact being told that abuse is your fault, or that you’re overreacting See more signs to look for.Get help and supportAll forms of domestic abuse are not acceptable in any situation.If you’re experiencing domestic abuse and feel frightened of, or controlled by, a partner, an ex-partner or family member, it’s important to remember that it’s not your fault and there is no shame in seeking help.It may seem like a di?cult step to take, but there is support available and #YouAreNot Alone.Free, confidential support and advice is available to victims and their concerned family members or friends, 24 hours a day.Nation Helpline	Contact
England Refug e’s National Domestic Abuse HelplineNorthern Domestic and Sexual Abuse
0808 2000 247Online live chat Web form0808 802 1414
Ireland
Helpline
Online live chat help@dsahelpline.org
Scotland Domestic Abuse and Forced Marriage HelplineWales Live Fear Free WelshGovernment funded, 24 hour, 365 day service with
0800 027 1234Online live chat helpline@sdafmh.org.uk0808 80 10 100Online live chat Text
specialists who make referrals info@livefearfreehelpline.wales and link to other services andadvice.
UK-wide The Men’s Advice Line run by Respect is a confidential helpline specifically for male victims.
0808 801 0327info@mensadviceline.org.uk
Bright Sky appBright Sky is a mobile app and website for anyone experiencing domestic abuse, or who is worried about someone else.The app can be downloaded for free from the app stores. Only download the app if it is safe for you to do so and if you are sure that your phone isn’t being monitored.Women’s Aid local support services directoryWomen’s Aid have a  directory of domestic abuse support services across the UK.If you are experiencing domestic abuse or are worried about friends or family, you can access the Women’s Aid live chat service 7 days a week, 10am to 6pm.helpline@womensaid.org.ukVictim SupportVictim Support run these services for victims and survivors of any abuse or crime, regardless of when it occurred or if the crime was reported to the police: free, independent and confidential 24/7 Supportline 08 08 16 89 111  live chat service My Support Space - free online resourceSafe SpacesSafes Spaces are safe, confidential rooms where victims can take some time to reflect, access information on specialist support services or call friends or family.Safe Spaces are also available in Boots, Morrisons, Superdrug and Well pharmacies, TSB banks and independent pharmacies across the UK.Find your nearest Safe Space.Check whether someone has an abusive pastIf you are concerned that a new, former or existing partner has an abusive past you can ask the police to check under the Domestic Violence Disclosure Scheme (also known as ‘Clare’s Law’). This is your ‘right to ask’. If records show that you may be at risk of domestic abuse, the police will consider disclosing the information. A disclosure can be made if it is legal, proportionate and necessary to do so.If you are concerned about a friend or family member, you can apply for a disclosure on behalf of someone you know.You can make a request to the police for information about a person’s previous violent o?ending in person at the police station or elsewhere, by telephone, by email, online or as part of a police investigation. Support agencies and services can also help you ask the police about this.Get a court order to protect you or your childIf you’re a victim of domestic abuse you can apply for a court order or injunction to protect yourself or your child from: your current or previous partner  a family member someone you currently or previously lived with This is called a non-molestation or occupation order. You can apply online, by email or by post.Get a non-molestation or occupation order if you’ve been the victim of domestic abuse.Domestic abuse protection ordersA domestic abuse protection order (DAPO) can: stop someone coming to or near your home  decide who can stay or return to your home order the person to attend a behavioural change programme order the person to wear an electronic tag to check they’re keeping to the conditions of the orderThere are no court fees for applying.You can only apply for a DAPO if the person you need protection from lives in one of the following areas: Hartlepool, Middlesbrough, Redcar and Cleveland and Stockton-on-Tees  Greater Manchester the London boroughs of Croydon, Bromley or Sutton Apply for a domestic abuse protection order.Support someone you knowIf you are worried that a friend, neighbour or loved one is a victim of domestic abuse, you can call the National Domestic Abuse Helpline for free and confidential advice, 24 hours a day on 0808 2000 247.Or you can contact the other support services listed on this page.Seeking help for someone you know can be challenging but #YouAreNotalone. Domestic abuse advisers will o?er confidential, non- judgemental information and advice on the options available to you helping you to keep safe and make informed choices.If you believe there is an immediate risk of harm to someone, or it is an emergency, you should always call 999.If someone confides in you, there is more information on how to support a friend who is being abused.If you are an employerLet your employees know that if they are facing domestic abuse you want to help them to get help. Stay in regular contact with employees you know, or fear, may be facing abuse and if you lose contact with them, take swift action to visit them. If you believe there is an immediate risk of harm to someone, or it is an emergency, always call 999.Encourage employees to look out for others who may be facing domestic abuse and signpost them to support. Your sta? may also be worried about their own abusive behaviour at this time. There is no excuse for domestic abuse, no matter what stresses you are under and support is available.Hestia’s Respond to Abuse Advice Line is a free resource for employers. Employers can call 020 3879 3695 Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm, or email adviceline.eb@hestia.org for support, guidance or information about domestic abuse and how to support employees and colleagues experiencing domestic abuse.The  Employers’ Initiative on Domestic Abuse website provides resources to support employers including an employers’ toolkit.If you are a professional working in the domestic abuse sectorSafeLives provides guidance and support to professionals and those working in the domestic abuse sector, as well as additional advice for those at risk.Find additional information and supportIf you want to access help specifically to cater to your background and needs or want support and help for specific types of abuse there are several organisations that can help - see Domestic abuse: specialist sources of support.You can also find additional information and support here on topics including:  help for children and young people welfare benefits and housing advice help if you don’t have settled status in the UK  support for specific types of abuseGet help if you think you might be an abuserIf you are concerned about your behaviour or the behaviour of someone you know, there is support available.The  Respect Phoneline is an anonymous and confidential helpline for men and women who are abusing their partners and families. It is open Monday to Friday 9am to 8pm. The helpline also takes calls from partners or ex-partners, friends and relatives who are concerned about perpetrators.A webchat service is available Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays from 10am to 11am and from 3pm to 4pm.Telephone: 0808 802 4040How to call the police when you can’t speakIf you are in danger and unable to talk on the phone, call 999 and listen to the questions from the operator and, if you can, respond by coughing or tapping on the handset.Call 999 from a mobileIf prompted, press 55 to Make Yourself Heard and this will transfer your call to the police. Pressing 55 only works on mobiles and does not allow police to track your location.Call 999 from a landlineIf the operator can only hear background noise and cannot decide whether an emergency service is needed, you will be connected to a police call handler.If you replace the handset, the landline may remain connected for 45 seconds in case you pick up again.When 999 calls are made from landlines, information about your location should be automatically available to the call handlers to help provide a response.If you are deaf or can’t use a phoneYou can register with the emergencySMS. Text REGISTER to 999. You will get a text which tells you what to do next. Do this when it is safe so you can text when you are in danger.Published 5 October 2018Last updated 21 March 2025 + show all updatesExplore the topicDomestic abuseViolence against women and girlsServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Central Lancashire Online Knowledge (CLoK)TitleCalls for Police Service: Understanding the demand profile and the UK policeresponseTypeArticleURLhttps://clok.uclan.ac.uk/15638/DOIhttps://doi.org/10.1177/0032258X16671032Date2016CitationBoulton, Laura, McManus, Michelle Ann, Metcalfe, L., Brian, David John and Dawson, I (2016) Calls for Police Service: Understanding the demand profile and the UK police response. The Police Journal: Theory, Practice andPrinciples. ISSN 0032-258XCreatorsBoulton, Laura, McManus, Michelle Ann, Metcalfe, L., Brian, David John andDawson, IIt is advisable to refer to the publisher’s version if you intend to cite from the work. https://doi.org/10.1177/0032258X16671032For information about Research at UCLan please go to http://www.uclan.ac.uk/research/All outputs in CLoK are protected by Intellectual Property Rights law, including Copyright law. Copyright, IPR and Moral Rights for the works on this site are retained by the individual authors and/or other copyright owners. Terms and conditions for use of this material are defined in the http://clok.uclan.ac.uk/policies/
Calls for Police Service: Understanding the demand profile and the UK police response.Dr. Laura BoultonPolicing and Criminal Investigation, School of Forensic and Applied Science, University of Central Lancashire, Preston, PR1 2HE, email: lboulton1@uclan.ac.uk, tel: 00 44 (0)1772 894386Dr. Michelle McManus1Policing and Criminal Investigation, School of Forensic and Applied Science, University of Central Lancashire, Preston, PR1 2HE, email: mamcmanus@uclan.ac.uk, tel: 00 44 (0)1772 894154Lauren MetcalfePolicing and Criminal Investigation, School of Forensic and Applied Science, University of Central Lancashire, Preston, PR1 2HE, email: LMetcalfe@uclan.ac.ukDavid BrianPolicing and Criminal Investigation, School of Forensic and Applied Science, University of Central Lancashire, Preston, PR1 2HE, email : djbrian@uclan.ac.uk, tel: 00 44 (0) 1772893539Ian DawsonT/Superintendent – Head of Corporate Development & Futures, HQ Operations, Lancashire Constabulary | Preston PR4 5SB, email: ian.dawson@lancashire.pnn.police.ukTel: 00 44 (0) 1772 4126131 Corresponding author
Author BiographiesDr. Laura BoultonLaura is a Lecturer in Policing at University of Central Lancashire (UCLan). She completed her PhD in 2014 exploring how expertise, cognitive executive functioning, neuropsychology and human factors influence the decision making of Authorised Firearms Officers in order to develop a model of decision making during armed confrontations. Providing an evidence base that can be practically utilised by Police practitioners to impact change in practice was the underlying motivation for this research. Throughout her PhD she worked in collaboration with Merseyside Police, North West Ambulance Service and Merseyside Fire and Rescue Service. She now lectures on Master’s Degree programmes at UCLAN.Dr. Michelle McManusSenior Lecturer at University of Central Lancashire (UCLan). Completed her PhD in 2012 exploring risk factors for child sexual abuse within indecent image of children offending. Her doctoral research assisted with the creation of KIRAT (Kent Internet Risk Assessment Tool), a risk management tool for use by the police to assess the risk of contact abuse in those individuals accessing indecent images of children. This was rolled out for national use by CEOP in 2012. Due to the number of domestic abuse research projects completed with various constabularies across the UK, Dr. McManus sits on various groups such as: College of Policing Domestic Abuse Risk Assessment Task Force Group, Homicide Working Group Child Death Subgroup and Lancashire Evidenced Based Research Group. She is also Director of Studies for 3 PhD students exploring various aspects of Domestic Abuse.Lauren MetcalfeHaving studied in the field of policing for the past 7 years, Lauren has enthusiastically worked to undertake and promote Evidence Based Policing research. Lauren is currently submitting her PhD thesis surrounding the nature of gang related gun crime in Preston, Lancashire; assessing the complexities of the issue, profiling the individuals involved and working towards more effective preventative measures for the future. With the intention for the project having real world impact, she has collaborated with various organisations throughout the PhD, including Lancashire Constabulary and Lancashire Probation Service, to implement projects designed to assist in deterring such types of crime.
David BrianDave is a Lecturer at the University of Central Lancashire (UCLan). Dave was a police officer for 30years reaching the Rank of Detective Superintendent. He now lectures on Master’s Degree programmes at UCLAN and as an invited speaker at other universities. Dave is currently studying for a Professional Doctorate in Elite Performance and is a researcher in the field of policing and acts a supervisor to a number of Phd students undertaking research into multi agency working, domestic abuse, the protection of vulnerable people and early action, sexual consent and public engagement with police services.Ian DawsonIan is a Temporary Superintendent in Lancashire Constabulary. He has been a Police Officer for 23 years and developed the Constabulary’s approach to Evidence Based Policing which over the last 5 years has developed and delivered over 40 research projects, the majority of which have been in partnership with UCLan. As Head of Corporate Development and Futures Ian now leads on Evidence Based Policing for the Constabulary. The Constabulary also collaborates as part of Consortiums with Liverpool University, the N8 group of Universities and the Open University and has supported funding awards in excess of £6 million for Policing research. Ian has also acquired European Union funding for Domestic Abuse victim research. He is currently studying for a M.St. in Criminology and Police Management at Cambridge University
AbstractPurpose – The purpose of this research paper is to identify and understand the demand profile of a division of Lancashire Police Constabulary in order to assist Police administrators in the evaluation of demand and understanding of Policing response.Design/methodology/approach – Police data records regarding all offences within the Central Division of Lancashire Police Constabulary over the year of 2013 were examined. Descriptive statistics were used to identify the top ten demand addresses in five categories (residential, statutory bodies, retail, nightlife, and young people’s services), and the incident classifications, time frames and response codes that were most associated with these addresses. Further content analysis was conducted on the top ten residential addresses in order to identify specific characteristics of residential demand.Findings - The majority of Lancashire Constabulary resources are being spent dealing with non-traditional police demand. The most demanding residents were found to have one or more of the following properties; (i) to be of white – Northern European origin, (ii) to be unemployed, (iii) to be associated with mental health issues, domestic violence incidents or substance abuse, and (iv) to have previously had other agency involvement.Practical Implications - These results indicate that the police could potentially reduce the demand for service by enhancing work within two key areas; partnership working and early intervention.Originality/value – In this time of austerity and police budget cuts, it is important to understand the demand on the UK police service in an attempt to reduce it.Keywords – UK; police; mixed methods; demand; resource management; partnership working; early intervention.Paper type – Research paper
IntroductionAs a result of cuts to the police funding budget (HMIC, 2013), police administrators need to achieve a balance between reducing cost and maintenance of service quality whilst meeting service demands (Taylor Griffiths et al., 2014). Achieving such a balance is challenged by the polices expanding responsibilities, i.e. new roles in community policing, security, and emerging crimes such as cyber enabled crime, (College of Policing, 2015). Therefore, in order to strike an appropriate balance between competing priorities and tight budget constraints, police forces are seeking to identify major resource consumers in order to understand how they can be addressed to reduce the strain on the service.      Traditionally, reported crime statistics have served as a basis for police resource management analyses as a measure of workload (Wilson, 2012). However recently, the College of Policing (2015) have reported that forces feel that the use of reported crime statistics in this way is inadequate: such statistics only reflect what is commonly referred to as ‘traditional police business’ (typically associated with criminal offences and could rarely be solved by other agencies) and fail to consider that the ever increasing level of ‘non-traditional police business’ being dealt with by officers on a daily basis is also likely affect demand (Wilson, 2012). Despite evidence to suggest that crime has been decreasing since 1995 and that calls for police service received through the emergency ‘999’ number has decreased by 23% since their peak in 2006/7, there is a widespread perception across UK forces that the demand on officers and staff has been, at least, maintained (College of Policing, 2015). This effect may reflect a combination of the increase in certain serious and complex crime types (i.e. violence against the person, shoplifting, sexual offense, fraud and public order), the high number of convictions (nearly 1 million) and penalty notices (34,000) issued for non-notifiable offences, and the 14% (35,000) reduction in Police officers and staff in 2014 (College of Policing, 2015). Nonetheless, there have been few empirical studies that can fully account for and describe the current public demand profile on the UK police service.      Previous research that has examined citizen demand for police services has typically found that the majority of police calls (between 80% - 90%) were not directly related to crime prevention or control, but instead involved resolving disputes, noncriminal behaviour complaints and requesting public service assistance (Hill and Paynich, 2014; Johnson and Rhodes, 2009). However, whilst this statistic is strongly supported, it is important to consider the context of these calls. Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of the Constabulary (2012) state that      
despite not currently being classed as crime fighting activity, at least 80% of the officers time is spent dealing with incidents that involve protecting people from becoming victims of crime or to prevent crimes occurring.      Supporting this, the College of Policing (2015) have recently reported that the demand generated by public safety and welfare incidents is increasing, and within some forces represents the largest number of reported incidents. This suggests that there have been significant changes in the basic focus of policing from conventional reactive policing (i.e. crime detection and control, order maintenance, registering and investigating crime, patrolling and responding to emergency calls) to proactive community policing (HMIC, 2012; Vinod Kumar, 2014). Based on the theoretical framework of the Broken Windows theory (Wilson and Kelling, 1982), community policing seeks to address minor offences in order to prevent more serious offences and violent crime occurring (Srinivasan et al., 2013).      A preventative community policing approach is said to be critical because it reduces crime and the demands that go with it (HMIC, 2012). However, whilst reduced rates of property crime (Caudill et al., 2013) and violent crime (Ratcliffe et al., 2011) provides evidence to support the prioritisation of proactive community policing (Worrall and Kovandzic, 2010), doing so also requires additional police resources at a greater cost (College of Policing, 2015Vinod Kumar, 2014).Repeat and/or demanding callersThe ‘iron law of troublesome places’ claims that a small proportion of locations are likely to account for the majority of reported incidents of crime and disorder (Bichler et al., 2013; Wilcox and Eck, 2011). For instance, a minority of patients have been found to account for the majority of calls for the ambulance service (Edwards et al., 2014). Similarly, some ‘troubled families’ who often have many generations displaying the same problems, may require more resources than others (Home Office, n.d). Repeat and/or demanding callers can place a significant burden on emergency services in general; both in terms of time and financial resources, and many factors can influence how people interact with the police in particular. For example, community differences can strongly impact police resource requirements with urban settings associated with more public demand that rural policing (Johnson and Rhodes, 2009; Taylor Griffiths et al., 2014), with this further linked to social deprivation, low collective efficacy and cohesion (Sampson et al., 1997)      Personal characteristics may also influence whether a person is likely to be a repeat caller. Key areas have been found to be those associated with alcohol/drugs and those with      
mental health issues. A recent UK report made by the College of Policing (2015) estimates that that mental health issues account for at least 20% of police time. This pattern suggests that dealing with individuals with mental health issues could be posing a considerable and increasing demand on police resources internationally (College of Policing, 2015; Health and Social Care Information Centre, 2014).Demand ManagementAs the police strive to meet the demands of their expanding roles and an increasingly expectant public (Fleming and Grabosky, 2009), there are a few ways in which the police aim to manage the demand on their service, including grading incidents appropriately to prioritise tasks, and using reviews to identify high demand areas in order to implement preventative measures to reduce reoccurring problems. The ‘troubled families’ programme, which involves intensive work with particularly resource demanding families, is a prime example of this. The government’s ‘troubled families’ programme has been found to reduce offending and antisocial behaviour and thus, reduce the demand on the police (Home Office, n.d).      Targeted policing can be seen as an effective tool for curbing demand by concentrating resources on specific crimes, criminals, victims and areas that are prone to cause high demand before calls for assistance occur (Karn, 2013). ‘Hot spot’ policing involves deploying more patrol resources at ‘hot spots’ defined as “small clusters of addresses with frequent hard crime calls as well as substantial soft crime calls for service” (Sherman and Weisburd, 1995, p. 630;). Similarly, problem orientated policing focusses on targeting strategies to specifically identified problems (Weisburd and Eck, 2004). Generally, studies show that increases of police presence in places where crime is more concentrated results in significant reductions in crime calls (Weisburd and Braga, 2006). In addition, this effect has been found to have a wider impact, as evidence indicates spatial diffusion benefits to the areas surrounding the policing intervention (Clark and Weisburd, 1994).Aims and Objectives of the Current StudyAs a result of police budget cuts and reduced staffing, it is important to take an evidence based approach to understand the demand on the police service in an attempt to optimise the use of resources (Srinivasan, 2013; Taylor Griffiths et al., 2014). It appears that the majority of calls to the police involve issues that are not inherently traditional police business (Hill and Paynich, 2014). However, this is based on results from dated or non-British based studies. Furthermore,
although it appears that some repeat callers hold specific traits, these are only loosely speculated at this stage. There are two key objectives to this research;(i) To give an overview of where the highest public demand for police resources in Lancashire Constabulary’s Central Division has come from; and(ii) To profile the most demanding addresses in this area in order to understand why these particular households/families have such a high demand for police services.Through increased understanding of who constitutes the main consumers of police resources and the reasons behind why there is such a demand from certain addresses, the police and their partner agencies will be more informed to better manage these high resource consumers, thus reducing the demand on the force (College of Policing, 2015).MethodologyData and Research ApproachLancashire Constabulary commissioned this research to identify and understand the demand profile across their Central Division. Lancashire County has an estimated population of nearly1.5 million with a rich diversity of communities, and Lancashire Constabulary covers 2,000 square miles and has 2889 Police officers and 1920 Police staff (Lancashire Constabulary, 2016). For this purpose, data was obtained from Lancashire Constabulary data warehouses. Raw data was extracted from Command and Control using a search criteria of all calls for service within the Central Division over the year of 2013 (01/01/13 – 31/12/13). This search resulted in 63,430 records being attained. These were then compiled into addresses and ordered according to the number of records for each address so that the top users could be identified. The top ten addresses for residential properties were compiled as were non-residential addresses within the following categories (see Table I). The second stage of data collection involved obtaining the details of those who were associated with the top ten residential addresses.[Table I. Property categories]AnalysisDescriptive results were calculated and analysed using total counts (n), percentages and appropriate measures of central tendency. Firstly, the top ten consumers within each of the five categories (see Table I) were examined in terms of; (i) incident classifications (see Table II),
(ii) the time frames these are occurring, and (iii) the response codes that were allocated to these incidents (see Table III).[Table II. Incident classifications and descriptions] [Table III. Response code grades and descriptions]Lastly, a content analysis was conducted on residential household and family characteristics. The profiling of residential addresses considered their local profiles to obtain key characteristics and warning markers. Individual incident logs were also examined to gain an understanding about the reasons why there was such demand from each address during the year.Results / FindingsThe top ten statutory bodies have the most incidents calling for police service (30%) compared with the top ten in the other address categories. This is followed by those in the retail category (24%) and nightlife (18%), with young people’s services and residential requiring the least resources (14% of the total each).Incident ClassificationThe majority of all reported incidents fell under the classification of ‘other’ (n = 1136, 28.35%) (see Table IV). For the coded classifications, the biggest demand was from welfare (n = 756, 18.87%), nuisance (n = 734, 18.32%), and acquisitive person crime (n = 667, 16.65%).[Table IV. Incident classification for all categories profiled]Most of the top ten residential addresses were found to associate with one specific incident classification. When exploring the residential demand (see Table V), welfare incidents accounted for the highest number of the reported incidents (n = 210, 37.91%). However, this was skewed by four addresses that accounted for 89.5% of the incidents. This suggests that welfare is a distinct problem area for some particular households, but that nuisance is causing problems across a wider amount of addresses.[Table V. Incident classification for individual address categories]
Incidents classified as ‘other’ were found to be the biggest call for services in statutory bodies (n = 565, 47.28%), and the largest coded incident classifications were welfare (n = 245, 20.5%) and nuisance (n = 178, 14.9%) (see Table V). However, this is skewed by the inclusion of a central hospital which generated a large number of welfare incidents. If this address is removed, statutory bodies accrue a larger amount nuisance incidents (n = 104, 20.47%) and ‘other’ incidents (n = 234, 46.06%). Despite this, welfare is still the third highest demand intensive classification accounting for 11.61% of the incidents (n = 59). For the top ten retail addresses, the most demand is focused on the acquisitive personal crime (n = 475, 49.63%). Again, ‘other’ (n = 192) and nuisance (n = 166) incidents were also highly demanding for retail addresses accounting for 20.06% and 17.35% respectively.      Within the top ten nightlife addresses, nuisance incidents required the highest demand (n = 208, 28.3%), accounting for an average of 21 incidents per address (see Table V). ‘Other’ incidents also account for a high volume of police resources (n = 200, 27.21%), followed by acquisitive (person) crime (n = 105, 14.29%) and violence against a person (n = 101, 13.74%).      The highest demand within the top ten young people’s services addresses was found to be welfare incidents (n = 231, 40.81%) (see Table V). In particular the top two addresses accounted for 176 of the 231 welfare incidents (76%). Both these addresses are children’s homes which indicated a potential need for a more robust partnership plan for dealing with such addresses      When comparing incident classifications across the five address categories it can be seen that welfare and nuisance incidents account for the highest number of coded incidents. In contrast, across all address categories, acquisitive (household) crime and sexual offences accounted for the least number of incidents, both of which are typically considered as traditional police business. When looking at the incident classifications collectively in terms of ‘traditional police business’ and ‘non-traditional police business’ (removing the ‘other’ classification) traditional police incidents (acquisitive person and household crime, conditions, vandalism/criminal damage, violence against the person and sexual offences) accounted for 26.89% of incidents whereas non-traditional police incidents (disputes, nuisance, domestic incidents, and welfare) make up 44.78% of incidents.Time Frame
Three time frames encompassed the largest demand: 11:01-14:00, 14:01-17:00 and 17:01- 20:00, therefore, with the exception of vandalism/criminal damage incidents, the period between 11:01 and 20:00 was found to be the most resource intensive (see Figure 1).[Figure 1: A chart showing the time frames for incident classifications across the top ten addresses for all categories]When looking at the five categories individually, a similar pattern can be seen. For residential addresses 17:01-20:00 and 20:01-23:00 were the most demanding time frames, for statutory bodies 11:01-14:00 and 14:01-17:00 required the most resources, for retail addresses 14:01- 17:00 and 17:01 – 20:00 required the most resources, and young people’s services had a high demand within the time frame 11:01-14:00. Across these four address categories, the majority of incidents fall within one of the three resource intensive periods, with the only exception being the nightlife addresses which held its peak demand at 02:01-05:00 (see Figure 2).[Figure 2: A chart showing the mode time frames for incidents occurring for the 5 categories]Response CodingAcross all address categories, the response code (see Table III) given the most was response code 3 (n = 1173, 29.27%) and the response code that was given the least was response code 1 (n = 276, 6.89%). This suggests that the majority of police resources are being used on planned response operations (code 3), and the least demand comes from the need for emergency response (code 1).      Response codes given for each of the address category were also examined. Response code 2 was the most frequently used code for responding to incidents at residential addresses (n = 208, 37.55%), whilst response code 5 was the least used (n = 21, 3.79%). For statutory bodies, response code 4 was found to be the most widely used (n = 406, 33.97%) and response code 1 was the least used (n = 59, 4.94%). Overall this indicates that for statutory services, there is little demand for emergency responses and most issues are resolved through a telephone resolution. For the retail category, response code 3 was the most used (n = 355, 37.1%), closely followed by response code 2 (n = 34.38%), whilst response codes 1 (n = 49, 7.94%) and 5 (n = 47, 7.04%) were the least used. Response code 5 was found to be the most widely used to answer nightlife calls for service (n = 208, 28.3%), whilst response code 1 is again the least (n= 40, 5.44%). Response code 3 was used the most to address issues at the top ten young
people’s services addresses (n = 237, 41.87%) and response code 1 used the least (n = 25, 4.95%). Therefore, there is rarely need for immediate response for incidents occurring at young people’s services addresses, with five addresses not requiring any emergency responses within the year. The residential addresses had a greater amount of code 1 emergency responses allocated to incidents (n = 103, 41.8%) than any of the other categories, suggesting that the incidents occurring at residential properties require a more rapid response.Residential ProfilingOut of the top ten demanding residential addresses, one was located within an area of high deprivation, seven were located in areas of medium deprivation, and two were located in areas of low deprivation. All addresses were located in urban residential areas; however they were spread out across the city. Four properties were flats, three were semi-detached housing and three were terrace houses. The number of residents in these properties ranged between 1- 8 people.      On analysing the socio-demographic qualities of the families, it was found that 100% of the family members across all ten households were of ‘White – Northern European’ ethnicity. The age range of those who were connected to the top ten addresses was between 0- 84 years old with an average 38 years old. Three of the ten addresses had under 18 year olds in the family. Regarding employment status, twenty people (43%) were listed as being unemployed and four people (9%) were employed. Four people (9%) were retired, six (13%) were school students and the occupation of thirteen people (28%) was unknown. Although there were an equal number of males and females across the sample, in 75% of cases the person calling for service was a female.      All of the ten addresses included at least one family member that had been involved domestic violence incidents, alcohol or substance abuse, or had experienced mental health issues. Eight out of ten addresses include someone in the family with mental health issues, six addresses included someone with alcohol addictions or who regularly partakes in alcohol abuse, five of the ten addresses were associated with cases of domestic violence, and four addresses included someone with substance abuse issues.The average number of referrals across the addresses was 90, with an average of31 referrals per family, and an average of 20 referrals per person. Seven out of the ten addresses had been involved with other agencies (e.g. Ambulance Service, Lancashire NHS Trust, Social Services). From these 90 addresses only five had utilised an intervention (i.e. crisis team, child
protection conferences, Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conference referrals, Multi Agency Safeguarding Hub referrals, etc.).DiscussionThe current study took an evidence based approach to understand the demand on the police service in Lancashire Constabulary’s Central Division in order to inform Police decision making regarding allocation of police resources (Srinivasan, 2013). Whilst recorded crime has been found to be decreasing on a national scale over the past decade, demand on the police service has been maintained in other ways (College of Policing, 2015).      Overall, the majority of incidents that the police are being requested to deal with are non-traditional police business, and therefore require the use of skills such as mediation and social service, rather than police statutory powers. In support of previous literature, only 26.89% of the reported incidents from highly demanding addresses were traditional police business (Scott, 1981). In particular, welfare and nuisance incidents were found to demand the majority of police resources. This supports reports of an 11.5% increase of demand generated by public safety and welfare incidents in Lancashire, West Yorkshire and South Yorkshire (College of Policing, 2015). As these types of incidents are often not seen as traditional police work, this is a contraction of the Home Secretary and Home Office’s (n.d) view that the police should be used largely in a law enforcement capacity, and therefore the police may not be the most appropriate service to deal with them. However, it cannot be contested from the findings in this report that the role of the police service in England andWales is changing due to the shift in requirements and expectations (Srinivasan et al., 2013). If police officers are trained to become better equipped to deal with these high frequency, but low-level problems or offenses, potential benefits could include the reduction of further crime and increased officer environmental knowledge to improve future problem solving (Walker and Katz, 2005).      Furthermore, included in the majority of calls for service that were grouped as non- traditional police incidents were calls concerning disputes and domestic incidents and as such, could potentially escalate into a criminal offence and/or pose risk to the people involved without the presence of a police officer. Therefore, the extent to which a tiered policing arrangement could respond to these calls should be considered in light of the potential risk involved and threat of incident escalation as a result of the absence of sworn Police officers.      Supporting previous research, the geographical profiling of demanding residential properties found that people in areas of medium deprivation are most likely to be repeat callers      
for police assistance (Johnson and Rhodes, 2009). Those living in areas of low deprivation have less need for the police as, generally, less crime and disorder occurs within these areas. Those living in areas with high deprivation may be more likely to experience crime and disorder, but may be less likely to call the police. This effect may reflect the commonality of these events, reduced collective efficacy, or may reflect the distrust of the police and strained police-community relations in these neighbourhoods (Weisburd and Eck, 2004). Therefore, those living in areas of medium deprivation tend to experience a moderate level of crime and disorder but still need the problems to be addressed by authorities, so are the most likely to call for service. The type of housing of the top ten addresses fell within three categories: flat, semi- detached and terrace. Whilst this could indicate relationships between housing types and cause to call the police, this effect may more simply reflect the area in which the addresses are situated.      Despite a void of cited links between employment status and service demand in previous literature, the current study found that 43% of family members within the top ten demanding residential addresses were unemployed, making unemployed people the single largest group likely to demand resources. All ten of these households were associated with previous issues (i.e. mental health issues, incidents of domestic violence, or alcohol and/or substance abuse); however, only seven had previously received other agency involvement and five had received interventions aimed to improve their family situation. This indicates that there is potential for agencies to work together more effectively with certain families at an earlier stage, when problems are first visible in order to attempt to prevent future high demand.Practical ImplicationsThese results indicate that the police could potentially reduce the demand for service by enhancing work within two key areas; (i) early intervention and, (ii)partnership working . Firstly, the majority of the residential repeat callers within this study were identified to have been struggling with a range of problems for some time. This highlights an area for early intervention to take place with children who show signs of behavioural problems and with those who start to display mental health issues, alcoholic dependencies or substance abuse before they reach crisis point and become high resource consumers. This has become a key aim of Lancashire’s Early Action Team. Early Action is a multi-agency intervention at the earliest opportunity, delivering sustained solutions to individual and family problems, which is hoped to ultimately build social resilience and create thriving communities. Early Action applies to both children and adults and aims to reduce vulnerability, improve health and wellbeing,
prevent crime and reduce demand across all public services, preventing problems rather than responding to them.      Secondly, as the majority incidents were not traditional police business, a large portion of the current workload could be more appropriately dealt with by other agencies or in partnership with other agencies. Not only could this improve incident resolution time, service and care for the caller, the demand on the police would be significantly reduced and resources could be more appropriately deployed to address traditional police business. For instance, co- responding police-mental health programs that are used to respond to ‘emotionally disturbed persons in the community’ have been found to facilitate strong community services partnerships and reduced justice system demands (Shapiro et al., 2014). In addition, police and mental-health clinician emergency response partnerships have been found to generate service improvements such as more efficient service transition, reduced police officer ‘down time’, and improved interagency knowledge transfer (McKenna, Furness, Oaks and Brown, 2015).      Furthermore, early interventions and partnerships should focus on promoting co- production. Co-production involves the development of an equal and reciprocal relationship between the service provider and service user in recognition that the experiences of those who use the services can be utilised to improve it (Clark, 2015). Co-production initiatives have been utilised successfully within the mental healthcare system, i.e. the Lambeth Living Well Collaborative (Innovation Unit, n.d). In order to promote co-production within Lancashire Constabulary, a new Early Action Support Volunteer role has been created for members of the public in which volunteers will provide support and mentoring services for individuals and families who have low to moderate needs and no longer require or receive support from agencies.Limitations and future researchOne limitation of this research is that the initial data search was based upon the number of incidents linked to addresses rather than the families reporting the incidents. As a result, the data might not include all calls for service from the families identified, or certain families that have high demand for services may not have been identified due to property relocation during 2013. In addition, the data in this study only included calls which were coded as incidents. There were approximately 700,000 calls received in Lancashire in 2013 which were classed as ‘non-incidents’ and these were not included in the current data set. Furthermore, this research is limited to incidents occurring only during 2013 and in the one specific area (Central Division). Future research could examine if the same families are continuing to demand a large
portion of police resources over a number of years in order to determine the effectiveness of any implemented interventions. This research does have the potential to be replicated across the different operating divisions with Lancashire Constabulary to examine if these themes are prevalent across the county. Finally, these results are based on quantitative data only and therefore lack full exploration of any contextual factors that may have impacted the findings. Future research should utilise qualitative data based on real-world examples (i.e. call for service logs), to advance understanding of the topic and any contributing factors.ConclusionsThe requirements and expectations of the police are constantly changing and it is important that the police stay relevant by addressing current demands. In order to efficiently achieve this, the demand profile for Lancashire should be continuously monitored to ensure services fit this demand. This research found that the majority of incidents being dealt with by the police within Lancashire Constabulary’s Central Division are not inherently traditional police work. Furthermore, incidents most typically associated with traditional police work were found to occur the least in this sample. This suggests that reducing demand and addressing key issues requires increased involvement with other agencies to enable the most appropriate and effective response regarding calls for service. This multi-agency early response could also free resources and reduce overall costs. Furthering the results of this study, Lancashire Constabulary are currently engaged in a large funded project around transforming Public Services within Lancashire by engaging with a range of public services who will collectively provide the most appropriate support, at the earliest point possible in that individuals life. Early identification and appropriate use of interventions are key to reduce the likelihood of individuals escalating to crisis point.ReferencesBichler, G., Schmerler, K. and Enriquez, J. (2013), "Curbing nuisance motels: an evaluation of police as place regulators", Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, Vol. 36 No. 2, pp. 437-462.
Caudill, J.W., Getty, R.., Smith, R., Patten, R. and Trulson, C.R. (2013), “Discouraging window breakers: the lagged effects of police activity on crime”, Journal of Criminal Justice, Vol. 41 No. 1, pp. 18-23.Clark, M. (2015), “Co-production in mental healthcare”, Mental Health Review Journal, Vol.20 No. 4.Clark, R.V. and Weisburd, D. (1994), “Diffusion of crime control benefits: Observations on the reverse of displacement”, in Clark, R.V. (Ed.), Crime Prevention Studies, Criminal Justice Press, Monsey, NY, pp. 165-183.College of Policing (2015), “College of policing analysis: estimating demand on the police service”, available at: http://www.college.police.uk/documents/demand_report_21_1_15.pdf (accessed 09March 2015).Edwards, M.J., Bassett, G., Sinden, L. and Fothergill, R.T. (2014), “Frequent callers to the ambulance service: patient profiling and impact of case management on patient utilisation of the ambulance service”, Emergency Medicine Journal, Vol. 0, pp. 1-5, available at: http://emj.bmj.com/content/early/2014/10/13/emermed-2013- 203496.full.pdf+html (accessed 27 January 2015).Fleming, J. and Grabosky, P. (2009), “Managing the demand for police services, or how to control an insatiable appetite”, Policing, Vol. 3 No. 3, pp. 281-291.Hill, B. and Paynich, R. (2014), Fundamentals of Crime Mapping, 2nd ed, Jones and Bartlett Learning, Burlington, Massachusetts.HMIC. (2012), “Taking time for crime: A study of how police officers prevent crime in the field”, available at: http://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmic/media/taking-time- for-crime.pdf (accessed 20 November 2015).HMIC. (2013), “Lancashire Constabulary’s response to the funding challenge”, available at: http://www.hmic.gov.uk/media/lancashire-response-to-the-funding-challenge.pdf (accessed 27 January 2015).
Home Office. (n.d), “Have you got what it takes? Tackling troubled families”, available at https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/117408/tackling-troubled-families.pdf (accessed 27 January 2015).Innovation Unit. (n.d.), Co-production in mental Health, [online], available at: http://innovationunit.org/our-projects/projects/co-production-mental-health (accessed 20 November 2015).Health and Social Care Information Centre, (2014) “Inpatients Formally Detained in Hospitals Under the Mental Health Act 1983 and Patients Subject to Supervised Community Treatment, England - 2013-2014, Annual figures”, available at: http://www.hscic.gov.uk/catalogue/PUB15812 (accessed 09 March 2015).Johnson, R.R. and Rhodes, T.N. (2009), “Urban and small town comparison of citizen demand for police services”, International Journal of Police Science & Management, Vol. 11 No. 1, pp. 27-38.Karn, J. (2013), Policing and Crime Reduction: The evidence and its implications for practice, The Police Foundation, London.Lancashire Constabulary, (2016) About Us, [online], available at: http://www.lancashire.police.uk/about-us (accessed 12 January 2016).McKenna, B., Furness, T., Oaks, J. and Brown, S. (2015), “Police and mental health clinician partnership in response to mental health crisis: A qualitative study”, International Journal of Mental Health Nursing, Vol. 24 No. 5, pp. 386-393.Ratcliffe, J.H., Taniguchi, T., Groff, E.R. and Wood, J.D. (2011), “The Philadelphia foot patrol experiment: a randomized controlled trial of police patrol effectiveness in violent crime hotspots”, Criminology, Vol. 49 No. 3, pp. 795-831.Sampson, R.J., Raudenbush, S.W. and Earls, F. (1997), “Neighbourhoods and Violent Crime: A Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy”, Science, Vol. 277, pp. 918-924.Scott, E.J. (1981), Calls for Service – Citizen Demand and Initial Police Response, National Institute of Justice, Washington, DC.
Shapiro, G.K., Cusi, A., Kirst, M., O’Camp, P., Nakhost, A., and Stergiopoulos, V. (2014), “Co-responding police-mental health programs: A review”, Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research, Vol. 42 No. 5, pp. 1-15.Sherman, L.W. and Weisburd, D. (1995), “General deterrent effects of Police patrol in crime “hot spots”: A randomized, controlled trial”, Justice Quarterly, Vol. 12 No. 4, pp.625-648.Srinivasan, S., Sorrell, T.P., Brooks, J.P., Edwards, D.J. and McDougle, R.D. (2013), "Workforce assessment method for an urban police department ", Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, Vol. 36 No. 4, pp. 702- 718.Taylor Griffiths, C., Pollard, N. and Stamatakis, T. (2014), “Assessing the effectiveness and efficiency of a police service: the analytics of operational reviews”, Police Practice and Research, working paper, Australian Institute of Police Management, Manly, 27 January.Vinod Kumar, T.K. (2014),"Differing services, rising expectations, and greater demands", Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, Vol. 37 No. 1, pp. 170-189.Walker, S. and Katz, C.M. (2005). The police in America: An introduction, McGraw Hill, Boston.Weisburd, D. and Braga, A.A. (2006), “Hot spots policing as a model for police innovation”, in Weisburd, D. and Braga, A.A. (Eds.), Police Innovation. Contrasting Perspectives, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 225-244.Weisburd, D. and Eck, J.E. (2004), “What can police do to reduce crime, disorder and fear?”,The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 593 No. 1,pp. 42-65.Wilcox, P. and Eck, J.E. (2011), “Criminology of the unpopular: implications for policy aimed at payday lending facilities”, Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 10 No. 2, pp. 473-482.
Wilson, J.M. (2012), "Articulating the dynamic police staffing challenge", Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, Vol. 35 No. 2, pp. 327- 355.Wilson, J. and Kelling, G. (1982), “Broken Windows”, Atlantic Monthly, Vol. 249 No. 3, pp.29-38.Worrall, J.L. and Kovandzic, T.V. (2010), “Police levels and crime rates: an instrumental variables approach”, Social Science Research, Vol. 39 No. 3, pp. 506-516.Figure 1: A chart showing the time frames for incident classifications across the top ten addresses for all categories
Figure 2: A chart showing the mode time frames for incidents occurring for the 5 categories
Category	DescriptionResidential	Residential addresses excluding children’s homes and residential care homes.Statutory Bodies	NHS facilities, prisons, probation, councilRetail	Supermarkets, clothing stores, convenience stores, convenience food outlets, department storesNightlife	Bars, clubs and pubs in the area Young People’s Services	Schools and children’s homesTable II. Incident classifications and descriptions.Incident classification	Description Acquisitive (household)	Burglary Acquisitive (person)	Theft, robberyConditions	Bail conditions, breach of bail/curfew/license, abscondedDisputes	Civil disputes, personalNuisance	Nuisance, hoax calls, abandoned calls, suspicious circumstancesVandalism/Criminal damage	Criminal damage, vandalism, vehicle crime, public order,arsonViolence against the person	Assault, wounding, ABH, GBH, homicide Sexual offences	Sexual offences, rapeDomestic incidents	Domestic incidentsWelfare	Concern for safety, collapse/illness/injury, missing from home, truancyOther	Any other classification not included previously, i.e. lost/recovered property, police generated activity and messages
Code	Grade	Description
1 Emergency Response2 Priority Response3 Planned Response4 Telephone Resolution5 Police Report Only
An incident where there is likely to be a risk of danger to life; use/immediate threat of use of violence; serious injury to a person; serious damage to property. Attendance usually within 15 minutes.A degree of importance or urgency associated with the initial police action but an emergency response is not required.Attendance usually within 1 hour.Response time is not critical in apprehending offenders so response given by a member of the Neighbourhood Police Teams, an appointment at a fixed surgery or an appointment by a scheduled car. Attendance usually within 48 hours, or at an agreed time.Resolution sorted at first contact. Does not require any further intervention outside the Communications Centre other than the passing of information or the recording of minor crimes.Where public assistance is not required, but an incident has occurred and a report needs to be written.

Table IV. Incident classification for all categories profiledIncident classificationn% of totalincidentsMSDMdnOther113628.3523.1847.0912Welfare75618.8716.0933.024Nuisance73418.3215.2914.3512.5Acquisitive (person)66716.6517.5522.47Disputes2095.224.985.463Violence against the person2035.075.645.174.5Vandalism/criminal damage972.422.852.022Domestic incidents952.375.289.221.5Conditions8024.717.272Sexual offences200.51.671.721Acquisitive (household)100.251.430.791
Table V. Incident classification for individual address categoriesIncident classificationCategoriesResidential addressesStatutory bodiesRetail addressesNightlife addressesYoung people’s servicesn (%)n (%)n (%)n (%)n (%)Other74 (13.36)565 (47.28)192 (20.06)200 (28.3)105 (18.55)Welfare210 (37.91245 (20.5)24 (2.51)46 (6.26)231 (40.81)Nuisance97 (17.51)178 (14.9)166 (17.35)208 (28.3)85 (15.02)Acquisitive (person)8 (1.44)51 (4.27)475 (49.63)105 (14.29)28 (4.95)Disputes55 (9.93)37 (3.1)57 (5.96)40 (5.44)20 (3.53)Violence against the person15 (2.71)47 (3.93)14 (1.46)101 (13.74)26 (4.59)Vandalism/criminal damage13 (2.35)22 (1.84)21 (2.19)22 (2.99)19 (3.36)Domestic incidents76 (13.72)7 (0.59)5 (0.52)5 (0.82)2 (0.35)Conditions4 (0.72)26 (2.18)1 (0.1)6 (0.82)14 (7.6)Sexual offences2 (0.36)13 (1.09)1 (0.1)1 (0.1)3 (0.53)Acquisitive (household)0 (0)4 (0.33)1 (0.1)1 (0.1)4 (0.71)
MenuHome Crime, justice and law  Domestic abuseGuidanceDomestic abuse: how to get helpFind out how to get help if you or someone you know is a victim of domestic abuse.From: Home O?cePublished 5 October 2018Last updated 21 March 2025 — See all updatesRelated contentDefinition of domestic violence and abuse: g uide for local areasApply for the migrant victims of domestic abuse concessionDomestic Abuse Act 2021Domestic abuse: recognise the signs Indefinite leave to remain or enter(  domestic violence or abuse)Translated guidanceIf English is not your first language, information has been translated into several languages as well as an easy read version.Women’s Aid also have g uidance documents on domestic abuse and coronavirus available in a number of languages for victims, family and friends, and community members of those a?ected.If you are deaf, you can access a British Sign Lang uage video that explains how to get help if you or someone you know is a victim of domestic abuse.Recognise domestic abuseDoes your partner, ex-partner or someone you live with: cut you o? from family and friends and intentionally isolate you?  bully, threaten, or control you? take control of your finances? monitor or limit your use of technology?  physically and/or sexually abuse you?Domestic abuse is not always physical violence. It can also include: coercive control and ‘gaslighting’  economic abuse online abuse threats and intimidation  emotional abuse sexual abuseAnyone can be a victim of domestic abuse, regardless of gender, age, ethnicity, religion, socio-economic status, sexuality or background.If you believe that you are a victim of domestic abuse, there are signs that you can look out for including: being withdrawn, or being isolated from your family and friends  having bruises, burns or bite marks on you having your finances controlled, or not being given enough to buy food, medication or pay bills not being allowed to leave your house, or stopped from going to college or work having your internet or social media use monitored, or someone else reading your texts, emails or letters being repeatedly belittled, put down or told you are worthless  being pressured into sex or sexual contact being told that abuse is your fault, or that you’re overreacting See more signs to look for.Get help and supportAll forms of domestic abuse are not acceptable in any situation.If you’re experiencing domestic abuse and feel frightened of, or controlled by, a partner, an ex-partner or family member, it’s important to remember that it’s not your fault and there is no shame in seeking help.It may seem like a di?cult step to take, but there is support available and #YouAreNot Alone.Free, confidential support and advice is available to victims and their concerned family members or friends, 24 hours a day.Nation Helpline	Contact
England Refug e’s National Domestic Abuse HelplineNorthern Domestic and Sexual Abuse
0808 2000 247Online live chat Web form0808 802 1414
Ireland
Helpline
Online live chat help@dsahelpline.org
Scotland Domestic Abuse and Forced Marriage HelplineWales Live Fear Free WelshGovernment funded, 24 hour, 365 day service with
0800 027 1234Online live chat helpline@sdafmh.org.uk0808 80 10 100Online live chat Text
specialists who make referrals info@livefearfreehelpline.wales and link to other services andadvice.
UK-wide The Men’s Advice Line run by Respect is a confidential helpline specifically for male victims.
0808 801 0327info@mensadviceline.org.uk
Bright Sky appBright Sky is a mobile app and website for anyone experiencing domestic abuse, or who is worried about someone else.The app can be downloaded for free from the app stores. Only download the app if it is safe for you to do so and if you are sure that your phone isn’t being monitored.Women’s Aid local support services directoryWomen’s Aid have a  directory of domestic abuse support services across the UK.If you are experiencing domestic abuse or are worried about friends or family, you can access the Women’s Aid live chat service 7 days a week, 10am to 6pm.helpline@womensaid.org.ukVictim SupportVictim Support run these services for victims and survivors of any abuse or crime, regardless of when it occurred or if the crime was reported to the police: free, independent and confidential 24/7 Supportline 08 08 16 89 111  live chat service My Support Space - free online resourceSafe SpacesSafes Spaces are safe, confidential rooms where victims can take some time to reflect, access information on specialist support services or call friends or family.Safe Spaces are also available in Boots, Morrisons, Superdrug and Well pharmacies, TSB banks and independent pharmacies across the UK.Find your nearest Safe Space.Check whether someone has an abusive pastIf you are concerned that a new, former or existing partner has an abusive past you can ask the police to check under the Domestic Violence Disclosure Scheme (also known as ‘Clare’s Law’). This is your ‘right to ask’. If records show that you may be at risk of domestic abuse, the police will consider disclosing the information. A disclosure can be made if it is legal, proportionate and necessary to do so.If you are concerned about a friend or family member, you can apply for a disclosure on behalf of someone you know.You can make a request to the police for information about a person’s previous violent o?ending in person at the police station or elsewhere, by telephone, by email, online or as part of a police investigation. Support agencies and services can also help you ask the police about this.Get a court order to protect you or your childIf you’re a victim of domestic abuse you can apply for a court order or injunction to protect yourself or your child from: your current or previous partner  a family member someone you currently or previously lived with This is called a non-molestation or occupation order. You can apply online, by email or by post.Get a non-molestation or occupation order if you’ve been the victim of domestic abuse.Domestic abuse protection ordersA domestic abuse protection order (DAPO) can: stop someone coming to or near your home  decide who can stay or return to your home order the person to attend a behavioural change programme order the person to wear an electronic tag to check they’re keeping to the conditions of the orderThere are no court fees for applying.You can only apply for a DAPO if the person you need protection from lives in one of the following areas: Hartlepool, Middlesbrough, Redcar and Cleveland and Stockton-on-Tees  Greater Manchester the London boroughs of Croydon, Bromley or Sutton Apply for a domestic abuse protection order.Support someone you knowIf you are worried that a friend, neighbour or loved one is a victim of domestic abuse, you can call the National Domestic Abuse Helpline for free and confidential advice, 24 hours a day on 0808 2000 247.Or you can contact the other support services listed on this page.Seeking help for someone you know can be challenging but #YouAreNotalone. Domestic abuse advisers will o?er confidential, non- judgemental information and advice on the options available to you helping you to keep safe and make informed choices.If you believe there is an immediate risk of harm to someone, or it is an emergency, you should always call 999.If someone confides in you, there is more information on how to support a friend who is being abused.If you are an employerLet your employees know that if they are facing domestic abuse you want to help them to get help. Stay in regular contact with employees you know, or fear, may be facing abuse and if you lose contact with them, take swift action to visit them. If you believe there is an immediate risk of harm to someone, or it is an emergency, always call 999.Encourage employees to look out for others who may be facing domestic abuse and signpost them to support. Your sta? may also be worried about their own abusive behaviour at this time. There is no excuse for domestic abuse, no matter what stresses you are under and support is available.Hestia’s Respond to Abuse Advice Line is a free resource for employers. Employers can call 020 3879 3695 Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm, or email adviceline.eb@hestia.org for support, guidance or information about domestic abuse and how to support employees and colleagues experiencing domestic abuse.The  Employers’ Initiative on Domestic Abuse website provides resources to support employers including an employers’ toolkit.If you are a professional working in the domestic abuse sectorSafeLives provides guidance and support to professionals and those working in the domestic abuse sector, as well as additional advice for those at risk.Find additional information and supportIf you want to access help specifically to cater to your background and needs or want support and help for specific types of abuse there are several organisations that can help - see Domestic abuse: specialist sources of support.You can also find additional information and support here on topics including:  help for children and young people welfare benefits and housing advice help if you don’t have settled status in the UK  support for specific types of abuseGet help if you think you might be an abuserIf you are concerned about your behaviour or the behaviour of someone you know, there is support available.The  Respect Phoneline is an anonymous and confidential helpline for men and women who are abusing their partners and families. It is open Monday to Friday 9am to 8pm. The helpline also takes calls from partners or ex-partners, friends and relatives who are concerned about perpetrators.A webchat service is available Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays from 10am to 11am and from 3pm to 4pm.Telephone: 0808 802 4040How to call the police when you can’t speakIf you are in danger and unable to talk on the phone, call 999 and listen to the questions from the operator and, if you can, respond by coughing or tapping on the handset.Call 999 from a mobileIf prompted, press 55 to Make Yourself Heard and this will transfer your call to the police. Pressing 55 only works on mobiles and does not allow police to track your location.Call 999 from a landlineIf the operator can only hear background noise and cannot decide whether an emergency service is needed, you will be connected to a police call handler.If you replace the handset, the landline may remain connected for 45 seconds in case you pick up again.When 999 calls are made from landlines, information about your location should be automatically available to the call handlers to help provide a response.If you are deaf or can’t use a phoneYou can register with the emergencySMS. Text REGISTER to 999. You will get a text which tells you what to do next. Do this when it is safe so you can text when you are in danger.Published 5 October 2018Last updated 21 March 2025 + show all updatesExplore the topicDomestic abuseViolence against women and girlsServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
MenuHome Crime, justice and law  Domestic abuseGuidanceDomestic abuse: how to get helpFind out how to get help if you or someone you know is a victim of domestic abuse.From: Home O?cePublished 5 October 2018Last updated 21 March 2025 — See all updatesRelated contentDefinition of domestic violence and abuse: g uide for local areasApply for the migrant victims of domestic abuse concessionDomestic Abuse Act 2021Domestic abuse: recognise the signs Indefinite leave to remain or enter(  domestic violence or abuse)Translated guidanceIf English is not your first language, information has been translated into several languages as well as an easy read version.Women’s Aid also have g uidance documents on domestic abuse and coronavirus available in a number of languages for victims, family and friends, and community members of those a?ected.If you are deaf, you can access a British Sign Lang uage video that explains how to get help if you or someone you know is a victim of domestic abuse.Recognise domestic abuseDoes your partner, ex-partner or someone you live with: cut you o? from family and friends and intentionally isolate you?  bully, threaten, or control you? take control of your finances? monitor or limit your use of technology?  physically and/or sexually abuse you?Domestic abuse is not always physical violence. It can also include: coercive control and ‘gaslighting’  economic abuse online abuse threats and intimidation  emotional abuse sexual abuseAnyone can be a victim of domestic abuse, regardless of gender, age, ethnicity, religion, socio-economic status, sexuality or background.If you believe that you are a victim of domestic abuse, there are signs that you can look out for including: being withdrawn, or being isolated from your family and friends  having bruises, burns or bite marks on you having your finances controlled, or not being given enough to buy food, medication or pay bills not being allowed to leave your house, or stopped from going to college or work having your internet or social media use monitored, or someone else reading your texts, emails or letters being repeatedly belittled, put down or told you are worthless  being pressured into sex or sexual contact being told that abuse is your fault, or that you’re overreacting See more signs to look for.Get help and supportAll forms of domestic abuse are not acceptable in any situation.If you’re experiencing domestic abuse and feel frightened of, or controlled by, a partner, an ex-partner or family member, it’s important to remember that it’s not your fault and there is no shame in seeking help.It may seem like a di?cult step to take, but there is support available and #YouAreNot Alone.Free, confidential support and advice is available to victims and their concerned family members or friends, 24 hours a day.Nation Helpline	Contact
England Refug e’s National Domestic Abuse HelplineNorthern Domestic and Sexual Abuse
0808 2000 247Online live chat Web form0808 802 1414
Ireland
Helpline
Online live chat help@dsahelpline.org
Scotland Domestic Abuse and Forced Marriage HelplineWales Live Fear Free WelshGovernment funded, 24 hour, 365 day service with
0800 027 1234Online live chat helpline@sdafmh.org.uk0808 80 10 100Online live chat Text
specialists who make referrals info@livefearfreehelpline.wales and link to other services andadvice.
UK-wide The Men’s Advice Line run by Respect is a confidential helpline specifically for male victims.
0808 801 0327info@mensadviceline.org.uk
Bright Sky appBright Sky is a mobile app and website for anyone experiencing domestic abuse, or who is worried about someone else.The app can be downloaded for free from the app stores. Only download the app if it is safe for you to do so and if you are sure that your phone isn’t being monitored.Women’s Aid local support services directoryWomen’s Aid have a  directory of domestic abuse support services across the UK.If you are experiencing domestic abuse or are worried about friends or family, you can access the Women’s Aid live chat service 7 days a week, 10am to 6pm.helpline@womensaid.org.ukVictim SupportVictim Support run these services for victims and survivors of any abuse or crime, regardless of when it occurred or if the crime was reported to the police: free, independent and confidential 24/7 Supportline 08 08 16 89 111  live chat service My Support Space - free online resourceSafe SpacesSafes Spaces are safe, confidential rooms where victims can take some time to reflect, access information on specialist support services or call friends or family.Safe Spaces are also available in Boots, Morrisons, Superdrug and Well pharmacies, TSB banks and independent pharmacies across the UK.Find your nearest Safe Space.Check whether someone has an abusive pastIf you are concerned that a new, former or existing partner has an abusive past you can ask the police to check under the Domestic Violence Disclosure Scheme (also known as ‘Clare’s Law’). This is your ‘right to ask’. If records show that you may be at risk of domestic abuse, the police will consider disclosing the information. A disclosure can be made if it is legal, proportionate and necessary to do so.If you are concerned about a friend or family member, you can apply for a disclosure on behalf of someone you know.You can make a request to the police for information about a person’s previous violent o?ending in person at the police station or elsewhere, by telephone, by email, online or as part of a police investigation. Support agencies and services can also help you ask the police about this.Get a court order to protect you or your childIf you’re a victim of domestic abuse you can apply for a court order or injunction to protect yourself or your child from: your current or previous partner  a family member someone you currently or previously lived with This is called a non-molestation or occupation order. You can apply online, by email or by post.Get a non-molestation or occupation order if you’ve been the victim of domestic abuse.Domestic abuse protection ordersA domestic abuse protection order (DAPO) can: stop someone coming to or near your home  decide who can stay or return to your home order the person to attend a behavioural change programme order the person to wear an electronic tag to check they’re keeping to the conditions of the orderThere are no court fees for applying.You can only apply for a DAPO if the person you need protection from lives in one of the following areas: Hartlepool, Middlesbrough, Redcar and Cleveland and Stockton-on-Tees  Greater Manchester the London boroughs of Croydon, Bromley or Sutton Apply for a domestic abuse protection order.Support someone you knowIf you are worried that a friend, neighbour or loved one is a victim of domestic abuse, you can call the National Domestic Abuse Helpline for free and confidential advice, 24 hours a day on 0808 2000 247.Or you can contact the other support services listed on this page.Seeking help for someone you know can be challenging but #YouAreNotalone. Domestic abuse advisers will o?er confidential, non- judgemental information and advice on the options available to you helping you to keep safe and make informed choices.If you believe there is an immediate risk of harm to someone, or it is an emergency, you should always call 999.If someone confides in you, there is more information on how to support a friend who is being abused.If you are an employerLet your employees know that if they are facing domestic abuse you want to help them to get help. Stay in regular contact with employees you know, or fear, may be facing abuse and if you lose contact with them, take swift action to visit them. If you believe there is an immediate risk of harm to someone, or it is an emergency, always call 999.Encourage employees to look out for others who may be facing domestic abuse and signpost them to support. Your sta? may also be worried about their own abusive behaviour at this time. There is no excuse for domestic abuse, no matter what stresses you are under and support is available.Hestia’s Respond to Abuse Advice Line is a free resource for employers. Employers can call 020 3879 3695 Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm, or email adviceline.eb@hestia.org for support, guidance or information about domestic abuse and how to support employees and colleagues experiencing domestic abuse.The  Employers’ Initiative on Domestic Abuse website provides resources to support employers including an employers’ toolkit.If you are a professional working in the domestic abuse sectorSafeLives provides guidance and support to professionals and those working in the domestic abuse sector, as well as additional advice for those at risk.Find additional information and supportIf you want to access help specifically to cater to your background and needs or want support and help for specific types of abuse there are several organisations that can help - see Domestic abuse: specialist sources of support.You can also find additional information and support here on topics including:  help for children and young people welfare benefits and housing advice help if you don’t have settled status in the UK  support for specific types of abuseGet help if you think you might be an abuserIf you are concerned about your behaviour or the behaviour of someone you know, there is support available.The  Respect Phoneline is an anonymous and confidential helpline for men and women who are abusing their partners and families. It is open Monday to Friday 9am to 8pm. The helpline also takes calls from partners or ex-partners, friends and relatives who are concerned about perpetrators.A webchat service is available Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays from 10am to 11am and from 3pm to 4pm.Telephone: 0808 802 4040How to call the police when you can’t speakIf you are in danger and unable to talk on the phone, call 999 and listen to the questions from the operator and, if you can, respond by coughing or tapping on the handset.Call 999 from a mobileIf prompted, press 55 to Make Yourself Heard and this will transfer your call to the police. Pressing 55 only works on mobiles and does not allow police to track your location.Call 999 from a landlineIf the operator can only hear background noise and cannot decide whether an emergency service is needed, you will be connected to a police call handler.If you replace the handset, the landline may remain connected for 45 seconds in case you pick up again.When 999 calls are made from landlines, information about your location should be automatically available to the call handlers to help provide a response.If you are deaf or can’t use a phoneYou can register with the emergencySMS. Text REGISTER to 999. You will get a text which tells you what to do next. Do this when it is safe so you can text when you are in danger.Published 5 October 2018Last updated 21 March 2025 + show all updatesExplore the topicDomestic abuseViolence against women and girlsServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation

ContentsChapter 1: Status and Purpose of this Document	11.1. Status	11.2. Audience	21.3. Aim and Purpose	31.4. Principles Supporting the Guidance	41.5. Definitions	5Chapter 2: Understanding FGM	82.1. What is FGM?	82.2. Types of FGM	92.3. International Prevalence of FGM	92.4. Prevalence of FGM in England and Wales	122.4.1 Prevalence of FGM at a Local Level	122.5. Names for FGM	132.6. FGM and Other Forms of Violence Against Women and Girls	13Chapter 3: The Law in England and Wales	143.1. Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003	153.1.1 Failing to Protect a Girl from Risk of FGM	153.1.2 Extra-Territorial Offences	173.1.3 Other Offences	173.1.4 WHO Classifications of FGM and the 2003 Act	183.1.5 Significant Harm	193.1.6 Exemptions Under the 2003 Act	193.1.7 Re-Infibulation	203.1.8 Female Genital Surgery	203.2. Anonymity of Victims of FGM	203.2.1 Exemptions	213.2.2 Breach of the Restrictions	213.2.3 Defences	213.3. FGM Protection Orders (FGMPO)	223.3.1 Applications	233.3.2 Conditions of an Order	233.3.3 Breach	243.3.4 Sharing Information about an FGMPO	24Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | i
3.4. FGM Mandatory Reporting Duty	253.4.1 Professionals Not Subject to the Mandatory Reporting Duty	273.4.2 Safeguarding Duty in Wales	27Chapter 4: Working Together to Tackle FGM	294.1. Introduction	294.2. A Strategic Response / Actions for Heads of Organisations	304.3. A Victim-Centred and Multi-Agency Approach	304.4. Commissioning Services	314.5. Awareness and Training	324.6. Working with Communities and Community Groups	334.6.1 Working with Communities to End FGM	334.6.2 Community Groups	344.6.3 Working with Survivors	34CASE STUDY: Working with community groups - North East FGM Forum	354.7. Information Sharing	36Annex A: Background on FGM	38A.1. Cultural Underpinnings and Motives of FGM	38A.2. Medicalisation of FGM	38A.3. Consequences of FGM	39A.3.1 Immediate/Short-Term Consequences of FGM	39A.3.2 Long-Term Consequences of FGM	39Annex B: Risk	40B.1. Risk Factors	40B.1.2 Indicators that FGM May Have Already Taken Place	42Annex C: Talking About FGM	44C.1. Introduction to Talking About FGM	44C.2. Preparing to Speak to Individuals and Families	45C.2.1 Using Translators	47C.3. Communicating in Written and Public Formats	47Annex D: Safeguarding	48D.1. FGM: Part of Wider Safeguarding Responsibilities	48D.2. Safeguarding Effectively	49D.2.1 Girl (Under 18) who is Suspected to have Undergone FGM	51ii | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital
D.2.2 Girl (Under 18) or Vulnerable Adult who is Suspected to be at Risk…51D.2.3 Girl (Under 18) or Vulnerable Adult who has Previously Been Identified as at Risk of FGM	52D.2.4 FGM Disclosed by or Visually Identified in a Girl (Under 18)	53D.2.5 Adult who has had FGM	53D.2.6 Professionals Working in Wales: Additional Considerations	53D.2.7 Safeguarding Other Family Members	53D.2.8 Women and Girls from Overseas	54D.2.9 NHS Staff in England: Additional Considerations	55D.2.10 Police: Additional Considerations	56D.2.11 School, Colleges and Universities: Additional Considerations	61CASE STUDY: Norbury School	63Annex E: Legal Interventions	64E.1. Police Protection	65E.2. FGM Protection Orders	66E.3. Emergency Protection Orders (EPO) Under S. 44 of the Children Act 1989	67E.4. Care Orders and Supervision Orders	67E.5. Inherent Jurisdiction	68E.5.1 Applications for Wardship	68E.6. Repatriation	70Annex F: Care and Support	71F.1. Health Services	71F.2. Counselling and Psychological Services	71F.3. Safety of Service Users	72F.4. Child Protection Examinations	72Annex G: Terms Used for FGM In Other Languages	73Annex H: Contact Information	74Annex I: Resources	76Annex J: Making an Application for an FGM Protection Order (FGMPO)	80

Chapter 1: Status and Purpose of this Document1.1. StatusThis statutory guidance is being issued under section 5C(1) of the Female Genital Mutilation Act 20031 and extends to England and Wales only. Section 5C(1) states:“(1) The Secretary of State may issue guidance to whatever persons in England and Wales the Secretary of State considers appropriate about—(a) the effect of any provision of this Act, or(b) other matters relating to female genital mutilation.(2) A person exercising public functions to whom guidance is given under this section must have regard to it in the exercise of those functions.(3) Nothing in this section permits the Secretary of State to give guidance to any court or tribunal.”As statutory guidance issued under section 5C of the 2003 Act, a person exercising public functions to whom this guidance is given must have regard to it in the exercise of those functions. This means that a person to whom the guidance is given must take the guidance into account and, if they decide to depart from it, have clear reasons for doing so.It contains guidance which should be followed by all; these sections are generally identified by the use of the word ‘should’ and are contained within the main body of the guidance. It also contains guidance that may be appropriate for some individuals, but may not be required by others. This latter guidance is identified by terminology such as ‘you may find it useful to’ and is set out within the Annexes.1 As amended by the Serious Crime Act 2015.
1.2. AudienceThis multi-agency statutory guidance should be read and followed by all persons and bodies in England and Wales who are under statutory duties to make arrangements to discharge their functions having regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children2 and vulnerable adults. The following list is not exhaustive, however such persons and bodies include:ï local authorities and district councils;ï National Health Service (NHS) and independent service providers;ï NHS England;ï NHS Wales;ï clinical commissioning groups (CCGs);ï NHS Trusts;ï NHS Foundation Trusts;ï the police;ï governing bodies of maintained schools and colleges;ï proprietors of independent schools (including academies, free schools and alternative provision academies) and non-maintained special schools; andï management committees of pupil referral units (PRUs).Professionals working in these organisations and who undertake these duties are responsible for ensuring that they fulfil their role and responsibilities in a manner consistent with the statutory duties of their employer.The information within this guidance may also be relevant to bodies working with women and girls at risk of female genital mutilation (FGM) or dealing with its consequences.2 For example, under section 11 (1) or section 28 (1) of the Children Act 2004, section 175(2) of the Education Act 2002; section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, paragraph 7(a) of the Schedule to the Education (Independent School Standards) Regulations 2014 and paragraph 3 of the Schedule to the Education (Non-Maintained Special Schools) (England) Regulations 2011.
1.3. Aim and PurposeThis guidance should be considered in conjunction with other relevant safeguarding guidance, including, but not limited to, ‘Working Together to Safeguard Children’ (2018)3 in England or ‘Working Together to Safeguard People: Volume 5 – handling cases to protect children at risk’ (2018)4 and ‘Volume 6 – handling cases to protect adults at risk (2018)5 in Wales. This document is not intended to replace wider safeguarding guidance, but to provide additional advice on FGM.This statutory guidance sets out the responsibilities of chief executives, directors, senior managers and front-line professionals within agencies involved in safeguarding and supporting women and girls affected by FGM.This guidance has three key functions:ï to provide information on FGM, including on the law on FGM in England and Wales. This is set out in the main body of this document;ï to provide strategic guidance on FGM for chief executives, directors and senior managers of persons and bodies mentioned above, or of third parties exercising public protection functions on behalf of those persons or bodies. This guidance is set out in the main body of this document; andï to provide advice and support to front-line professionals who have responsibilities to safeguard and support women and girls affected by FGM, in particular to assist them in:o identifying when a girl or young woman may be at risk of FGM and responding appropriately;o identifying when a girl or woman has had FGM and responding appropriately; ando implementing measures that can prevent and ultimately help end the practice of FGM.This guidance encourages agencies to cooperate and work together to protect and support those at risk of, or who have undergone, FGM.3 www.gov.uk/government/publications/working-together-to-safeguard-children--24 https://gov.wales/safeguarding-children-risk-abuse-or-neglect5 https://gov.wales/safeguarding-adults-risk-abuse-or-neglect
1.4. Principles Supporting the GuidanceFGM is a criminal offence – it is child abuse and a form of violence against women and girls, and therefore should be treated as such. Cases should be dealt with as part of existing structures, policies and procedures on child protection and adult safeguarding. There are, however, particular characteristics of FGM that front-line professionals should be aware of to ensure that they can provide appropriate protection and support to those affected.The following principles should be adopted by all agencies in relation to identifying and responding to those at risk of, or who have undergone FGM, and their parent(s) or guardians:ï the safety and welfare of the child is paramount;ï all agencies should act in the interests of the rights of the child, as stated in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989);ï FGM is illegal in the UK (see Chapter 3);ï FGM is an extremely harmful practice - responding to it cannot be left to personal choice;ï accessible, high quality and sensitive health, education, police, social care and voluntary sector services must underpin all interventions;ï as FGM is often an embedded social norm, engagement with families and communities plays an important role in contributing to ending it; andï all decisions or plans should be based on high quality assessments (in accordance with ‘Working Together to Safeguard Children’ (2018)6statutory guidance in England, and the ‘Social Services and Well- being (Wales) Act Part 3 Code of Practice – assessing the needs of individuals’ (2015)7.6 www.gov.uk/government/publications/working-together-to-safeguard-children--27 https://gov.wales/sites/default/files/publications/2019-05/part-3-code-of-practice-assessing-the-needs-of- individuals.pdf
1.5. DefinitionsFor the purpose of this guidance, the following definitions apply:Adult/Woman‘Adult’ is defined as a person aged 18 years or over.Child/Girl/Young PersonAs defined in the Children Acts 1989 and 2004, and the Social Services and well- being (Wales) Act 2014 ‘child’ means a person under the age of 18. This includes young people aged 16 and 17 who are living independently; their status and entitlement to services and protection under the Children Act 1989 is not altered by the fact that they are living independently.Child Abuse and NeglectThroughout this document, the recognised categories of maltreatment are those set out in ‘Working Together to Safeguard Children’ (2018)8 (for England) and ‘Working Together to Safeguard People: Volume 5 – handling individual cases to protect children at risk’ (2018)9 in Wales. These are:ï physical abuseï emotional abuseï sexual abuseï neglectChild in Need (England)Children shall be taken to be ‘in need’ under section 17 of the Children Act 1989, for the purposes of Part III of that Act, where:ï they are unlikely to achieve or maintain, or have the opportunity to achieve or maintain, a reasonable standard of health or development;ï their health or development is likely to be significantly impaired, or further impaired, without the provision of services by a local authority under Part III of that Act;ï they are disabled.Under section 17 of that Act, local authorities have a general duty to safeguard and promote the welfare of children within their area who are in need and, so far as is consistent with that duty, to promote the upbringing of such children by their families, by providing a range and level of services appropriate to those children’s needs.8 www.gov.uk/government/publications/working-together-to-safeguard-children--29 https://gov.wales/safeguarding-children-risk-abuse-or-neglect
De-infibulationDe-infibulation is a minor surgical procedure to divide the scar tissue sealing the vaginal entrance in Type 3 FGM. De-infibulation is sometimes termed a ‘reversal’ of FGM. This, however, is incorrect as it does not replace genital tissue or restore normal genital anatomy and function.Domestic AbuseAny incident or pattern of incidents of controlling, coercive or threatening behaviour, violence or abuse between those aged 16 or over who are or have been intimate partners or family members10 regardless of gender or sexuality. This can encompass, but is not limited to, the following types of abuse:ï psychologicalï physicalï sexualï financialï emotionalControlling behaviour is a range of acts designed to make a person subordinate and/or dependent by isolating them from sources of support, exploiting their resources and capacities for personal gain, depriving them of the means needed for independence, resistance and escape and regulating their everyday behaviour.Coercive behaviour is an act or a pattern of acts of assault, threats, humiliation and intimidation or other abuse that is used to harm, punish, or frighten their victim.The Government definition, which is not a legal definition, includes so called 'honour’ based abuse, including FGM and forced marriage, and is clear that victims are not confined to one gender or ethnic group.Forced MarriageA forced marriage is a marriage in which one or both spouses do not (or, in the case of some adults with learning or physical disabilities or mental incapacity, cannot) consent to the marriage and violence, threats or any other form of coercion is involved. Coercion may include emotional force, physical force or the threat of physical force and financial pressure.InfibulationInfibulation (Type 3 FGM) is the narrowing of the vaginal opening through the creation of a covering seal. The seal is formed by cutting and repositioning the inner, or outer, labia.10 Family members are: mother, father, son, daughter, brother, sister & grandparents; directly-related, in-laws or step-family.
Re-infibulation or Re-SuturingRe-infibulation refers to the re-suturing (usually after childbirth) of the incised scar tissue in a woman with FGM Type 2 or 3.Significant HarmThe Children Act 1989 introduced the concept of ‘significant harm’ as the threshold that justifies compulsory intervention in family life in the best interests of children and young people. Harm is defined at section 31(9), Children Act 1989, whilst section 31(10) provides limited guidance as to what will be considered significant harm. Local authorities have a duty to make enquiries to decide whether they should take action to safeguard or promote the welfare of a child who is suffering, or likely to suffer, significant harm under section 47 of the Children Act 1989. The definition of harm at section 31(9) was amended by the Adoption and Children Act 2002 to include, “for example, impairment suffered from seeing or hearing the ill-treatment of another”.Note on the use of ‘victim’: The term ‘victim’ is used in this document to denote women or girls who have undergone FGM. This term is used particularly in the context of explanation of the law on FGM to describe those who have been the subject of a criminal offence. It should be noted that not everyone who has been subjected to FGM chooses to describe themselves as a ‘victim’ and may prefer another term, for example, ‘survivor’.
Chapter 2: Understanding FGMThis chapter provides information for heads of organisations and front-line professionals who have a statutory duty to protect children and vulnerable adults.Key pointsï FGM is illegal in the UK. For the purpose of the criminal law in England and Wales, FGM is mutilation of the labia majora, labia minor or clitoris.ï FGM is an unacceptable practice for which there is no justification. It is child abuse and a form of violence against women and girls.ï FGM is prevalent in 30 countries. These are concentrated in countries around the Atlantic coast to the Horn of Africa, in areas of the Middle East, and in some countries in Asia.ï It is estimated that approximately 103,000 women aged 15-49 and approximately 24,000 women aged 50 and over who have migrated to England and Wales are living with the consequences of FGM. In addition, approximately 10,000 girls aged under 15 who have migrated to England and Wales are likely to have undergone FGM.ï FGM is a deeply embedded social norm, practised by families for a variety of complex reasons. It is often thought to be essential for a girl to become a proper woman, and to be marriageable. The practice is not required by any religion.2.1. What is FGM?FGM is a procedure where the female genital organs are injured or changed and there is no medical reason for this. It is frequently a very traumatic and violent act for the victim and can cause harm in many ways. The practice can cause severe pain and there may be immediate and/or long-term health consequences, including mental health problems, difficulties in childbirth, causing danger to the child and mother; and/or death.The age at which FGM is carried out varies enormously according to the community. The procedure may be carried out shortly after birth, during childhood or adolescence, just before marriage or during a woman’s first pregnancy.
2.2. Types of FGMFGM has been classified by the World Health Organisation (WHO) into four types:ï Type 1 – Clitoridectomy: partial or total removal of the clitoris (a small, sensitive and erectile part of the female genitals) and, in very rare cases, only the prepuce (the fold of skin surrounding the clitoris);ï Type 2 – Excision: partial or total removal of the clitoris and the labia minora, with or without excision of the labia majora (the labia are the ‘lips’ that surround the vagina);ï Type 3 – Infibulation: narrowing of the vaginal opening through the creation of a covering seal. The seal is formed by cutting and repositioning the inner, or outer, labia, with or without removal of the clitoris; andï Type 4 – Other: all other harmful procedures to the female genitalia for non- medical purposes, e.g. pricking, piercing, incising, scraping and cauterising the genital area.The extent to which the WHO classifications of FGM come within the ambit of the criminal law is discussed at Section 3.1.4.2.3. International Prevalence of FGMFGM is a deeply rooted practice, widely carried out mainly among specific ethnic populations in Africa and parts of the Middle East and Asia. It serves as a complex form of social control of women’s sexual and reproductive rights. The exact number of girls and women alive today who have undergone FGM is unknown, however, UNICEF estimates that over 200 million girls and women worldwide have undergone FGM11.While FGM is concentrated in countries around the Atlantic coast to the Horn of Africa, and areas of the Middle East like Iraq and Yemen, it has also been documented in communities in:
ï Colombia;ï Iran;ï Israel (within the Bedouin community and within the immigrant Ethiopian Jewish community in its country of origin);ï Oman;ï The United Arab Emirates;ï The Occupied Palestinian Territories;ï 
India;ï Indonesia;ï Malaysia;ï Pakistan; andï Saudi Arabia.ï 
It has also been identified in parts of Europe, North America and Australia.11 UNICEF (2016) Female Genital Mutilation/ Cutting: a Global Concern:www.data.unicef.org/resources/female-genital-mutilation-cutting-a-global-concern.html
Figure 1: Percentage of girls and women aged 15-49 who have undergone FGM in Africa, the Middle East, and IndonesiaNotes: In Liberia, girls and women who have heard of the Sande society were asked whether they were members; this provides indirect information on FGM since it is performed during initiation into the society. Data for Indonesia refer to girls aged 0 to 11 years since prevalence data on FGM among girls and women aged 15 to 49 years is not available. Source: UNICEF global databases, 2016, based on DHS, MICS and other nationally representative surveys,2004-2015. Map disclaimer
Percentage of girls and women aged 15-49 who have undergone FGM in Africa, the Middle East, and IndonesiaAfrica Benin – 9%Burkina Faso – 76% Cameroon – 1%Central African Republic – 24% Chad – 44%Côte d’lvoire – 38% Djibouti – 93%Egypt – 87%Eritrea – 83%Ethiopia – 74%Gambia – 75% Ghana – 4 % Guinea – 97%Guinea-Bissau – 45%Kenya – 21%Liberia – 50%Mali – 89%Mauritania – 69%Niger – 2%Nigeria – 25%Senegal – 25% Sierra Leone – 90% Somalia – 98%Sudan – 87%Togo – 5%Uganda – 1%United Republic of Tanzania – 15%Middle EastIraq – 8%Yemen – 19%AsiaIndonesia – 49%Notes: In Liberia, girls and women who have heard of the Sande society were asked whether they were members; this provides indirect information on FGM since it is performed during initiation into the society. Data for Indonesia refer to girls aged 0 to 11 years since prevalence data on FGM among girls and women aged 15 to 49 years is not available.Source: UNICEF global databases, 2016, based on DHS, MICS and other nationally representative surveys, 2004-2015.
2.4. Prevalence of FGM in England and WalesThe prevalence of FGM in England and Wales is difficult to estimate because of the hidden nature of the crime. However, a 2015 study12 estimated that:ï approximately 60,000 girls aged 0-14 were born in England and Wales to mothers who had undergone FGM (see Annex B for risk factors); andï approximately 103,000 women aged 15-49 and approximately 24,000 women aged 50 and over who have migrated to England and Wales are living with the consequences of FGM. In addition, approximately 10,000 girls aged under 15 who have migrated to England and Wales are likely to have undergone FGM.2.4.1 Prevalence of FGM at a Local LevelLocal data should be used to understand the scale and needs of the population affected by FGM in a particular area.The 2015 study13 reported that no local authority area in England and Wales is likely to be free from FGM entirely.Regional breakdowns of these prevalence estimates14 show that while urban areas, and specifically London, have the highest estimated prevalence, every area is likely to be affected in some way. It should also be noted that women and girls from affected communities living in low prevalence areas may be more isolated and in greater need of targeted support.NHS Digital publishes quarterly statistics15 on the profile of patients treated within the National Health Service in England who are identified through their treatment as having had FGM16.In Wales, each health board’s FGM lead collates instances of FGM identified within their organisation.12 Macfarlane A, Dorkenoo E. (2015) Prevalence of Female Genital Mutilation in England and Wales: National and local estimates. London: City University London and Equality Now http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/12382/13 Macfarlane A, Dorkenoo E. (2015) Prevalence of Female Genital Mutilation in England and Wales: National and local estimates. London: City University London and Equality Now http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/12382/14 http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/12382/ (see dataset)15  https://digital.nhs.uk/data-and-information/publications/statistical/female-genital-mutilation16  https://digital.nhs.uk/data-and-information/clinical-audits-and-registries/female-genital-mutilation-datasets
Names for FGMFGM is known by a variety of names, including ‘female genital cutting’, ‘circumcision’ or ‘initiation’. The term ‘female circumcision’ is anatomically incorrect and misleading in terms of the harm FGM can cause. The terms ‘FGM’ or ‘cut’ are increasingly used at a community level, although they are not always understood by individuals in practising communities, largely because they are English terms. See Annex G for terms used for FGM in different languages and Annex C for advice about how to talk about FGM.2.5. FGM and Other Forms of Violence Against Women and GirlsFGM is a form of violence against women and girls which is, in itself, both a cause and consequence of gender inequality17. Whilst FGM may be an isolated incident of abuse within a family, it can be associated with other behaviours that discriminate against, limit or harm women and girls. These may include other forms of honour- based abuse (e.g. forced marriage) and domestic abuse.There have been reports of cases where individuals have been subjected to both FGM and forced marriage18. If a professional has a concern about an individual who may be at risk of forced marriage, they should consult the multi-agency practice guidelines on handling cases of forced marriage19.Further information about FGM, including the motives for and consequences of it, can be found in Annex A.17 Violence prevention: the evidence (who.int)18 Civil protection for (potential) victims of forced marriage is covered by the Forced Marriage (Civil Protection) Act 2007.19 www.gov.uk/forced-marriage#guidance-for-professionals
Chapter 3: The Law in England and WalesThis chapter provides information for heads of organisations and front-line professionals who have a statutory responsibility to protect children and vulnerable adults.Key pointsFGM is illegal in England and Wales under the Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003.As amended by the Serious Crime Act 2015, the Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003 now includes:ï An offence of failing to protect a girl from the risk of FGM;ï Extra-territorial jurisdiction over offences of FGM committed abroad by UK nationals and those habitually (as well as permanently) resident in the UKï Lifelong anonymity for victims of FGM;ï FGM Protection Orders which can be used to protect girls at risk; andï A mandatory reporting duty which requires specified professionals to report known cases of FGM in under 18s to the police.In England and Wales, criminal and civil legislation on FGM is contained in the Female Genital Mutilation Act 200320 (“the 2003 Act”).20 Parts of the 2003 Act also apply in Northern Ireland. In Scotland, FGM legislation is contained in the Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation (Scotland) Act 2005.
3.1. Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003Under section 1(1) of the 2003 Act, a person is guilty of an offence if they excise, infibulate or otherwise mutilate the whole or any part of a girl’s labia majora, labia minora or clitoris. Section 6(1) of the 2003 Act provides that the term “girl” includes “woman” so the offences in sections 1 to 3 apply to victims of any age.Other than in the excepted circumstances set out in sections 1(2) and (3), it is an offence for any person (regardless of their nationality or residence status) to:ï perform FGM in England or Wales (section 1 of the 2003 Act);ï assist a girl to carry out FGM on herself in England or Wales (section 2 of the 2003 Act); andï assist (from England or Wales) a non-UK national or UK resident to carry out FGM outside the UK on a UK national or UK resident21 (section 3 of the 2003 Act).Provided that the FGM takes place in England or Wales, the nationality or residence status of the victim is irrelevant.Any person found guilty of an offence under section 1, 2, or 3 of the 2003 Act is liable to a maximum penalty of 14 years’ imprisonment or a fine (or both).3.1.1 Failing to Protect a Girl from Risk of FGMSection 3A of the 2003 Act 22provides for an offence of failing to protect a girl from the risk of FGM. This means that if an offence under section 1, 2 or 3 of the 2003 Act is committed against a girl under the age of 16, each person who is responsible for the girl at the time the FGM occurred could be liable under the offence.The term “responsible” covers two classes of person:ï a person who has “parental responsibility” for the girl and has “frequent contact” with her; andï a person aged 18 or over who has assumed (and not relinquished) responsibility for caring for the girl “in the manner of a parent”.21 A “UK resident” is defined as an individual who is habitually resident in the UK.22 As inserted by section 72 of the Serious Crime Act 2015.
Those who have parental responsibility and the means by which they can acquire it are set out in the Children Act 1989 (in the case of England and Wales). It includes, for example:ï a child’s biological mother;ï a father who is married to the mother of the child when the child is born;ï an unmarried father registered on the child’s birth certificate at the time of their birth;ï guardians; andï persons named in a Child Arrangements Order.The requirement in the first case for “frequent contact” is intended to ensure that a person who, in law, has parental responsibility for a girl, but who in practice has little or no contact with her, would not be liable. For example, where the parents of a girl were separated and lived apart with one parent having little or no contact with the daughter, the intention is that that parent would not be liable for the offence.Similarly, the requirement in the second case that the person should be caring for the girl “in the manner of a parent” is intended to ensure that a person who is looking after a girl for a very short period – such as a babysitter – would not be liable. A person who has assumed responsibility for caring for the girl in the manner of a parent may include, for example, grandparents with whom the girl has gone to stay for an extended summer holiday. In such circumstances, those persons with parental responsibility for the girl would continue to be liable for the offence. It is not intended, for example, to include teachers working in their professional capacity.In either case, liability for the offence is subject to two statutory defences. The first defence is that the defendant did not think that there was a significant risk of FGM being committed, and they could not reasonably have been expected to be aware of such a risk. The second defence is that the defendant took such steps as he or she could reasonably have been expected to take to protect the girl from becoming a victim of FGM. If the defendant produces sufficient evidence of either defence, the onus would then be on the prosecution to prove that the defence does not apply.What constitutes reasonable steps would depend on the circumstances of the case. For example, the steps considered reasonable for a woman to take in the case where her overbearing and violent husband or another family member has arranged for FGM to be carried out on their daughter may well differ from those taken by a woman who is not subject to those pressures. Whether a defendant has taken such steps as could reasonably have been expected will need to be assessed on a case-by-case basis.Any person found guilty of an offence under section 3A of the 2003 Act is liable to a maximum penalty of 7 years’ imprisonment or a fine (or both).
3.1.2 Extra-Territorial OffencesSection 4(1) of the 2003 Act extends sections 1 to 3 to extra-territorial acts so that it is also an offence for a UK national or UK resident to:ï perform FGM outside the UK (sections 4 and 1 of the 2003 Act);ï assist a girl to perform FGM on herself outside the UK (sections 4 and 2 of the 2003 Act); andï assist (from outside the UK) a non-UK national or UK resident to carry out FGM outside the UK on a UK national or UK resident (sections 4 and 3 of the 2003 Act).The extra-territorial offences are intended to cover taking a girl abroad to be subjected to FGM. By virtue of section 1(4) of the 2003 Act, the exceptions set out in sections 1(2) and (3) also apply to the extra-territorial offences.Section 4(1A) of the 2003 Act provides that an offence under section 3A can be committed wholly or partly outside the UK by a person who is a UK national or UK resident.3.1.3 Other OffencesUnder provisions of the law which apply generally to criminal offences it is also an offence to:ï aid, abet, counsel or procure a person to commit an FGM offence23;ï encourage or assist a person to commit an FGM offence24ï attempt to commit an FGM offence25: andï conspire to commit an FGM offence26.Any person found guilty of such an offence faces the same maximum penalty as for the offences under the 2003 Act.23 Common law.24 Sections 44-46 of the Serious Crime Act 2007.25 Section 1 of the Criminal Attempts Act 1981.26 Section 1 of the Criminal Law Act 1977.
3.1.4 WHO Classifications of FGM and the 2003 ActExcision and infibulation are examples of what constitutes mutilation for the purpose of the 2003 Act but the term “mutilate” is not defined in the Act. The interpretation of the legislation, including whether a particular procedure amounts to mutilation, is a matter for the criminal courts to determine in cases brought before them. In the absence of any conviction for FGM, there is currently no criminal case law on what does or does not amount to mutilation for the purpose of the 2003 Act.The World Health Organisation (WHO) classifications of FGM and section 1 of the 2003 Act were, however, considered by the Family Court in the context of care proceedings in the case of B and G (Children) (No 2)27. In his judgment of 15 January 201528, the President of the Family Division said (at paragraph 11):“It will be seen that for the purposes of the criminal law what is prohibited is to “excise, infibulate or otherwise mutilate” the “whole or any part” of the “labia majora, labia minora or clitoris.” This brings within the ambit of the criminal law all forms of FGM of WHO Types I, II and III (including, it may be noted, Type 1a29). But WHO Type IV comes within the ambit of the criminal law only if it involves “mutilation” [emphasis added].”The President went on to say (at paragraph 70):“whether a particular case of FGM Type IV….involves mutilation is in my determination not a matter for determination by the family court and certainly not a matter I need to determine in the present case. It is a matter properly for determination by a criminal court as and when the point arises for decision in a particular case [emphasis added].”It follows from the above that, unless and until a criminal court decides the point in a particular case, there can be no certainty that any of the procedures classified by WHO as Type 4 FGM, including piercing, amounts to mutilation. The most that can be said is that Type 4 FGM may be an offence under section 1 of the 2003 Act.Whether it does in fact constitute such an offence would depend on the particular circumstances.For the purpose of complying with the statutory duty under section 5B of the 2003 Act to notify the police of FGM, relevant professionals are not required to be satisfied that the circumstances disclosed to them or the physical signs they have observed involve the commission of a criminal offence under the 2003 Act.27 [2015] EWFC 3.28 www.judiciary.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/BandG_2_.pdf29 Removal of the clitoral hood or prepuce only.18 | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
The duty to report applies where the relevant professional observes physical signs on the girl which appear to show that an act of FGM has been carried out on her, and the relevant professional has no reason to believe that the act was part of a permitted surgical operation; or where the girl informs the relevant professional that an act of FGM has been carried out on her.It is for the police, upon receipt of a report, to investigate the circumstances and to conduct enquiries into any alleged offence. The Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) will decide whether a person should be charged with a criminal offence and, if so, what that offence should be and whether a prosecution will take place. As with every criminal offence, the CPS will apply the two-stage test in the Code for Crown Prosecutors in deciding whether to proceed with a prosecution: (1) whether there is sufficient evidence to provide a realistic prospect of conviction; and, if so, (2) whether a prosecution is in the public interest.3.1.5 Significant HarmIn the case of B and G (Children) (No 2), the President of the Family Division concluded that all types of FGM (including Type 4) constitute “significant harm” for the purposes of family law. Professionals should, therefore, have regard to their wider safeguarding responsibilities in relation to FGM as well as to the statutory duty in section 5A of the 2003 Act.3.1.6 Exemptions Under the 2003 ActIn strict anatomical terms, there is little to distinguish some of the procedures involved in carrying out FGM from those involved in carrying out legitimate surgery. The 2003 Act therefore contains general exemptions for:ï a surgical operation performed by a registered medical practitioner which is necessary for a girl’s physical or mental health; orï an operation performed by a registered medical practitioner or midwife (including a person undergoing training with a view to becoming a medical practitioner or midwife) on a girl who is in labour or has just given birth, for purposes connected with the labour or birth.These exemptions are set out in sections 1(2) and (3) of the 2003 Act.Section 1(5) of the 2003 Act provides that for the purposes of determining whether an operation is necessary for the mental health of a girl it is immaterial whether she or any other person believes that the operation is required as a matter of custom or ritual. So FGM could not legally occur on the ground that a girl’s mental health would suffer if she does not follow the prevailing custom of her community.Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | 19
3.1.7 Re-InfibulationRe-infibulation is when the raw edges of the FGM wound are sutured again following childbirth, recreating a small vaginal opening similar to the original FGM Type 3 appearance. Section 1 of the 2003 Act does not refer explicitly to re-infibulation but, as a matter of common sense, if it is an offence to infibulate it must equally be an offence to re-infibulate. The first prosecution for FGM in February 2015, which concerned an alleged act of re-infibulation, provides support for that view. Although the case did not result in a conviction, it is clear that the court, by agreeing that the evidence should be considered by a jury, proceeded on the basis that re-infibulation is covered by section 1 of the 2003 Act.3.1.8 Female Genital SurgeryThe 2003 Act contains no specific exemption for ‘cosmetic’ surgery or female genital cosmetic surgery (FGCS). If a procedure involving any of the acts prohibited by section 1 of the 2003 Act is not necessary for physical or mental health or is not carried out for purposes connected with childbirth then it is an offence (even if the girl or woman on whom the procedure is carried out consented).The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists is clear in its guideline ‘(Female Genital Mutilation and its Management (Green-top Guideline No. 53)’, published on 10 July 2015) that “All surgeons who undertake FGCS must take appropriate measures to ensure compliance with the FGM Act”.As set out above, it is for the police to investigate any alleged offence and for the CPS to decide whether a prosecution under the 2003 Act is appropriate and it would ultimately be for a criminal court to determine, as and when the point arises for decision in a particular case, if non-medically indicated genital surgery constitutes mutilation and is therefore an offence under the 2003 Act.3.2. Anonymity of Victims of FGMSection 4A and Schedule 1 of the 2003 Act30 make provision for the anonymity of victims of FGM in England and Wales (and Northern Ireland). The provisions are modelled on those in the Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act 1992 which protect the anonymity of victims of certain sexual offences, such as rape, as soon as an allegation is made.The effect of these provisions is to prohibit the publication of any matter that would be likely to lead members of the public to identify a person as the alleged victim of an offence under the 2003 Act (including the offence of failing to protect a girl at risk of genital mutilation under section 3A of the 2003 Act, as well as aiding, abetting, counselling and procuring the “principal offence”). The prohibition lasts for the lifetime of the alleged victim. The prohibition covers not just more immediate identifying information, such as the name and address or a photograph of the alleged victim, but any other information which, whether on its own or pieced together with other information, would be likely to lead members of the public to identify the alleged victim.30 As inserted by section 71 of the Serious Crime Act 2015.20 | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
“Publication” is given a broad meaning and would include traditional print media, broadcasting and social media such as Twitter or Facebook.3.2.1 ExemptionsThere are two limited circumstances where the court may disapply the restrictions on publication:ï the first is where a person being tried for an FGM offence could have their defence substantially prejudiced if the restriction to prevent identification of the person against whom the allegation of FGM was committed is not lifted; andï the second is where preventing identification of the person against whom the allegation of FGM was committed is to impose a substantial and unreasonable restriction on the reporting of the proceedings and it is in the public interest to remove the restriction.3.2.2 Breach of the RestrictionsContravention of the prohibition on publication is an offence. It will not be necessary for the prosecution to show that the defendant intended to identify the victim. In relation to newspapers or other periodicals (whether in print form or online editions) and radio and television programmes, the offence is directed at proprietors, editors, publishers or broadcasters rather than individual journalists. Any prosecution for the offence requires the consent of the Attorney General or the Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland as the case may be.3.2.3 DefencesThere are two defences:ï the first is where the defendant had no knowledge (and no reason to suspect) that the publication included the relevant content or that a relevant allegation had been made; andï the second is where the victim (where aged 16 or over) had freely given written consent to the publication. These defences impose a reverse burden on the defendant, that is, it is for the defendant to prove that the defence is made out on a balance of probabilities, rather than imposing a requirement on the prosecution to show, beyond reasonable doubt, that the defence does not apply.Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | 21
3.3. FGM Protection Orders (FGMPO)An FGMPO is a civil order which may be made for the purposes of protecting a girl31 against the commission of an FGM offence – that is, protecting a girl at risk of FGM - or protecting a girl against whom an FGM offence has been committed. In deciding whether to make an order a court must have regard to all the circumstances of a case including the need to secure the health, safety and well-being of the potential or actual victim. The court can make an order which prohibits, requires, restricts or includes any other such other terms as it considers appropriate to stop or change the behaviour or conduct of those who would seek to subject a girl to FGM or have already arranged for, or committed, FGM.Examples of the types of orders the court might make are:ï to protect a victim or potential victim at risk of FGM from being taken abroad;ï to order the surrender of passports or any other travel documents, including the passport/travel documentation of the girl to be protected;ï to prohibit specified persons (‘respondents’) from entering into any arrangements in the UK or overseas for FGM to be performed on the person to be protected;ï to include terms which relate to the conduct of the individuals named in the order both inside and outside of England and Wales; andï to include terms which cover individuals who are, or may become involved in other respects (or instead of the original respondents) and who may commit or attempt to commit FGM against a girl.Orders may also be made against people, who are not named in the application. This is in recognition of the complexity of the issues and the numbers of people who might be involved in the wider community.Additional information on legal interventions is contained at Annex E.31 “girl” is used throughout this section, but by virtue of section 6(1) of the 2003 Act, “girl” includes woman’, i.e. a woman of any age can be protected by an FGMPO.
3.3.1 ApplicationsAn application for an FGMPO can be made to the High Court or the family court by the person to be protected (the victim), or a “relevant third party” (a person or body specified, or in a class specified by the Lord Chancellor for this purpose) without the leave of the court. Local authorities have been specified as a “relevant third party”32. An application can also be made by ‘any other person’ with the leave of the court. In deciding whether to grant leave, the court must have regard to all the circumstances, including the applicant’s connection with, and knowledge of, the circumstances of the girl. More information on applying for FGMPOs can be found on GOV.uk33.A court can also make an FGMPO without application being made to it in certain family proceedings. In addition, a criminal court can also make an FGMPO, without application, in criminal proceedings for a genital mutilation offence where the person who would be a respondent to any proceedings for an FGMPO is a defendant in the criminal proceedings. An FGMPO can be made in such criminal proceedings to protect a girl at risk, whether or not they are the victim of the offence in relation to the criminal proceedings. For example, the younger sister of the victim of a genital mutilation offence could also be protected by the court in criminal proceedings.An application for a FGMPO is not an alternative to the work of the police and CPS in investigating and prosecuting crimes. Crimes may be investigated and offenders prosecuted at the same time as an application is made for an FGMPO or an order is in force.3.3.2 Conditions of an OrderThe terms of an FGMPO may relate to conduct inside and/or outside of England and Wales (or Northern Ireland).An FGMPO may be made for a specified period or until varied or discharged.The applicant or the court must serve the order on the police, including the local police station of the girl being protected.When local authorities have obtained a FGMPO or are aware that one is in place, it is essential that they work closely with the victim and the relevant support service, if there is one, to ensure it offers the level of protection that was envisaged. Links need to be established with other agencies, in particular the police, to ensure ongoing support is available to victims as needed.32 SI 2015 No. 1422.33 www.gov.uk/female-genital-mutilation-protection-order
3.3.3 BreachBreach of an FGMPO is a criminal offence with a maximum penalty of up to five years’ imprisonment. As an alternative to prosecution, a breach of an FGMPO may be dealt with by the civil route as a contempt of court, punishable by up to two years’ imprisonment, a fine, or both.If the police investigate a possible breach as a criminal offence, they can arrest those suspected of breaching the terms of the order. Following a police investigation, the CPS will decide whether or not to proceed with a prosecution for the breach and/or any other offences that might be disclosed. Where the decision is taken, however, to pursue breach as a contempt of court matter, an application should be made to the family court for an arrest warrant. This should be supported by a statement setting out how the order has been breached. The order will need to be served on the respondents.Although FGMPOs are specifically designed to protect actual or potential victims of FGM, one or more of the orders or applications in Annex E may also be considered alongside an FGMPO, depending on the particular circumstances of each case.Referral to an accredited family law practitioner to deal with wider issues of private or public family law may be equally important to meet the girl’s needs.3.3.4 Sharing Information about an FGMPOWhere an agency has obtained an FGMPO it should consider which, if any, other agencies need to be aware of the FGMPO, i.e. those not served with a copy of the order by the court, and whether it is necessary for that information to be shared in order to secure the protection of the girl at risk. Care should, however, be exercised in sharing information, particularly if it could have the adverse effect of leading to either reprisals for the victim and/or other members of their family.When the court has made an order, the applicant or the court, (where requested or if the court makes an order of its own initiative), should serve a copy of the order on the police, together with a statement showing that the respondents and/or any other persons directed by the court have been served with the order or informed of its terms. The order and statement should be delivered to the police station for the address of the person being protected by the order, unless the court specifies another police station.
3.4. FGM Mandatory Reporting DutySection 5B of the 2003 Act34 introduces a mandatory reporting duty which requires regulated health and social care professionals and teachers in England and Wales to report ‘known’35 cases of FGM in under 18s which they identify in the course of their professional work to the police.The duty applies to all regulated professionals (as defined in section 5B(2)(a), (11) and (12) of the 2003 Act) working within health or social care, and teachers. It therefore covers:ï health and social care professionals regulated by a body which is overseen by the Professional Standards Authority for Health and Social Care (with the exception of the Pharmaceutical Society of Northern Ireland). This includes those regulated by the:o General Chiropractic Councilo General Dental Councilo General Medical Councilo General Optical Councilo General Osteopathic Councilo General Pharmaceutical Councilo Health and Care Professions Council (whose role includes the regulation of social workers in England)o Nursing and Midwifery Councilï teachers36 - this includes qualified teachers or persons who are employed or engaged to carry out teaching work in schools and other institutions, and, in Wales, education practitioners regulated by the Education Workforce Council;ï registered social care workers in Wales.34 As inserted by section 74 of the Serious Crime Act 2015.35 “Known” cases are those where either a girl informs the person that an act of FGM – however described – has been carried out on her, or where the person observes physical signs on a girl appearing to show that an act of FGM has been carried out and the person has no reason to believe that the act was, or was part of, a surgical operation within section 1(2)(a) or (b) of the FGM Act 2003.36 Section 5B(11) of the FGM Act 2003 (as inserted by section 74 of the Serious Crime Act 2015) provides the definition for the term ‘teacher’:” teacher” means – (a) in relation to England, a person within section 141A(1) of the Education Act 2002 (persons employed or engaged to carry out teaching work at schools and other institutions in England); (b) in relation to Wales, a person who falls within a category listed in the table in paragraph 1 of Schedule 2 to the Education (Wales) Act 2014 (anaw 5) (categories of registration for purposes of Part 2 of that Act) or any other person employed or engaged as a teacher at a school (within the meaning of the Education Act 1996) in Wales”.
The legislation requires regulated health and social care professionals and teachers in England and Wales to make a report to the police where, in the course of their professional duties, they either:ï are informed by a girl under 18 that an act of FGM has been carried out on her; orï observe physical signs which appear to show that an act of FGM has been carried out on a girl under 18 and they have no reason to believe that the act was necessary for the girl’s physical or mental health or for purposes connected with labour or birth.Reports under the duty should be made as soon as possible after a case is discovered, and best practice is for reports to be made by the close of the next working day. In order to allow for exceptional cases, a maximum timeframe of one month from when the discovery is made37 applies for making reports. However, the expectation is that reports will be made much sooner than this.A longer timeframe than the next working day may be appropriate in exceptional cases where, for example, a professional has concerns that a report to the police is likely to result in an immediate safeguarding risk to the child (or another child, e.g. a sibling) and considers that consultation with colleagues or other agencies is necessary prior to the report being made.Cases of failure to comply with the duty will be dealt with in accordance with the existing performance procedures in place for each profession. FGM is child abuse, and employers and the professional regulators are expected to pay due regard to the seriousness of breaches of the duty.FGM Mandatory Reporting Duty: Additional ResourcesInformation for professionals subject the duty and their employers, including on how to make a report, is available at:www.gov.uk/government/publications/mandatory-reporting-of-female-genital- mutilation-procedural-informationAdditional information for health care professionals in England is available at: www.gov.uk/government/publications/fgm-mandatory-reporting-in-healthcare37 As required by section 5B (5)(c) of the 2003 Act (as amended by the Serious Crime Act 2015).
3.4.1 Professionals Not Subject to the Mandatory Reporting DutyWhile the duty is limited to the specified professionals described above, non- regulated practitioners still have a general responsibility to report cases of FGM, in line with wider safeguarding frameworks. If a non-regulated professional becomes aware that FGM has been carried out on a girl under 18, they should still share this information within their local safeguarding lead, and follow their organisation’s safeguarding procedures.3.4.2 Safeguarding Duty in WalesUnder the ‘Social Services and Well-being (Wales) Act 2014: Part 4 Code of Practice- meeting needs’ (2015) a local authority must provide and keep under review care and support plans for people who have needs which meet the eligibility criteria and for people where it appears to the local authority that it is necessary to meet the person’s needs in order to protect the person from abuse or neglect or the risk of abuse or neglect (and additionally in the case of a child: harm or the risk of harm).Where the duties to a child fall under Part 6 of the Act (Looked After and Accommodated Children) the local authority must review the care and support plan in line with the requirements of Regulations made under that part of the Act.A local authority must meet the needs of children, which the local authority considers it is necessary to meet in order to protect the child from abuse or neglect or a risk of abuse or neglect or in order to protect the child from other harm or risk of such harm. This is an overriding duty on a local authority irrespective of any application of, or outcome from, the determination of eligibility. A local authority’s duties in respect of looked after children are contained within Part 6 of the Act.Local authorities must determine whether the needs of the individual call for the exercise of any function they have under Part 4 (Care and Supervision) or Part 5 (Protection of Children) of the Children Act 1989.Relevant partners have a Duty to Report Children at Risk (Section 130) under Part  7 of the Social Services and Well-being (Wales) Act. Section 130(4) defines a “child at risk” as a child who:a) is experiencing or is at risk of abuse, neglect or other kinds of harm; andb) has needs for care and support (whether or not the local authority is meeting any of those needs).When a child has been reported under section 130, the local authority must consider whether there are grounds for carrying out an investigation under section 47 of the Children Act 1989. This includes children at risk of FGM.
Relevant partners have a Duty to Report Adults at Risk (Section 128) under Part 7 of the Social Services and Well-being (Wales) Act. Section 126(1) defines an “adult at risk” as an adult who:a) is experiencing or is at risk of abuse or neglect; andb) has needs for care and support (whether or not the local authority is meeting any of those needs); andc) as a result of those needs is unable to protect himself or herself from the abuse or neglect or the risk of it.Section 126(2) requires a local authority to consider whether there is reasonable cause to suspect the person is an adult at risk and to take appropriate action.
Chapter 4: Working Together to Tackle FGMThis chapter provides information for heads of organisations, third parties exercising public protection functions, and front- line professionals.Key pointsï No single professional can have a full picture of an individual’s needs and circumstances. To ensure that women and girls affected by FGM receive the right help at the right time, everyone who comes into contact with them has a role to play.ï ‘Working Together to Safeguard Children’ (2018) in England or ‘Working Together to Safeguard People: Volume 5- handling individual cases to protect children at risk’ (2018) in Wales sets out the requirements and expectations on individual services and professionals to provide a multi-agency response to safeguard and promote the welfare of children. This document does not attempt to duplicate this guidance, and should be considered alongside other relevant guidance on safeguarding children and vulnerable adults.ï Wherever possible, professionals should actively seek and support ways to reduce the prevalence of FGM in practising communities in the UK. Agencies should consider how preventative work, delivered by community organisations/community change advocates, can be embedded within their organisation’s work on protection, with a focus on involving community support for girls and families at risk.4.1. IntroductionFGM is illegal. It is child abuse and a form of violence against women and girls and should therefore be treated as such. It should be addressed using existing structures, policies and procedures designed to safeguard children and vulnerable adults.All bodies to which this guidance applies need to work effectively with one another, and with other relevant organisations to address FGM.
4.2. A Strategic Response / Actions for Heads of OrganisationsHeads of relevant organisations should ensure that:Roles and responsibilitiesï their organisation has a lead person whose role includes responsibility for FGM (this will often be the designated safeguarding lead). This person should have relevant experience, expertise and knowledge. Their role should include ensuring that cases of FGM are handled, monitored and recorded properly;ï there is a member of the organisation who has undertaken additional training and can be approached to discuss and direct difficult cases (this may be the ‘lead person’ mentioned above);ï their staff understand their role in protecting those who have undergone or are at risk of abuse, including FGM;ï their staff know to whom they should refer cases within their organisation and when to refer cases to other agencies;ï their staff understand the importance of timely information sharing both internally and with other agencies;Policies and proceduresï there are policies and procedures in place to protect those who have undergone or are at risk of FGM. The policies and procedures should be in line with existing statutory and non-statutory guidance on safeguarding children and vulnerable adults. These policies and procedures must reflect multi-agency working arrangements; andï policies and procedures are kept under review and updated to reflect structural, departmental, legal and other relevant changes.4.3. A Victim-Centred and Multi-Agency ApproachAn effective local response to FGM should be underpinned by two key principles:ï safeguarding is everyone’s responsibility: each professional and organisation should play their part; andï a victim-centred approach should be taken: based on a clear understanding of the needs and views of girls and women affected by FGM.ï 
4.4. Commissioning ServicesIt is likely that some women with FGM are living in every local authority area in England and Wales38 (see Section 2.4.1).It is important for commissioning leads to understand the data relating to their local communities so that their agency’s response is appropriate to communities’ needs. This includes ensuring that:ï services are provided to meet the physical and mental health needs of women and girls who have undergone FGM as appropriate;ï projects and services aimed at preventing FGM are developed in consultation with FGM survivors and expert voluntary sector organisations; andï when commissioning services, considering whether there are suitable local community organisations or individual peer educators who have the experience to work with and support affected communities effectively.When commissioning services, local authorities may wish to check whether community organisations are accredited. For example, the Imkaan Accredited Quality Standards39 set out standards for community organisations working with black and minority ethnic (BME) women and girls on harmful practices including FGM and so called ‘honour-based’ abuse.Commissioning: Additional ResourcesInformation on commissioning health services for women and girls affected by FGM in England is set out in the Department of Health’s ‘Commissioning Services to Support Women and Girls with Female Genital Mutilation’ (2015)40.38 Macfarlane A, Dorkenoo E. (2015) Prevalence of Female Genital Mutilation in England and Wales: National and local estimates. London: City University London and Equality Now http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/12382/39 https://www.imkaan.org.uk/resources40 www.gov.uk/government/publications/services-for-women-and-girls-with-fgm#
4.5. Awareness and TrainingTraining should enable all staff to discharge their safeguarding duties with regard to FGM, as for any other form of abuse. Training on FGM could include the following:ï an overview of FGM (what it is, when and where it is performed);ï the UK law on FGM and child protection;ï the potential consequences of FGM;ï what to do when FGM is suspected or has been performed; andï the role of different professionals and the importance of multi-agency working.Local Safeguarding Children Boards (in England) are responsible for monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of single agency and inter-agency training on safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children provided within their area41. This is in line with their function to develop policies and procedures in relation to training of those persons who work with children or in services affecting the safety and welfare of children42. Such policies and procedures may include specific training in relation to FGM. In Wales similar functions for regional Safeguarding Boards are set out in guidance ‘Working together to Safeguard people: Volume 1 – introduction and overview’ (2016)43.Safeguarding Children and Young people: roles and competences for health care staff44 provides a competence-based framework to set out the minimum training requirements for healthcare professionals in the UK to enable them to recognise child maltreatment and to take effective action as appropriate to their role. Knowledge of and the ability to recognise signs of FGM are included at all levels of competence.In Wales, any training accessed should align with the requirements of the National Training Framework on violence against women, domestic abuse and sexual violence45.Awareness and Training: Additional ResourcesE-learning for all professionals (including teachers, police, border force staff, and health visitors), developed by the Home Office, is available at www.fgmelearning.co.uk.Health Education England offer e-learning, free to access by health and social care professionals, at www.e-lfh.org.uk/programmes/female-genital-mutilation/.41 See Chapter 4 of Working Together to Safeguard Children 2018 for further information on the role of LSCBs in England.42 Regulation 5(1)(a)(ii) of the Local Safeguarding Children Boards Regulations 2006 for LSCBs in Wales.43 https://gov.wales/safeguarding-people-introduction44 www.rcpch.ac.uk/child-protection-publications45 http://livefearfree.gov.wales/guidance-for-professionals/national-training-framework/?lang=en.32 | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
4.6. Working with Communities and Community Groups4.6.1 Working with Communities to End FGMSo-called cultural practices, such as FGM, can be deeply embedded in practising communities and working to end them requires both top down direction and a community-led approach.Some of the ways organisations and professionals can help to end FGM include:ï involving individuals and families in discussions about how FGM can be ended within their family and wider community;ï talking to all groups, including men, boys and community leaders about FGM and its consequences;ï encouraging individuals to report suspected cases of FGM, and highlighting the anonymous means for doing this, such as the NSPCC helpline46, for those unwilling to provide information to the authorities (see the FGM resource pack47 for more information); andï signposting to organisations that can provide support and advice to those who wish to end the practice within their family or community (for information on organisations working on FGM see the FGM resource pack48).Local authorities, Local Safeguarding Children Boards (in England), Safeguarding Children Boards (in Wales) and relevant professionals are encouraged to actively consider how best this could be done as part of existing work and engagement with practising communities, and how new initiatives could be established. Maintaining a continued dialogue with affected communities may help to ensure that prevention and support interventions are accepted.46  www.nspcc.org.uk/preventing-abuse/child-abuse-and-neglect/female-genital-mutilation-fgm/47 www.gov.uk/government/publications/female-genital-mutilation-resource-pack/female-genital-mutilation- resource-pack48 www.gov.uk/government/publications/female-genital-mutilation-resource-pack/female-genital-mutilation- resource-packMulti-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | 33
4.6.2 Community GroupsCommunity groups have a valuable role to play in responding to FGM. This may include:ï supporting women’s access to specialist care;ï disseminating information in schools; andï supporting and supplementing professional training programmes.When developing services and projects, organisations should consider working with appropriate community groups and survivors to help make sure the services provided both meet the needs of service users, and that their staff understand the issues related to FGM.Appropriately trained professionals can help to address fears and misconceptions that may deter those affected by FGM from engaging with statutory services.Professionals with specialist knowledge of FGM may also wish to consider how they can assist community groups, for example, by speaking at community-based events.Information on local and national voluntary sector organisations working with communities on FGM, including a postcode search function which signposts local support services, is available at: www.gov.uk/female-genital-mutilation-help-advice.4.6.3 Working with SurvivorsIt is important, where possible and with appropriate support provided, to involve survivors of FGM when developing services or policies that will affect them. In doing so, organisations should recognise that each individual survivor will have their own experiences and needs and should not be expected to represent all women and girls who have undergone FGM.Survivors may also wish to act as change advocates to encourage communities to abandon FGM. Community groups working with those affected by FGM can help to facilitate engagement with survivors and can advise on the support they may need to speak out about their experience of FGM.34 | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
CASE STUDY: Working with community groups - North East FGM ForumCrown Prosecution Service (CPS) North East wanted to improve criminal justice agencies’ understanding of the issues faced by communities affected by FGM in the area, help communities to understand the criminal justice process and address any concerns there may be about engaging with criminal justice agencies.CPS North East decided to set up a regional forum. Members of the forum included representatives of:ï the three Police and Crime Commissioners in the North East;ï the three police forces;ï community support services working with victims of FGM; andï health services.The aim of the forum was to provide opportunities for networking and dialogue between criminal justice agencies and organisations offering support to women affected by FGM to share information and best practice, and to identify areas for joint working.The forum resulted in the development of good practice in investigation of reports of FGM. Ongoing dialogue between the agencies, and their communities, helped to ensure that local practice and policy across the North East were developed to take into account the needs of victims and communities, and that victims could be supported through the criminal justice system.Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | 35
4.7. Information SharingWhen dealing with FGM, organisations and professionals should continue to have regard to their wider responsibilities in relation to the handling and sharing of information. To safeguard children and vulnerable adults in line with relevant statutory requirements and guidance, it may be necessary to share information with other agencies or departments.To ensure effective safeguarding arrangements:ï all organisations should have arrangements in place which set out clearly the processes and the principles for sharing information between each other, with other professionals and with the LSCB or regional Safeguarding Boards in Wales; andï no professional should assume that someone else will pass on information which they think may be critical to keeping a child or vulnerable adult safe. If a professional has concerns about an individual’s welfare and believes they are suffering or likely to suffer harm, then they should share the information with the relevant local authority children’s or adult’s social care.Chief executives and professionals working in healthcare in England should have due regard to the FGM Enhanced Dataset Information Standard (SCCI2026)49 which instructs all clinicians on how and what to record in health records when a patient with FGM is identified, including additional details for example the type of FGM. The standard also instructs upon standardised information sharing protocols to support safeguarding against FGM.The FGM Enhanced Dataset Information Standard also instructs NHS acute and mental health trusts and GP practices on how they should submit data about patients who have FGM to NHS Digital. NHS Digital collect and publish anonymised statistics on behalf of the Department of Health and Social Care and NHS England and NHS Improvement. The information is used nationally and locally to improve the NHS response to FGM and to help commission the services to support women who have experienced FGM and safeguard women and girls at risk of FGM. Please see the new National FGM Support Clinics as an example of this: https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/female-genital-mutilation-fgm/national-fgm-support- clinics/It is important to note that the personal information held and collected under the FGM Enhanced Dataset Information Standard is not released to anyone outside of NHS Digital. If these arrangements were to change, any information which was held prior to such a change would continue to be protected under the current arrangements.49  https://digital.nhs.uk/data-and-information/clinical-audits-and-registries/female-genital-mutilation-datasets36 | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
Guidance on the recording of FGM and the FGM Enhanced dataset standard is available at https://digital.nhs.uk/data-and-information/information- standards/information-standards-and-data-collections-including- extractions/publications-and-notifications/standards-and-collections/scci2026- female-genital-mutilation-enhanced-datasetAnnual information is now presented in dashboard format which can be found here: https://files.digital.nhs.uk/AF/8E6782/FGM%202019%20AR%20-%20Dashboard.xlsmInformation Sharing: Additional ResourcesInformation Sharing: ‘Advice for practitioners providing safeguarding services to children, young people, parents and carers’ (2018)50 gives guidance to front-line practitioners in England working in child or adult services who have to make decisions about sharing personal information.In Wales ‘Working Together to Safeguard People - information sharing to safeguard children’ (2019)51 is available to provide advice and promote proportionate information sharing.50 www.gov.uk/government/publications/safeguarding-practitioners-information-sharing-advice51 https://gov.wales/sharing-information-safeguard-childrenMulti-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | 37
Annex A: Background on FGMA.1. Cultural Underpinnings and Motives of FGMFGM is a complex issue, and individuals and families who support it give a variety of justifications and motivations for this. However, FGM is a crime and child abuse, and no explanation or motive can justify it. The justifications given may be based on a belief that, for example, it:ï brings status and respect to the girl;ï preserves a girl’s virginity/chastity;ï is part of being a woman;ï is a rite of passage;ï gives a girl social acceptance, especially for marriage;ï upholds the family “honour”;ï cleanses and purifies the girl;ï gives the girl and her family a sense of belonging to the community;ï fulfils a religious requirement believed to exist;ï perpetuates a custom/tradition;ï helps girls and women to be clean and hygienic;ï is aesthetically desirable;ï makes childbirth safer for the infant; andï rids the family of bad luck or evil spirits.FGM is a traditional practice often carried out by a family who believe it is beneficial and is in a girl or woman’s best interests. This may limit a girl’s motivation to come forward to raise concerns or talk openly about FGM – reinforcing the need for all professionals to be aware of the issues and risks of FGM.Infibulation (Type 3) is strongly linked to virginity and chastity, and used to ‘protect’ girls from sex outside marriage and from having sexual feelings. In some cultures, it is considered necessary at marriage for the husband and his family to see her ‘closed’ and, in some instances, both mothers will take the girl to be cut open enough to be able to have sex.Although FGM is practised by secular communities, it is most often claimed to be carried out in accordance with religious beliefs. However, FGM predates Christianity, Islam and Judaism, and the Bible, Koran, Torah and other religious texts do not advocate or justify FGM.A.2. Medicalisation of FGMSome who support the practice have sought to eliminate risks of infection (by, for example, carrying it out in a medical environment) in order to legitimise FGM. However, in addition to the immediate risks associated with FGM being carried out, it can have serious and harmful long-term psychological and physical effects, regardless of how the procedure was done.38 | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
A.3. Consequences of FGMMen and women in practising communities may be unaware of the potential harmful health and welfare consequences of FGM, some of which are set out below.A.3.1 Immediate/Short-Term Consequences of FGMThe immediate/short-term consequences of FGM can include:ï severe pain;ï shock;ï haemorrhage;ï wound infections;ï urinary retention;ï injury to adjacent tissues;ï genital swelling; and/orï death.A.3.2 Long-Term Consequences of FGMThe long-term consequences of FGM can include:ï genital scarring;ï genital cysts and keloid scar formation;ï recurrent urinary tract infections and difficulties in passing urine;ï possible increased risk of blood infections such as hepatitis B and HIV;ï pain during sex, lack of pleasurable sensation and impaired sexual function;ï psychological concerns such as anxiety, flashbacks and post traumatic stress disorder;ï difficulties with menstruation (periods);ï complications in pregnancy or childbirth (including prolonged labour, bleeding or tears during childbirth, increased risk of caesarean section); andï increased risk of stillbirth and death of child during or just after birth.Further information on care and support for women and girls affected by FGM is provided at Annex F.Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | 39
Annex B: RiskB.1. Risk FactorsThe most significant factor to consider when deciding whether a girl or woman may be at risk of FGM is whether her family has a history of practising FGM. In addition, it is important to consider whether FGM is known to be practised in her community or country of origin.The age at which girls undergo FGM varies enormously according to the community. The procedure may be carried out when the girl is new-born, during childhood or adolescence, at marriage or during a first pregnancy.Given the hidden nature of FGM, individuals from communities where it takes place may not be aware of the practice. Women and girls who have undergone FGM may not fully understand what FGM is, what the consequences are, or that they themselves have had FGM. Given this context, discussions about FGM should always be undertaken with appropriate care and sensitivity (see Annex C).It is believed that FGM may happen to girls in the UK as well as overseas. Girls of school age who are subjected to FGM overseas are likely to be taken abroad (often to the family’s country of origin) at the start of the school holidays, particularly in the summer, in order for there to be sufficient time for her to recover before returning to school.There are a number of factors in addition to a girl’s or woman’s community, country of origin and family history that could indicate she is at risk of being subjected to FGM. Potential risk factors may include:ï a female child is born to a woman who has undergone FGM;ï a female child has an older sibling or cousin who has undergone FGM;ï a female child’s father comes from a community known to practise FGM;ï the family indicate that there are strong levels of influence held by elders and/or elders are involved in bringing up female children;ï a woman/family believe FGM is integral to cultural or religious identity;ï a girl/family has limited level of integration within UK community;ï parents have limited access to information about FGM and do not know about the harmful effects of FGM or UK law;ï a girl confides to a professional that she is to have a ‘special procedure’ or to attend a special occasion to ‘become a woman’;40 | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
ï a girl talks about a long holiday to her country of origin or another country where the practice is prevalent (see Section 2.3 for the nationalities that traditionally practise FGM);ï parents state that they or a relative will take the girl out of the country for a prolonged period;ï a parent or family member expresses concern that FGM may be carried out on the girl;ï a family is not engaging with professionals (health, education or other);ï a family is already known to social care in relation to other safeguarding issues;ï a girl requests help from a teacher or another adult because she is aware or suspects that she is at immediate risk of FGM;ï a girl talks about FGM in conversation, for example, a girl may tell other children about it (see Annex G for commonly used terms in different languages) – it is important to take into account the context of the discussion;ï a girl from a practising community is withdrawn from Personal, Social, Health and Economic (PSHE) education or its equivalent;ï a girl is unexpectedly absent from school;ï sections are missing from a girl’s Red book; and/orï a girl has attended a travel clinic or equivalent for vaccinations / anti-malarials.Remember: this is not an exhaustive list of risk factors. There may be additional risk factors specific to particular communities. For example, in certain communities FGM is closely associated to when a girl reaches a particular age.If any of these risk factors are identified professionals will need to consider what action to take. If unsure whether the level of risk requires referral at this point, professionals should discuss with their named/designated safeguarding lead.If the risk of harm is imminent, emergency measures may be required.See Annex E for information on legal interventions that can be used to protect girls/women at risk of FGM.Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | 41
Professionals should not assume that all women and girls from a particular community are supportive of, or at risk of FGM. Women who recognise that their ongoing physical and/or psychological problems are a result of having had FGM and women who are involved or highly supportive of FGM advocacy work and eradication programmes may be less likely to support or carry out FGM on their own children.However, any woman may be under pressure from her husband, partner or other family members to allow or arrange for her daughter to undergo FGM. Wider family engagement and discussions with both parents, and potentially wider family members, may be appropriate.B.1.2 Indicators that FGM May Have Already Taken PlaceIt is important that professionals look out for signs that FGM has already taken place so that:ï the girl or woman receives the care and support she needs to deal with its effects (see Annex F);ï enquiries can be made about other female family members who may need to be safeguarded from harm; and/orï criminal investigations into the perpetrators, including those who carry out the procedure, can be considered to prosecute those who have broken the law and to protect others from harm.There are a number of indications that a girl or woman has already been subjected to FGM:ï a girl or woman asks for help;ï a girl or woman confides in a professional that FGM has taken place;ï a mother/family member discloses that female child has had FGM;ï a family/child is already known to social services in relation to other safeguarding issues;ï a girl or woman has difficulty walking, sitting or standing or looks uncomfortable;ï a girl or woman finds it hard to sit still for long periods of time, and this was not a problem previously;ï a girl or woman spends longer than normal in the bathroom or toilet due to difficulties urinating;ï a girl spends long periods of time away from a classroom during the day with bladder or menstrual problems;ï a girl or woman has frequent urinary, menstrual or stomach problems;42 | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
ï a girl avoids physical exercise or requires to be excused from physical education (PE) lessons without a GP’s letter;ï there are prolonged or repeated absences from school or college (see 2016 guidance on children missing education52);ï increased emotional and psychological needs, for example withdrawal or depression, or significant change in behaviour;ï a girl or woman is reluctant to undergo any medical examinations;ï a girl or woman asks for help, but is not be explicit about the problem; and/orï a girl talks about pain or discomfort between her legs.Remember: this is not an exhaustive list of indicators.If any of these indicators are identified professionals will need to consider what action to take. If unsure what action to take, professionals should discuss with their named/designated safeguarding lead.Professionals subject to the mandatory reporting duty are required to report ‘known’53 cases of FGM in girls under 18 to the police (see Section 3.4).52 www.gov.uk/government/publications/children-missing-education53 “Known” cases are those where either a girl informs the person that an act of FGM – however described – has been carried out on her, or where the person observes physical signs on a girl appearing to show that an act of FGM has been carried out and the person has no reason to believe that the act was, or was part of, a surgical operation within section 1(2)(a) or (b) of the FGM Act 2003.Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | 43
Annex C: Talking About FGMKey pointsï Supporting women and girls who have undergone FGM demands sensitivity and compassion on the part of the professional;ï Sometimes it will not be clear that FGM is the origin of the individual’s problem/s;ï Professionals may experience strong emotions when dealing with FGM – it is important they discuss this with a colleague or supervisor;ï Important points to consider when talking to women or girls affected by FGM include: ensuring that the conversation is not interrupted, giving the individual time to speak, only asking one question at a time, and remaining non-judgmental;ï When developing written or visual materials for either individuals or the public, care must be taken to ensure the materials are appropriate, and developing them in consultation with survivors and affected communities is recommended.C.1. Introduction to Talking About FGMGood communication is essential when talking to individuals who have had FGM, may be at risk of FGM, or are affected by the practice.Professionals should ensure that they enquire sensitively about FGM. The topic of FGM may arise in a variety of settings, including a GP’s surgery as part of a medical consultation, a home environment during a health visitor’s post-natal visit, or at school. Conversations may take place with the girl or woman who may be affected by FGM, a parent or other family member. How the conversation is opened and the language used will vary according to the setting and who the conversation is with, however, the key principles set out below should apply in all cases.Talking about FGM can be difficult and upsetting. Professionals may wish to speak with their supervisor if they are affected by what they have heard.It is important to acknowledge and understand the motives, demographics and consequences of FGM. Equally, it is important that professionals take the time to think about their own concerns, feelings and values, so they can discuss FGM with clarity and confidence. A lack of awareness may mean that a professional is unable to relate to the girl or woman/their family, which may lead to a failure to discuss the issue appropriately and result in distress for the girl or woman.44 | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
If, as a result of talking about FGM with an individual or family, a professional identifies that a girl is at risk of FGM or has undergone FGM, then appropriate action should be taken. See Annex D for guidance on safeguarding and Annex F for guidance on care and support.Communicating About FGM: Additional ResourcesHealth and social care professionals in England can complete the e-learning session, ‘Communication Skills for FGM consultations’ at www.e-lfh.org.uk which provides advice and training to support these discussions.Professionals in England can watch a video on NHS Choices where women who have had FGM discuss how they would like to see professionals hold sensitive conversations about FGM: www.nhs.uk/fgmguidelinesIn Wales, NHS employees can speak to their FGM Safeguarding Lead to discuss any concerns and access necessary training. Information on online resources, data reporting arrangements and FGM Leads in Wales is available at: www.wales.nhs.uk/sitesplus/888/page/67421/C.2. Preparing to Speak to Individuals and FamiliesAdhering to key standards will enable professionals to hold conversations in a sensitive and appropriate way. These include:ï making the care of women and girls affected by FGM the primary concern, treating them as individuals, listening and respecting their dignity;ï working with others to protect and promote the health and well- being of those in their care, their families and carers, and the wider community; andï being open and honest, acting with integrity and upholding the reputation of the profession.When initiating a conversation about FGM, professionals should:ï ensure that the conversation is opened sensitively;ï be aware of the specific circumstances of the individual when a discussion about FGM needs to take place; andï be non-judgmental.Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | 45
Creating and maintaining a good rapport with the girl or woman is essential. This can be achieved by:ï allowing the girl or woman to speak - actively listening, gently encouraging, and seeking the girl or woman’s permission to discuss sensitive areas;ï not being afraid to ask about FGM, using appropriate and sensitive language. It is not unusual for women to report that professionals have avoided asking questions about FGM, and this can lead to a breakdown in trust. If a professional does not give a girl or woman the opportunity to talk about FGM , it can be very difficult for a girl or woman to bring this up herself;ï asking only one question at a time – it can be difficult to think through the answers to several questions at the same time;ï making sure there is appropriate time to listen; a girl or woman may relate information she has not disclosed previously. Interrupting her story part way through because of a lack of time is likely to cause distress and may either damage the relationship with her, or affect her relationship with professionals in future; andï preparing by understanding what written materials are available to support conversations, and what other community and third-sector organisations are able to offer support and additional information within the area. For resources and advice on how to find services, see Annex I and Annex H.It is important that professionals understand the appropriate language to use and maintain a professional and non-judgmental approach to engage with the individual effectively in what may be a challenging and upsetting situation.Professionals should:ï ensure sensitive language is used and that the girl or woman’s wishes, culture and values are recognised and respected;ï be aware that different communities may have different terms for FGM (see Annex G);ï remember that women or girls may not be aware that they have had FGM; professionals may need to explain that FGM is the cause of symptoms; andï consider some of the following ways to start a discussion about FGM:“I can see in your notes from the obstetrician or midwife that you have been cut. Could you tell me a bit more about this?”“I know that (some) women in your country have been cut. How do you feel about this? Could you tell me a bit more?” “You have talked about your cutting and the traditions in your country. Is there anything else you want to tell me about this?”46 | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
“How do you, and how does your partner, feel about female genital cutting? How do the people around you feel about this? Are you still in touch with relatives in your country? How do they feel about it? At what age is it usually performed?”Professionals have a responsibility to ensure women and families understand that FGM is illegal in the UK, and to explain the harmful consequences it can have. See Annex I for resources that can be used to support these conversations.C.2.1 Using TranslatorsAn accredited female interpreter may be required. Any interpreter should ideally be appropriately trained in relation to FGM, and in all cases should not be a family member, not be known to the individual, and not be someone with influence in the individual’s community.Care must be taken to ensure that an interpreter is available at services supporting women with FGM, as this is likely to be required for many appointments relating to FGM.C.3. Communicating in Written and Public FormatsWhen issuing communication materials about FGM some specific considerations are required. Cultural sensitivities must not get in the way of tackling FGM, but communicating about it in the wrong way can undermine and damage efforts.It is important to highlight that FGM is illegal, child abuse, a form of violence against women and girls, a human rights violation and a manifestation of gender inequality. However, communication on FGM also needs to be framed respectfully.Campaigns that do not recognise this, risk doing inadvertent harm, including:ï pushing the practice underground;ï stigmatising women and girls who have already undergone FGM;ï fuelling racism/discrimination against affected communities;ï incorrectly suggesting that more minor forms of FGM, or FGM carried out in clinics under sanitary conditions, are acceptable.To help ensure that communication activities are appropriate it is recommended that organisations consult with relevant community organisations and survivors.Communication Activities: Additional ResourcesAdvice on developing communication activities on violence against women and girls, including FGM, is available in the Violence against Women and Girls Communications Insight PackMulti-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | 47
Annex D: SafeguardingKey pointsï FGM is illegal in England and Wales (see Chapter 3 for more details). Professionals should intervene to safeguard girls and protect women who may be at risk of FGM or have been affected by it.ï The level of safeguarding intervention needed will depend on how imminent the risk of harm is (see Annex B for risk factors). An appropriate course of action should be decided on a case-by-case basis, with expert input from all relevant agencies.ï Working across agencies as soon as a girl or woman is identified as being at risk of FGM is essential.D.1. FGM: Part of Wider Safeguarding ResponsibilitiesFGM is not an issue where action or intervention can be determined by personal preference – it is an illegal, extremely harmful practice and a form of child abuse and violence against women and girls. Fears of being branded ‘racist’ or ‘discriminatory’ should not weaken the protection that professionals provide.Organisations should have local safeguarding protocols and procedures for protecting children (see Chapter 4).In Wales the national Wales Safeguarding Procedures detail the essential roles and responsibilities for practitioners to ensure that they safeguard children and adults who are at risk of abuse and neglect. There are also a number of practice guides including the ‘All Wales  Practice Guide: safeguarding children from harmful practices related to tradition, culture, religion or superstition’.48 | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
Managing risk throughout childhoodBeing born to a mother who has undergone FGM may mean a female child is at greater risk of FGM (see Annex B for risk factors). This risk can usually be identified at birth as, through ante-natal care and delivery of the child, NHS professionals can and should have identified that the mother has had FGM.Professionals should remember that FGM can be carried out at any age, so identifying that a girl is at risk of FGM at birth means that safeguarding measures adopted may need to remain in place for a number of years over the course of her childhood.This differs from other forms of harm, and this difference in approach should be recognised when putting in place policies and procedures to protect against FGM.Remember: If the only risk indicator is that a girl’s mother has undergone FGM, referral to children’s social care may not be appropriate, but other local multi- agency arrangements may be relevant. In such cases, monitoring is important to ensure that agencies respond appropriately if circumstances change and other risk factors arise. Where there is a specific risk, the case should be referred to social care.Guidance for healthcare professionals on FGM risk and safeguarding is available at: www.gov.uk/government/publications/safeguarding-women-and-girls-at-risk-of- fgmD.2. Safeguarding EffectivelyA girl at risk of FGM may need to be safeguarded over a significant proportion of her childhood, and it is therefore essential that agencies work together to determine the most appropriate safeguarding response. The importance of sharing information between practitioners and between agencies in relation to girls who may be at risk of FGM should not be underestimated (see Section 4.7). Potential signs of risk might be mentioned by a girl, her family or her friends to different professionals. For example, if a girl tells her teacher about an impending special ceremony, and in the following week the girl is taken to the GP surgery to receive travel vaccinations for planned departure, the knowledge of both of these details is critical to understanding the risk the girl faces. For this reason, professionals should:ï be aware and act upon the wide range of risk factors (see Annex B) in relation to FGM;ï have a consistent approach to sharing information with partner agencies and reviewing the individual situation; andï put in place safeguarding actions which reflect the needs of the girl.Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | 49
Equally, multi-agency working needs to be flexible and responsive to individual circumstances. For example, a policy to routinely refer all girls born to mothers who have FGM within seven days of birth to children’s social care may not meet the needs of the girl. In this example, referral may be made at a stage where the risk has not fully developed and is not imminent which may result in the case being closed.Further action may not be appropriate at that time, but if circumstances change (for example, a relative moves into the family home, or the family’s beliefs change), then safeguarding action may be required. Once a potential risk of FGM has been identified, this information should be shared between professionals and agencies to ensure that there is ongoing awareness of this risk.If a risk of FGM is identified, the first steps when safeguarding girls and women will normally come in the form of discussions with the girl, her parents, and other family members. See Annex C for advice on how to have these conversations.Having established that there are recognised signs of the risk of FGM, a professional should undertake a risk assessment.Health professionals and relevant organisations in England, should have regard to the Department of Health guidance for professionals, ‘Female Genital Mutilation Risk and Safeguarding’54.As part of the assessment, professionals should make sure that the girl and/or appropriate family members understand:ï that FGM is illegal;ï the potential health consequences of FGM;ï any actions taken;ï that information will be shared about this with colleagues and partner organisations as appropriate.When deciding what course of action to take, professionals may need to consult with their local/designated safeguarding lead and should always ensure that actions are consistent with local safeguarding policies. The course of action chosen should be based upon the needs of the girl or women identified as being at risk and will vary depending on the circumstances.54 http://www.gov.uk/government/publications/safeguarding-women-and-girls-at-risk-of-fgm50 | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
D.2.1 Girl (Under 18) who is Suspected to have Undergone FGMIf any professional suspects that a girl has undergone FGM their named/designated safeguarding lead must be made aware and an immediate referral should be made to the relevant local authority’s children’s social care department.When a girl is suspected to have already undergone FGM, all professionals should:ï document this in their notes;ï complete relevant risk assessment; andï follow local multi-agency safeguarding procedures.D.2.2 Girl (Under 18) or Vulnerable Adult who is Suspected to be at Risk of FGMAll cases should be handled in accordance with local safeguarding procedures, and all relevant factors should be taken into account, as with all other forms of safeguarding risk to children or vulnerable adults. The initial referral should, in the case of a girl, be made to the relevant local authority’s children’s social care department (possibly via a Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub if one is in place). In the case of a vulnerable adult, an initial referral should be made to adult social services.Where there is an imminent or serious risk, an emergency response may be required, either an urgent referral to social services and/or potentially contacting the police. Where it is considered that there is an immediate risk to a girl or woman, the local authority55 should consider whether to apply for an FGM Protection Order and/or an Emergency Protection Order (see Chapter 3 and Annex E).Where a girl or woman, given her individual circumstances, is identified as being at risk of FGM, but the current situation does not indicate that the risk is imminent or significant appropriate safeguarding actions should be taken, making sure that this information is shared appropriately. This will help to make sure that, if other agencies or professionals have a wider scope or understanding of the child’s or woman’s circumstances, they will be able to use the most up to date information to consider the risk the girl or woman currently faces.55 Local authorities are ‘relevant third parties’ for the purposes of applying for an FGMPO, i.e. they can apply for such an order without seeking prior leave from the court to do so.Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | 51
Local procedures should set out what to do in these circumstances. This is likely to include:ï keeping a record of the discussion. For healthcare professionals, this should be within the patient’s record;ï sharing this information with the relevant local authority’s children’s social care department, via a Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub if one is in place;ï if identified by a healthcare professional, sharing this information with the girl’s GP, health visitor or school nurse (dependent on age of child) and potentially other professional delivering care to the child depending upon circumstances;ï in healthcare settings in England, making sure that the FGM Information Sharing (FGM-IS) System is used, and an indicator placed upon the girl’s record as appropriate (see Section D.2.9).In all cases, professionals should also consider risk to other children and women in the family.Depending on the circumstances of the individual case, the professional’s role and local procedures, a professional may need to make this referral personally. If the referral is made by another individual, all relevant information obtained from the child/family members should be shared with the referrer.D.2.3 Girl (Under 18) or Vulnerable Adult who has Previously Been Identified as at Risk of FGMWith effective safeguarding and information sharing procedures in place, professionals will be able to see on a girl or woman’s record that she has previously been identified as potentially at risk of FGM. Professionals treating or supporting the girl or woman should make themselves aware of any relevant information and take appropriate action, as for other forms of abuse.Professionals should always take opportunities to discuss and understand changes to the girl’s family circumstances, and look out for whether there is a change in relation to any of the known risk factors. For example, if the professional becomes aware of new travel plans or the arrival of extended family members to live with the girl, this information should be shared with appropriate partner agencies. Local procedures should give advice of how to act in these circumstances.52 | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
D.2.4 FGM Disclosed by or Visually Identified in a Girl (Under 18)Where a case of FGM is disclosed by or visually identified in a girl under the age of 18, regulated health or social care professionals and teachers are legally required to make a report to the police under the FGM mandatory reporting duty. See Section3.4 for further information.Professionals who are not subject to the mandatory reporting duty should follow their local safeguarding procedures, and discuss the case with their local safeguarding lead to agree an appropriate a course of action.D.2.5 Adult who has had FGMThere is no requirement for automatic referral of adult women with FGM to adult social services or the police. Professionals should be aware that any disclosure may be the first time that a woman has ever discussed her FGM with anyone. A referral to the police should not be an automatic response for all adult women who are identified as having had FGM; cases must individually assessed.Professional should seek to support women by offering referral to community groups who can provide support, or other services as appropriate (see Annex H).In all cases it is also important to consider whether the individual and/or her family are known to social services, and whether there are any existing safeguarding arrangements in place.D.2.6 Professionals Working in Wales: Additional ConsiderationsRelevant partners have a Duty to Report Children at Risk (Section 130) under Part 7 of the Social Services and Well-being (Wales) Act. Section 130(4) defines a “child at risk” as a child who:a) is experiencing or is at risk of abuse, neglect or other kinds of harm; andb) has needs for care and support (whether or not the local authority is meeting any of those needs).When a child has been reported under section 130, the local authority must consider whether there are grounds for carrying out an investigation under section 47 of the Children Act 1989. This includes children at risk of FGM.D.2.7 Safeguarding Other Family MembersWhenever a woman is identified as having had, or being at risk of, FGM, consideration must be given not only to whether she is at risk of further harm, but also to whether there are other girls or women in her family or wider unit who may be at risk of FGM (see Annex B). Issues to consider may include the potential need to:ï share information about an adult related to or known to the child or vulnerable adult in relation to whom safeguarding action is being taken;ï share information about a girl or young woman who the professional does not have a direct relationship with, e.g. the elder daughter of a pregnant woman who a midwife is treating.Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | 53
D.2.8 Women and Girls from OverseasIf the girl or woman is from overseas, and fleeing potential FGM, applying to remain in the UK as a refugee can be a complex process requiring professional immigration advice (see www.gov.uk/claim-asylum for more information about the asylum application process).Many individuals, especially women, may be frightened by contact with any statutory agency, as they may have been told that the authorities will deport them and/or take their parents or children from them. Professionals need to be extremely sensitive to these fears when dealing with a victim or potential victim from overseas, whatever their immigration status, as they may not be aware of their true immigration position. These circumstances make them particularly vulnerable.Professionals must not allow any investigation of immigration status to impede police enquiries into an offence that may have been committed against the victim or their children. Border Force officials and police officers may choose to establish an agreement or protocol about how any two simultaneous investigations may work.54 | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
NHS Staff in England: Additional ConsiderationsD.2.9 NHS Staff in England: Additional ConsiderationsThe FGM Information Sharing (FGM-IS) System in the NHS in EnglandThe Female Genital Mutilation Information Sharing (FGM-IS), is a national IT system for health that allows clinicians across England to note on a girl's record within the NHS Summary Care Record application (an existing part of a child’s electronic record) that they are potentially at risk of FGM.The FGM-IS allows the potential risk of FGM to be shared confidentially with health professionals across all care settings until a girl is 18 years old. The FGM-IS can be used at any appropriate time during the delivery of care to check whether the girl has been assessed as being potentially at risk of FGM.If a girl is identified as being at potential risk of FGM, the FGM risk indicator should be added to the system following completion of an FGM risk assessment, as detailed in the Department of Health's guidance titled ‘Female Genital Mutilation Risk and Safeguarding Guidance for professionals’ (2017)56.The FGM-IS is to be used in conjunction with local safeguarding frameworks and processes. Use of the FGM-IS will not change professional responsibilities in this regard.The FGM-IS will hold the following information:ï an indicator that a girl has a family history of FGM;ï the date that the FGM risk indicator was added on to the system.ï the date that the FGM safeguarding risk assessment was carried out; andWho can access it?Authorised health professionals with the relevant security permissions on their NHS Smartcard are able to access the FGM Information. The main groups of health professionals who use the system to add or view information are those most likely to observe and identify the warning signs associated with the potential risk of FGM. These are usually GPs, practices nurses, midwives, school nurses, safeguarding specialists and health visitors.It is also likely that information held within the system will be viewed by clinicians working in NHS travel centres, acute trusts, mental health trusts, and unscheduled care settings such as primary care out-of-hours services, minor injury units and A&E. If a professional working in social care or the police identifies a girl for whom it may be appropriate to have this indicator placed upon the girl’s record, as part of the multi-agency response put in place to safeguarding the girl, they should discuss with the healthcare professional within the team how to make sure this is completed.56 www.gov.uk/government/publications/safeguarding-women-and-girls-at-risk-of-fgmMulti-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | 55
Police: Additional ConsiderationsD.2.10 Police: Additional ConsiderationsSection D.2. provides guidance for all professionals on the considerations and actions for safeguarding women and girls who are at risk of, or who have undergone, FGM.In addition, police should refer to the College of Policing’s ‘Authorised Professional Practice on FGM’57 which includes guidance on prevention, protection and evidence- gathering in FGM cases.Officers must not let fears of being branded ‘racist’ or insensitive to cultural traditions weaken their investigative strategy or decision(s) to arrest suspects. Investigation must be robust and follow national and local guidance for safeguarding and child abuse investigations. In addition officers should be culturally aware and have an understanding of the people they are dealing with as part of any investigation.Criminal investigations should follow national and local police guidance for safeguarding and child abuse investigations.The procedures described apply in particular to officers and staff in the following roles:ï child abuse investigation teams;ï community safety units;ï public protection units;ï missing persons teams;ï specialist sexual offences investigation teams; andï all police officers and police staff who in the course of their duty deal with or come into contact with children and young people.57 www.app.college.police.uk/app-content/major-investigation-and-public-protection/female-genital- mutilation/?s=female+genital+mutilation#prevention56 | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
Police: Additional ConsiderationsInitial steps when a girl may be at risk of FGMIf an officer or a member of police staff believes that a girl may be at risk of undergoing FGM, the duty inspector must be made aware and an immediate referral should be made to their local child abuse specialist team or similar. If this is outside their core hours, the duty inspector must ensure that effective protection measures are put in place to ensure the safety of the victim in addition to undertaking an effective primary investigation. The safety and welfare of the girl is of paramount importance. The specialist team will in turn make an immediate referral to the relevant local authority’s children’s social care team if this has not already been done by the first responders/ primary investigators.If any officer believes that the girl could be at immediate risk of significant harm, and use of an Emergency Protection Order has already been considered, they should consider the use of police protection powers under section 46 of the Children Act 1989. Officers should carry out the following actions:ï complete appropriate checks, e.g. Police National Database (PND), Police National Computer (PNC), Children’s Social Care;ï submit an appropriate intelligence log;ï complete relevant risk assessment and management plans (as per Force policy);ï complete a crime report, ensuring that the incident is flagged in accordance with force procedures;ï create a crime report/non-crime related occurrence to record the report/referral;ï inform their supervisor, who must be at least the rank of inspector (notify a superintendent if further strategic support is required and in accordance with local Force instructions);ï all officers and staff must consider whether this could be a critical incident and deal with the matter accordingly;ï consider ‘Golden Hour’ principles in relation to evidence gathering; andï consider risk to other children and women in the family.Next steps when a girl may be at risk of FGMDepending on the circumstances of the case, FGM-related referrals may lead to a strategy meeting with the police, local authority children’s social care, health professionals (school nurse, health visitor, or community/hospital paediatrician as appropriate) and the referrer (e.g. school). Such a meeting should take place as soon as practicable (and in any case within two working days).Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | 57
Police: Additional ConsiderationsOfficers should consider the use of police protection powers under section 46 of the Children Act 1989 and remove the girl to a place of safety (see Section E.1). In addition, police and local authority children’s social care should consider the use of an FGM Protection Order (see Chapter 3.3), and/or other protective order as appropriate. The welfare of other children within the family, in particular (but not exclusively) female siblings, should be reviewed. The investigation should be the subject of regular ongoing multi-agency reviews to discuss the outcome and any further protective steps that need to be taken with regard to that girl and any other siblings.Officers must not let fears of being branded ‘racist’ or insensitive to cultural traditions weaken their investigative strategy or decision(s) to arrest suspects. Investigation must be robust and follow national and local guidance for safeguarding and child abuse investigations. In addition officers should be culturally aware and have an understanding of the people they are dealing with as part of any investigation.Initial steps when a girl is thought/known to have had FGMIf any police officer or police staff is made aware that a girl has already undergone FGM, the duty inspector must be made aware and an immediate referral should be made to their local child abuse special team. If this is outside their core hours, the duty inspector (or on-call senior investigating officer) must manage the initial phase of the investigation and ensure that effective protection measures are put in place. The specialist team will in turn make an immediate referral to the relevant local authority’s children’s social care team.Officers should carry out the following actions:ï complete appropriate checks, e.g. PND, PNC, Children’s Social Care;ï submit an appropriate intelligence log;ï complete relevant risk assessment and management plans (as per Force Policy);ï refer to local authority children’s social care (unless they were the referrer).ï complete a crime report, ensuring that the incident is flagged in accordance with force procedures;ï inform their supervisor, who must be at least the rank of inspector;ï ensure that the on-call superintendent is made aware of the referral;ï create a crime report/non-crime related occurrence to record the report/referral;58 | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
Police: Additional Considerationsï if the report is made under the mandatory reporting duty (see Section 3.4) it must be recorded as a crime without delay or waiting for further investigation (unless there is immediately available credible evidence to show that a crime has not occurred). This includes cases where it is suspected that FGM occurred outside of England and Wales.ï all officers and staff must treat this crime as a critical incident and deal with the matter effectively;ï the investigative strategy should consider obtaining evidence or intelligence identifying the cutters (people who carry out FGM for payment or otherwise) and investigating these individuals with a view to identifying further victims and closing down such networks; andï investigating officers must refer to the Police/Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) Protocol for the investigation and prosecution of FGM cases. The 43 English and Welsh police forces have signed this protocol.Next steps when a girl is thought/known to have had FGMIf it is believed or known that a girl has undergone FGM, a multi-agency strategy meeting should be held as soon as practicable (and in any case within two working days) to discuss the implications for the child and the coordination of the criminal investigation.There is a risk that the fear of prosecution will prevent those concerned from seeking help, resulting in possible health complications for the girl; thus police action will need to be in partnership with other agencies, affected communities and specialist non- government organisations. This should also be used as an opportunity to assess the need for specialist support services such as counselling and medical help as appropriate.Police officers should refer to the CPS’s guidance ‘Provision of Therapy for Child Witnesses Prior to a Criminal Trial’58. As highlighted above, investigating officers must refer to the Police/CPS Protocol for the investigation and prosecution of FGM cases, which has been signed by the 43 police forces in England and Wales.A second strategy meeting should take place within a reasonable as appropriate to support the operational response.Conducting interviews about FGMAs with all criminal investigations, children and young people should be interviewed under the relevant procedure/guidelines (e.g. ‘Achieving Best Evidence’59) to obtain the best possible evidence for use in any prosecution.Consent should be obtained to record the interview and for allowing the use of the interview in family and/or criminal courts. In addition, information gained from the58 www.cps.gov.uk/publications/prosecution/therapychild.html59 www.cps.gov.uk/sites/default/files/documents/legal_guidance/best_evidence_in_criminal_proceedings.pdfMulti-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | 59
Police: Additional Considerationsinterview process will enable a risk assessment to be conducted as to the risk to any other children or siblings.See Annex C for more information on talking about FGM with those affected.Medical examinationsCorroborative evidence should be sought through a medical examination conducted by a qualified medical professional trained in identifying the different types of FGM.In all cases involving children, an experienced paediatrician should be involved in setting up the medical examination. This is to ensure that a holistic assessment which explores any other medical, support and safeguarding needs of the girl or young woman is offered and that appropriate referrals are made as necessary.Steps when an adult has had FGMIf any police officer or police staff is made aware that an adult woman has undergone FGM, a multi-agency disciplinary approach must be taken to consider the risks to the woman. This should consider any potential risk to any girls within the family (and extended family) and consider initial and core assessments of those girls.Consideration should also be given to providing supportive services for the woman, including counselling and medical assistance and signposting the FGM survivor to specialist non-governmental organisation support networks.The investigative strategy should consider obtaining evidence or intelligence identifying the excisors (people who carry out FGM for payment or otherwise) and investigating these individuals with a view to identifying further victims and closing down such networks. Investigating officers must consult early with the CPS in all FGM cases - as per the police/CPS protocol so the most effective investigation and prosecution opportunities are identified. Further advice on progressing an investigation can be found online on the Authorised Professional Practice (APP) website (www.app.college.police.uk).60 | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
School, Colleges and Universities: Additional ConsiderationsD.2.11 School, Colleges and Universities: Additional ConsiderationsThe statutory duties on schools and colleges are set out in ‘Working Together to Safeguard Children’60(for England) and ‘Keeping Children Safe in Education’61 or ‘Keeping Learners Safe’62 in Wales. These apply to FGM as to any other form of abuse.See Annex B for advice on how to identify girls who may have undergone FGM or may be at risk.Section D.2 provides guidance for all professionals on the considerations and actions around safeguarding of women and girls who are at risk of or who have undergone FGM.As well as following relevant statutory guidance, schools, colleges and universities may also find it useful to:ï Raise awareness of FGM among staff and pupils/students byo displaying relevant materials;o providing staff training;o making materials such as books or DVDs available;o including FGM in relevant parts of the school curriculum: PSHE in England (PSE in Wales); sex and relationship education; science; citizenship.ï Resources, including examples of lesson plans, are available in the online resource pack63.60 www.gov.uk/government/publications/working-together-to-safeguard-children--261  https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/keeping-children-safe-in-education--262 https://gov.wales/keeping-learners-safe63 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/female-genital-mutilation-resource-packMulti-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | 61
School, Colleges and Universities: Additional ConsiderationsWhat to do if a student stops attending schoolDetails of the steps that local authorities need to take to meet their duty to identify all children (of compulsory school age64) not receiving a suitable education are described in (England) Children missing education – statutory guidance for local authorities (Sep 2016)65 or Statutory Guidance to Help Prevent Children and Young People from Missing Education: Welsh Assembly Government Circular 006/2010.If a teacher, lecturer or other member of staff suspects that a student has been removed from, or prevented from, attending education as a result of FGM, a referral should be made to the local authority children’s or adult’s social care and the police.Staff may consider speaking to the student’s friends to gather information – although they should not make clear that FGM is suspected as this may get back to the family who may hasten any plans to perform the procedure (as well as potentially breaching confidentiality).Remember: schools and local authorities have specific duties in relation to attendance at school or removing pupils from the school register. Staff should not delete a pupil from the school’s admission register, except in certain circumstances. These are prescribed in The Education (Pupil Registration) (England) Regulations 2006. In certain circumstances, schools are required to inform the relevant local authority of a pupil who is to be removed from the admission register;64 As defined in section 8 of the Education Act 199665 www.gov.uk/government/publications/children-missing-education62 Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
School, Colleges and Universities: Additional ConsiderationsCASE STUDY: Norbury SchoolNorbury School had a large population of pupils from countries known to practise FGM.The head teacher decided that the school should raise awareness of FGM and identified two key colleagues, both who were well respected by pupils, parents and the wider community, to lead on this work.They recognised that they needed to bring communities on board with the work rather than have a ‘top down’ approach. They also wanted to be open and honest about facts, based on an educational approach, rather than ‘blame’ and ‘lecture’. They used the NSPCC PANTS programme as a basis for their FGM awareness programmes. The PANTS programme sets out a simple message for children that parts of their body covered by underwear are private, their body belongs to them and that no-one has the right to make them do anything that makes them feel uncomfortable.The school had six months of regular meetings with stakeholders including health services, children’s services, their parent group, the voluntary sector, the police, cluster schools and charities to understand the facts, the various educational approaches, training and engagement with communities.Following these meetings the school created their own FGM lesson plans, resources and approaches which they were shared with their stakeholders and modified as required.All Year 5 & 6 pupils’ parents met the school and reviewed the resources before the lessons were piloted and INSETs were held for their staff, governors and parents.The class groups for the lessons were not single-sexed groups until year 6, where they split the boys and the girls in order to see how the questions developed.This was a good step as they found that the boys were very curious and some very angry that this could be done to their sisters, cousins, friends. The school also created a playground display and made it clear that they were educating and not blaming, whilst remaining clear about the law in this county.By the end of the summer term, they had delivered the FGM awareness lessons to all their year 4 – 6 pupils and have the PANTS programme under way across the school from Nursery to year 6.To celebrate the voice of the child, the school have created a working party of Year 3- Year 6 children to raise awareness of FGM across their borough. The children have presented to both professionals and children and even take questions from the floor. The school has strong links with their cluster secondary schools and Year 10 students from those schools have supported the delivery of PANTS lessons to their Year 1 children.Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | 63
Annex E: Legal InterventionsKey pointsï Where a girl or woman is at risk, legal interventions should be considered.ï Interventions may include police protection, an Emergency Protection Order, an FGM Protection Order (FGMPO) and/or other orders or applications.ï The relevant agencies should consider what is appropriate on a fact-specific basis. In some cases it may be considered that an FGMPO is sufficient to protect a girl at risk. In other cases it may be more appropriate for a combination of orders to be sought, for example, an FGMPO and making a girl a ward of court.ï Referral to an accredited family law practitioner to deal with wider issues of private or public family law may be equally important to meet the girl’s needs.ï Where an application has been made to the family court to protect a girl who may be at risk of harm (for example, for a care order) and it is subsequently recognised that there is a risk of FGM but no application for an FGMPO has been made, the applicant can request the court to consider making such an order. A court can also make an FGMPO of its own volition where it considers it necessary to protect a girl from FGM during the course of other court proceedings.64 | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
E.1. Police ProtectionLocal authority children’s social care may approach the police and ask for their assistance in undertaking a joint investigation. The way in which this is to be handled should be covered in the procedures prepared by the Local Safeguarding Children Board or Safeguarding Children Boards in Wales and in accordance with ‘Working Together to Safeguard Children’66 (for England) and ‘Working Together to Safeguard People: Volume 5 - handling individual cases to protect children at risk’ (2018)67 in Wales. A joint approach can be particularly effective where it is thought that a girl or young woman is at immediate risk of FGM.Where there is reasonable cause to believe that a child would otherwise be likely to suffer significant harm, a police officer may (with or without the cooperation of social care) remove that child from the parent and use the powers for ‘police protection’ (section 46 of the Children Act 1989) for up to 72 hours. The police must inform children’s social care who must assist in finding safe and secure accommodation for the girl or young woman if requested to do so. Children’s social care must assist the police, by arranging a placement for the child or young person in a place of safety, taking into account risk management and safety planning – whether this is in local authority accommodation provided by children’s social care, on their behalf, or in a refuge.Local authority children’s social care must commence child protection enquiries under section 47 of the Children Act 1989 when they are informed that a child who lives, or is found in their area, is in police protection68. They must also do so if they are told that the child is the subject of an emergency protection order, or they have reasonable cause to suspect that a child who lives, or is found, in their area is suffering or likely to suffer significant harm.Children’s social care may apply for an Emergency Protection Order (EPO) (see Section E.3) at any point within the 72 hours if there is reasonable cause to believe the child is likely to suffer significant harm if she is not removed to accommodation provided by or on behalf of the local authority or does not remain in the place in which she is then being accommodated. The police have the power to make their own application for an EPO on behalf of the relevant local authority, but as a matter of practice this is done by children’s social care.66 www.gov.uk/government/publications/working-together-to-safeguard-children--267 https://gov.wales/safeguarding-children-risk-abuse-or-neglect
Remember:ï police officers have powers, under section 17(1)(e) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, to enter and search any premises in order to protect life or prevent injury;ï police officers can also prevent the removal of a child from a hospital or other safe place in which the child or young person is accommodated69;ï the parents may ask for contact with the child under protection, but this does not have to be granted if it is not, in the opinion of the officer designated for the purposes of section 46, both reasonable and in the best interests of the child, i.e. if it would place the child or young person in danger;ï the local police child abuse investigation team must be informed of any child under police protection;ï a girl may wish to see a female police officer;ï the girl may, or may not, want to see a police officer from her own community – try to give the child the choice;ï in all cases, check whether or not the girl is subject of a Child Protection Plan; andï the police do not have parental responsibility with respect to a child while that child is under police protection, but they must do what is reasonable in all the circumstances of the case for the purposes of safeguarding or promoting the child’s welfare (having regard in particular to the length of the period during which the child will be protected).E.2. FGM Protection OrdersSection 5A of and Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the 2003 Act”70 provide for the making of FGM Protection Orders (FGMPOs) in England and Wales71. An FGMPO is a civil order which may be made for the purposes of protecting a girl at risk of FGM or protecting a girl against whom an FGM offence has been committed. Breach of an FGMPO is a criminal offence with a maximum penalty of up to 5 years’ imprisonment. More information on FGMPOs is available in Section 3.3.69 Section 47(1)(a)(ii) of the Children Act 1989.70 As inserted by section 73 of the Serious Crime Act 2015.
E.3. Emergency Protection Orders (EPO) Under Section 44 of the Children Act 1989An application for an EPO can be made by anyone – including social workers, police, youth workers, advocates or friends of the girl or young woman – but in practice it is usually made by local authority children’s social care.An EPO authorises the applicant to remove the girl and keep her in safe accommodation, but this power can only be exercised in order to safeguard the girl’s welfare. In addition, the EPO operates to require any person in a position to do so to comply with any request to produce the child to the applicant. An EPO may also include directions as to the medical examination of the child (or that such examinations should not take place), although if the child is of sufficient understanding to make an informed decision, she may refuse to submit to such an examination.An EPO lasts for a period not exceeding eight days, but it may be renewed for up to a further seven days.More information on EPOs is available at: www.cafcass.gov.uk/grown- ups/professionals/care.aspxFor further information on court orders, refer to The Children Act 1989: court orders (2014).E.4. Care Orders and Supervision OrdersSometimes an EPO is followed by an application from the local authority for a Care Order or Supervision Order (sections 31 and 38 of the Children Act 1989). Without either a Care Order or an Interim Care Order, once the EPO has lapsed, the local authority will no longer have parental responsibility.No care or supervision order may be made with respect to a child who has reached the age of 17 (or 16 if the child is married).When a Care Order or Supervision Order is not available due to the age of the child, children’s social care should be aware of the opportunities presented by an FGM Protection Order or by making a child a ward of court, under the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court. A Ward of Court Order is available up to 18 years old. A child who is the subject of a Care Order cannot be made a ward of courtMore information on Care Orders and Supervision Orders is available at: www.cafcass.gov.uk/grown-ups/professionals/care.aspx
E.5. Inherent JurisdictionA children’s social care department may ask the High Court to exercise its inherent jurisdiction to protect the child. Any person with a genuine interest in the child, including the child themselves, a private individual or the Children and Family Court Advisory Support Service (CAFCASS/CAFCASS CYMRU) legal services department can apply to have a child made a ward of court.A local authority may only apply for an order under the High Court’s inherent jurisdiction if it has permission from the court to do so (under section 100 of the Children Act 1989). Leave to apply may only be granted by the court if it is satisfied that the result the local authority wishes to achieve could not be achieved throughthe making of any order, other than one under the court’s inherent jurisdiction. A local authority is entitled to apply for this where they have reasonable cause to believethat if the court’s inherent jurisdiction is not exercised, the child is likely to suffer significant harm.For the purposes of obtaining protection for a child or young person, there is little difference between wardship and the other orders made in the exercise of the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court72. All types of orders under the inherent jurisdiction are flexible and wide-ranging, and an order may be sought where there is a real risk of a child being subjected to FGM. Where there is a fear that a child may be taken overseas for the purpose of FGM, an order for the surrender of their passport may be made as well as an order that the child may not leave the jurisdiction without the court’s permission.Orders for the immediate return of the child or young person can be obtained. These orders can be enforced on family members or extended family members. The orders are in the form of injunctions with penal notices attached.E.5.1 Applications for WardshipOnce a young person has left the country, there are fewer legal options open to police, social services, other agencies or another person to recover the young person and bring them back to the UK. One course of action is to seek the return of the young person to the jurisdiction of England and Wales by making them a ward of court. Making a child a ward of court falls within the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court.72 See paragraph 1.3 of Practice Direction 12D of the Family Procedure Rules 2010 that provides guidance on the distinguishing characteristics of wardship.
An application for wardship is made to the High Court Family Division73, and may be made by a relative, friend close to the child or young person, or CAFCASS/CAFCASS CYMRU legal services department or any interested party.Where an urgent ward of court application is required, an application should be made where possible within court hours. It is key that in such situation, early liaison with the Clerk of the Rules occurs in order that they can attempt to accommodate such requests. When it is not possible to apply for urgent wardship order within court hours, contact should be made with the security office at the Royal Courts of Justice (020 7947 6000 or 020 7947 6260)74 who will refer the matter to the urgent business officer. The urgent business officer can contact the duty judge. The judge may agree to hold a hearing, either convened at court or elsewhere, or by telephone75.Paragraph 16 of Schedule 2 to the 2003 Act makes it clear that there is no effect on:ï the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court;ï any criminal liability;ï any civil remedies under the Protection from Harassment Act 1997;ï any right to an occupation order or a non-molestation order under Part 4 of the Family Law Act 1996;ï any right to a forced marriage protection order under Part 4A of that Act;ï any protection or assistance under the Children Act 1989; orï any claim in tortif making an application for a FGM Protection Order.73 Rule 12.36(1) of the Family procedure Rules 2010.74 www.justice.gov.uk/courts/procedure-rules/family/practice_directions/pd_part_12e75 Practice Direction 12E (Urgent business) www.justice.gov.uk/courts/procedure- rules/family/practice_directions/pd_part_12eMulti-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation | 69
E.6. RepatriationWhen a British national seeks assistance at a British Embassy or High Commission overseas and wishes to return to the UK, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) will do what it can to assist or repatriate the individual. Sometimes the FCO may ask the police or social services for assistance when a British national is being repatriated to the UK from overseas.In many cases a victim of FGM may be extremely vulnerable: because of their age, the country in which they are located or their personal circumstance. If the FCO is able to repatriate them, it may not be able to give the police or social services much, if any, notice of the person’s arrival due to the urgency of the situation. Sometimes a person may have risked their life to escape and their family may go to considerable lengths to find them. She may be extremely traumatised and frightened. These factors can make individuals particularly vulnerable when they return to the UK and it is likely that urgent multi-agency consideration of the level of risk faced by a victim of FGM will be appropriate.Many FGM cases involve children under the age of 16. In such cases, in order to assist the victim to return to the UK, the support and assistance of UK agencies (such as police and social services) will be essential and assistance from overseas authorities seized with safeguarding duties is also likely to be necessary. In some countries this could be the police, but in others it may be the Ministry for Children or even Health. Supporting repatriation of FGM victims under 16 without the support of at least one person with parental responsibility or the safeguarding authorities in- country may be very difficult and drawn out.Remember:ï The FCO does not ask victims of FGM to take out loans for their repatriation costs. Where possible, the Government will seek to ensure the costs of repatriation fall on the perpetrators by means of Female Genital Mutilation Protection Orders (FGMPOs). The Government will also assess other options where necessary, such as family, friends, schools or social care.ï the FCO can facilitate a British national’s return to the UK by providing emergency travel documents, in some exceptional circumstances helping to arrange flights and, where possible, by helping to find temporary safe accommodation while the victim is overseas; andï the FCO or social services may ask the police to meet the person on arrival, in case family members try to abduct them, at the airport.70 | Multi-agency statutory guidance on female genital mutilation
Annex F: Care and SupportF.1. Health ServicesWomen and girls who have had FGM can have a variety of different needs for care and support, and may seek help from a range of places.The appropriate treatment will depend on the girl/woman’s individual circumstances and an assessment of her needs. This will normally include considering her symptoms, type of FGM and whether she is pregnant. As with all health services, an individual care plan should be agreed with the patient and put in place to meet her specific needs.When developing a new service or care pathway within an area, organisations are encouraged and advised to work with patient representatives and groups who can advise on the wishes and needs of service users.Health Services: Additional ResourcesFor clinical guidelines on the care of women who have undergone FGM, please see Female Genital Mutilation and its Management (Green-top Guideline No. 53), published by Royal College of Obstetrics and Gynaecology.In Wales, there is a published FGM Care Pathway and any queries should be directed through the health board FGM lead: www.wales.nhs.uk/sitesplus/888/page/67421/F.2. Counselling and Psychological ServicesCase histories and personal accounts taken from women indicate that FGM can be an extremely traumatic experience which stays with them for the rest of their lives. Young women receiving psychological counselling in the UK report feelings of betrayal by parents, incompleteness, regret, and anger76. There is increasing awareness of the severe psychological consequences of FGM for girls and women, which can become evident in mental health problems.
Local commissioners must consider the provision of mental health support and services, and that girls and women who have undergone FGM are able to access this treatment as required. The support should be provided following an assessment of individual needs, and clinicians should discuss the care pathway with the patient, however, services should also consider allowing patients to access them directly without the need for a referral.F.3. Safety of Service UsersWhen services are commissioned, appropriate consideration is required to ensure the safety of patients. Any written materials and clinic names should be developed with due care and consideration that references to FGM may pose a safety risk if family members do not support the woman’s actions to access support services.F.4. Child Protection ExaminationsIf a girl has been referred to social services, it is standard practice to refer her in a timely manner for a child protection examination.A child protection examination is carried out to look for signs that a child or young person has been abused or neglected. This is different from a clinical examination, which aims to establish what is wrong with the child or young person and what treatment may be needed.If there is a delay in accessing a child protection examination appointment, this can cause unnecessary distress for a girl and her family, as an appropriate safeguarding response is normally informed by the details obtained within such an appointment.As such, organisations and professionals should make sure that the appointments are commissioned on an appropriate basis, and that professionals refer to them without delay after a referral is made.The multi-agency safeguarding response should also consider whether the girl needs to attend a clinical examination to consider what her care needs are.The General Medical Council has issued guidance on child protection examinations77. This guidance covers the considerations around obtaining consent (required), and what to do if consent it not given.
Annex G: Terms Used for FGM In Other LanguagesCountryTerm used for FGMLanguageCHAD – the Ngama Sara subgroupBagneGadjaEGYPTTharaArabicKhitanArabicKhifadArabicETHIOPIAMegrezAmharicAbsumHarrariERITREAMekhnishabTigregnaGAMBIANiakaMandinkaKuyangoMandinkaMusolula KaroolaMandinkaGUINEA-BISSAUFanadu di MindjerKrioluIRANXatnaFarsiKENYAKutairiSwahiliKutairi was ichanaSwahiliNIGERIAIbi/UgwuIgbodidabe fun omobirin / ila kiko fun omobirinYorubaSIERRA LEONESunnaSoussouBondoTemeneeBondo/SondeMendeeBondoMandinkaBondoLimbaSOMALIAGudiniinSomaliHalalaysSomaliQodiinSomaliSUDANKhifadArabicTahoorArabicTURKEYKadin SunnetiTurkishA fuller list of terms can be found at National FGM Centre: Traditional Terms for Female Genital Mutilation.
Annex H: Contact InformationHELPLINESNSPCC FGM helpline: 0800 028 3550www.nspcc.org.uk/preventing-abuse/child-abuse-and-neglect/female-genital- mutilation-fgmemail: fgmhelp@nspcc.org.ukNational Domestic Abuse Helpline: 0808 2000 247 (24-hour) https://www.nationaldahelpline.org.ukChildLine: 0800 1111 www.childline.org.ukPOLICEPolice forces www.gov.uk/contact-police Metropolitan Police ServiceProject Azure Partnership Team: 020 7161 2888GOVERNMENTFGM UnitThe FGM Unit, based at the Home Office, co-ordinates work on FGM across government and offers outreach support to local areas. Please note the unit does not handle individual cases.fgmenquiries@homeoffice.gov.ukForced Marriage UnitThe Government’s Forced Marriage Unit can be contacted for advice on forced marriage issues on 020 7008 0151 (Monday – Friday, 9am – 5pm; outside of these hours, call the Foreign and Commonwealth Office on 020 7008 1500).email: fmu@fco.gov.uk
Welsh Live Fear Free Helpline: 0808 801 0800Text: 078600 77333www.gov.wales/live-fear-freeOTHER ORGANISATIONSFor a list of other organisations who can provide advice and support on FGM see the ‘Contact, helplines and clinics’ section of the FGM resource pack:www.gov.uk/government/publications/female-genital-mutilation-resource- pack/female-genital-mutilation-resource-pack#contacts-helplines-and-clinicsEnter a postcode to find local organisations www.gov.uk/female-genital-mutilation- help-advice
Annex I: ResourcesSafeguarding guidanceHM Government (2018) Working Together to Safeguard Children www.gov.uk/government/publications/working-together-to-safeguard-children--2Welsh Government Safeguarding guidance https://gov.wales/safeguarding-guidanceHM Government (2015) What to do if you’re worried a child is being abused www.gov.uk/government/publications/what-to-do-if-youre-worried-a-child-is-being- abused--2Department of Health (2016) Female Genital Mutilation: Risk and Safeguarding – Guidance for professionals www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/418564/2903 800_DH_FGM_Accessible_v0.1.pdfDepartment for Education (2019) Keeping Children Safe in Education www.gov.uk/government/publications/keeping-children-safe-in-education--2Department for Education (2016) Children Missing Education: Statutory guidance for local authorities www.gov.uk/government/publications/children-missing-educationAll Wales Child Protection Procedures Review Group (2011) All Wales Protocol: Female Genital Mutilation www.wales.nhs.uk/sitesplus/888/page/67421/Prevalence dataUNICEF FGM international data http://data.unicef.org/child-protection/fgmc.htmlMacfarlane A, Dorkenoo E. (2015) ‘Prevalence of Female Genital Mutilation in England and Wales: National and local estimates’. London: City University London and Equality Now http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/12382/NHS Digital, FGM Enhanced Dataset Information Standard https://digital.nhs.uk/data-and-information/publications/statistical/female-genital- mutilationFGM Protection Orders (FGMPOs)HM Courts Service Application forms for FGMPOs and information in different languages on how FGMPOs can protect people www.gov.uk/female-genital- mutilation-protection-order
Mandatory reportingHome Office (2015) ‘Mandatory reporting procedural information’ www.gov.uk/government/publications/mandatory-reporting-of-female-genital-  mutilation-procedural-informationDepartment of Health (2015) Mandatory reporting resources for healthcare professionals www.gov.uk/government/publications/fgm-mandatory-reporting-in- healthcareHome Office (2016) ‘Fact sheet on mandatory reporting of female genital mutilation’ www.gov.uk/government/publications/fact-sheet-on-mandatory- reporting-of-female- genital-mutilationCommissioning servicesImkaan, Accredited Quality Standards for working with black and minority ethnic (BME) women and girls and harmful practices: Forced marriage (FM), Female genital mutilation (FGM) and ‘Honour-based’ violence (HBV) https://www.imkaan.org.uk/servicesDepartment of Health (2015) ‘Commissioning Services to Support Women and Girls with Female Genital Mutilation’ www.gov.uk/government/publications/services-for- women-and-girls-with-fgmTraining and awareness for professionalsHome Office, e-learning module FGM: How to recognise and prevent it www.fgmelearning.co.ukWelsh Government, Live Fear Free: Training on Domestic Abuse, Sexual Violence and Violence against Women http://livefearfree.gov.wales/guidance-for- professionals/national-training-framework/?lang=enHome Office (2020), FGM resource pack (including case studies and links to organisations and resources to support local work to tackle FGM) www.gov.uk/government/publications/female-genital-mutilation-resource- pack/female-genital-mutilation-resource-pack%20%20Information sharingDepartment for Education (2018) ‘Information sharing: advice for practitioners providing safeguarding services to children, young people, parents and carers’ www.gov.uk/government/publications/safeguarding-practitioners-information-sharing- advice
Resources for healthcare professionalsNHS Digital, FGM Professional Guidance and Resourceshttps://digital.nhs.uk/data-and-information/clinical-audits-and-registries/female-genital- mutilation-datasets/health-professionals-and-nhs-organisations#fgm-professional-guidance- and-resourcesE-Learning modules for healthcare professionals in England www.e-lfh.org.uk/programmes/female-genital-mutilation/Department of Health (2016) ‘Female Genital Mutilation: Risk and Safeguarding – Guidance for professionals’ www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/418564/2903 800_DH_FGM_Accessible_v0.1.pdfNHS Digital, Female Genital Mutilation Information Sharing (FGM-IS) https://digital.nhs.uk/services/female-genital-mutilation-information-sharingNHS Digital, Information on the Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) Enhanced Dataset Information Standard (SCCI2026) https://digital.nhs.uk/data-and- information/clinical-audits-and-registries/female-genital-mutilation-datasetsDepartment of Health and Health and Social Care (2015) ‘Understanding the FGM enhanced dataset’https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/fgm-enhanced-dataset-guidance-on- nhs-staff-responsibilitiesRoyal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (2015) ‘Female Genital Mutilation and its management (Green-top Guideline No. 53)’ www.rcog.org.uk/en/guidelines- research-services/guidelines/gtg53/Royal College of Nursing (2015) ‘Female Genital Mutilation’ www.rcn.org.uk/clinical- topics/female-genital-mutilationGeneral Medical Council, Guidance on child protection examinations www.gmc- uk.org/guidance/ethical_guidance/13430.aspGeneral Medical Council (2008) ‘Consent: Patients and Doctors Making Decisions Together’www.gmc-uk.org/guidance/ethical_guidance/consent_guidance_index.asp%20General Medical Council (2009) ‘Confidentiality’ www.gmc- uk.org/guidance/ethical_guidance/confidentiality.aspGeneral Medical Council (2013) ‘Intimate Examinations and Chaperones’ www.gmc- uk.org/guidance/ethical_guidance/21168.asp
Resources for policeCollege of Policing (2015) ‘Authorised Professional Practice: Female Genital Mutilation’ www.app.college.police.uk/app-content/major-investigation-and- public- protection/female-genital- mutilation/?s=female+genital+mutilation#preventionCrown Prosecution Service, ‘Provision of Therapy for Child Witnesses Prior to a Criminal Trial’ www.cps.gov.uk/publications/prosecution/therapychild.htmlMinistry of Justice (2011) ‘Achieving Best Evidence in Criminal Proceedings: Guidance on interviewing victims and witnesses, and guidance on using special measures’ https://www.cps.gov.uk/sites/default/files/documents/legal_guidance/best_evide nce_in_criminal_proceedings.pdfResources for social workersNational FGM Centre, FGM Good Practice Guidance and Assessment Tool for Social Workers http://nationalfgmcentre.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/FGM-Good- Practice-Guidance-for-Social-Workers.pdfAsylumInformation on claiming asylum in the UK www.gov.uk/claim-asylumLegal interventionsChildren and Family Court Advisory and Support Service, information on legal interventions to safeguard children www.cafcass.gov.uk/grown- ups/professionals/care.aspxForced marriageHM Government (2014) ‘The Right to Choose: Multi-agency statutory guidance for dealing with forced marriage’ www.gov.uk/guidance/forced-marriageHM Government (2014) ‘Multi-agency practice guidance: handling cases of forced marriage’ www.gov.uk/guidance/forced-marriageMaterials for public awareness-raisingTo order hard copies of materials, email the FGM Unit: FGMenquiries@homeoffice.gov.ukTo order the Statement Opposing FGM (also known as the ‘Health Passport’) which sets out the law on FGM and the help and support available and is available in 11 languages, visit the Department of Health orderline website www.orderline.dh.gov.uk
Annex J: Making an Application for an FGM Protection Order (FGMPO)
Are you a victim of FGM or at risk of FGM?
Complete Form FGM001 (obtainable at:Yes	http://hmctsformfinder.justice.gov.uk/HMC TS/GetForm.do?court_forms_id=12000) You can complete the application form yourself or you can get a solicitor to do itfor you. Further details on how to complete the form are set out on the back of Form FGM001.

Are you a local authority seeking to protect a girl who has been a victim of FGM or is at risk of FGM?
Yes
The application should include details of how you want the court to protect you or the person at risk of FGM, e.g. to prevent you or the person at risk from being taken abroad for FGM to be committed.The application should include details of any discussions which have caused you to believe you, or the person to be protected, may be at risk of FGM.Completed forms should be submitted to the court by post or in person. You can also send your application by email.

If you are not the victim or a local authority, are you an individual (e.g. a relative or family member), a public authority (e.g. the police, a health authority, or school etc.) or any other organisation (such as a charity or support organisation) who is seeking an application to protect someone who has been a victim of FGM or someone at risk of FGM?
Yes
You will need to seek the court’s permission to apply for a FGM Protection Order. You should complete Form FGM006 (obtainable at: http://hmctsformfinder.justice.gov.uk/HMC TS/GetForm.do?court_forms_id=12050) The application should include details of your reasons for seeking to apply for an FGM	Protection Order, your connection with the person to be protected and what you know of their circumstances.Completed forms should be submitted to the court by post or in person. You can also send your application by emai
Making an Application for an FGM Protection Order (FGMPO) – accessible versionIf you are a victim of FGM or at risk of FGM or a local authority seeking to protect a girl who has been a victim of FGM or is at risk of FGM.Complete Form FGM001 (obtainable at: http://hmctsformfinder.justice.gov.uk/HMC TS/GetForm.do?court_forms_id=12000) You can complete the application form yourself or you can get a solicitor to do it for you. Further details on how to complete the form are set out on the back of Form FGM001.The application should include details of how you want the court to protect you or the person at risk of FGM, e.g. to prevent you or the person at risk from being taken abroad for FGM to be committed.The application should include details of any discussions which have caused you to believe you, or the person to be protected, may be at risk of FGM.If you are not the victim or a local authority, but you are an individual (e.g. a relative or family member), a public authority (e.g. the police, a health authority, or school etc.) or any other organisation (such as a charity or support organisation) who is seeking an application to protect someone who has been a victim of FGM or someone at risk of FGMYou will need to seek the court’s permission to apply for an FGM Protection Order. You should complete Form FGM006 (obtainable at: http://hmctsformfinder.justice.gov.uk/HMC TS/GetForm.do?court_forms_id=12050) The application should include details of your reasons for seeking to apply for an FGM Protection Order, your connection with the person to be protected and what you know of their circumstances.Both completed forms should be submitted to the court by post or in person. You can also send your application by email


Publication date: July 2020© Crown copyright 2020You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence v.2. To view this licence visit www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government- licence/version/2/ or email PSI@nationalarchives.gov.ukWhere third party material has been identified, permission from the respective copyright holder must be sought.
Any enquiries regarding this document should be sent to the FGM Unit at fgmenquiries@homeoffice.gov.ukThis publication is available for download at www.official-documents.gov.uk
MenuHome Crime, justice and law  Domestic abuseGuidanceDomestic abuse: how to get helpFind out how to get help if you or someone you know is a victim of domestic abuse.From: Home O?cePublished 5 October 2018Last updated 21 March 2025 — See all updatesRelated contentDefinition of domestic violence and abuse: g uide for local areasApply for the migrant victims of domestic abuse concessionDomestic Abuse Act 2021Domestic abuse: recognise the signs Indefinite leave to remain or enter(  domestic violence or abuse)Translated guidanceIf English is not your first language, information has been translated into several languages as well as an easy read version.Women’s Aid also have g uidance documents on domestic abuse and coronavirus available in a number of languages for victims, family and friends, and community members of those a?ected.If you are deaf, you can access a British Sign Lang uage video that explains how to get help if you or someone you know is a victim of domestic abuse.Recognise domestic abuseDoes your partner, ex-partner or someone you live with: cut you o? from family and friends and intentionally isolate you?  bully, threaten, or control you? take control of your finances? monitor or limit your use of technology?  physically and/or sexually abuse you?Domestic abuse is not always physical violence. It can also include: coercive control and ‘gaslighting’  economic abuse online abuse threats and intimidation  emotional abuse sexual abuseAnyone can be a victim of domestic abuse, regardless of gender, age, ethnicity, religion, socio-economic status, sexuality or background.If you believe that you are a victim of domestic abuse, there are signs that you can look out for including: being withdrawn, or being isolated from your family and friends  having bruises, burns or bite marks on you having your finances controlled, or not being given enough to buy food, medication or pay bills not being allowed to leave your house, or stopped from going to college or work having your internet or social media use monitored, or someone else reading your texts, emails or letters being repeatedly belittled, put down or told you are worthless  being pressured into sex or sexual contact being told that abuse is your fault, or that you’re overreacting See more signs to look for.Get help and supportAll forms of domestic abuse are not acceptable in any situation.If you’re experiencing domestic abuse and feel frightened of, or controlled by, a partner, an ex-partner or family member, it’s important to remember that it’s not your fault and there is no shame in seeking help.It may seem like a di?cult step to take, but there is support available and #YouAreNot Alone.Free, confidential support and advice is available to victims and their concerned family members or friends, 24 hours a day.Nation Helpline	Contact
England Refug e’s National Domestic Abuse HelplineNorthern Domestic and Sexual Abuse
0808 2000 247Online live chat Web form0808 802 1414
Ireland
Helpline
Online live chat help@dsahelpline.org
Scotland Domestic Abuse and Forced Marriage HelplineWales Live Fear Free WelshGovernment funded, 24 hour, 365 day service with
0800 027 1234Online live chat helpline@sdafmh.org.uk0808 80 10 100Online live chat Text
specialists who make referrals info@livefearfreehelpline.wales and link to other services andadvice.
UK-wide The Men’s Advice Line run by Respect is a confidential helpline specifically for male victims.
0808 801 0327info@mensadviceline.org.uk
Bright Sky appBright Sky is a mobile app and website for anyone experiencing domestic abuse, or who is worried about someone else.The app can be downloaded for free from the app stores. Only download the app if it is safe for you to do so and if you are sure that your phone isn’t being monitored.Women’s Aid local support services directoryWomen’s Aid have a  directory of domestic abuse support services across the UK.If you are experiencing domestic abuse or are worried about friends or family, you can access the Women’s Aid live chat service 7 days a week, 10am to 6pm.helpline@womensaid.org.ukVictim SupportVictim Support run these services for victims and survivors of any abuse or crime, regardless of when it occurred or if the crime was reported to the police: free, independent and confidential 24/7 Supportline 08 08 16 89 111  live chat service My Support Space - free online resourceSafe SpacesSafes Spaces are safe, confidential rooms where victims can take some time to reflect, access information on specialist support services or call friends or family.Safe Spaces are also available in Boots, Morrisons, Superdrug and Well pharmacies, TSB banks and independent pharmacies across the UK.Find your nearest Safe Space.Check whether someone has an abusive pastIf you are concerned that a new, former or existing partner has an abusive past you can ask the police to check under the Domestic Violence Disclosure Scheme (also known as ‘Clare’s Law’). This is your ‘right to ask’. If records show that you may be at risk of domestic abuse, the police will consider disclosing the information. A disclosure can be made if it is legal, proportionate and necessary to do so.If you are concerned about a friend or family member, you can apply for a disclosure on behalf of someone you know.You can make a request to the police for information about a person’s previous violent o?ending in person at the police station or elsewhere, by telephone, by email, online or as part of a police investigation. Support agencies and services can also help you ask the police about this.Get a court order to protect you or your childIf you’re a victim of domestic abuse you can apply for a court order or injunction to protect yourself or your child from: your current or previous partner  a family member someone you currently or previously lived with This is called a non-molestation or occupation order. You can apply online, by email or by post.Get a non-molestation or occupation order if you’ve been the victim of domestic abuse.Domestic abuse protection ordersA domestic abuse protection order (DAPO) can: stop someone coming to or near your home  decide who can stay or return to your home order the person to attend a behavioural change programme order the person to wear an electronic tag to check they’re keeping to the conditions of the orderThere are no court fees for applying.You can only apply for a DAPO if the person you need protection from lives in one of the following areas: Hartlepool, Middlesbrough, Redcar and Cleveland and Stockton-on-Tees  Greater Manchester the London boroughs of Croydon, Bromley or Sutton Apply for a domestic abuse protection order.Support someone you knowIf you are worried that a friend, neighbour or loved one is a victim of domestic abuse, you can call the National Domestic Abuse Helpline for free and confidential advice, 24 hours a day on 0808 2000 247.Or you can contact the other support services listed on this page.Seeking help for someone you know can be challenging but #YouAreNotalone. Domestic abuse advisers will o?er confidential, non- judgemental information and advice on the options available to you helping you to keep safe and make informed choices.If you believe there is an immediate risk of harm to someone, or it is an emergency, you should always call 999.If someone confides in you, there is more information on how to support a friend who is being abused.If you are an employerLet your employees know that if they are facing domestic abuse you want to help them to get help. Stay in regular contact with employees you know, or fear, may be facing abuse and if you lose contact with them, take swift action to visit them. If you believe there is an immediate risk of harm to someone, or it is an emergency, always call 999.Encourage employees to look out for others who may be facing domestic abuse and signpost them to support. Your sta? may also be worried about their own abusive behaviour at this time. There is no excuse for domestic abuse, no matter what stresses you are under and support is available.Hestia’s Respond to Abuse Advice Line is a free resource for employers. Employers can call 020 3879 3695 Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm, or email adviceline.eb@hestia.org for support, guidance or information about domestic abuse and how to support employees and colleagues experiencing domestic abuse.The  Employers’ Initiative on Domestic Abuse website provides resources to support employers including an employers’ toolkit.If you are a professional working in the domestic abuse sectorSafeLives provides guidance and support to professionals and those working in the domestic abuse sector, as well as additional advice for those at risk.Find additional information and supportIf you want to access help specifically to cater to your background and needs or want support and help for specific types of abuse there are several organisations that can help - see Domestic abuse: specialist sources of support.You can also find additional information and support here on topics including:  help for children and young people welfare benefits and housing advice help if you don’t have settled status in the UK  support for specific types of abuseGet help if you think you might be an abuserIf you are concerned about your behaviour or the behaviour of someone you know, there is support available.The  Respect Phoneline is an anonymous and confidential helpline for men and women who are abusing their partners and families. It is open Monday to Friday 9am to 8pm. The helpline also takes calls from partners or ex-partners, friends and relatives who are concerned about perpetrators.A webchat service is available Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays from 10am to 11am and from 3pm to 4pm.Telephone: 0808 802 4040How to call the police when you can’t speakIf you are in danger and unable to talk on the phone, call 999 and listen to the questions from the operator and, if you can, respond by coughing or tapping on the handset.Call 999 from a mobileIf prompted, press 55 to Make Yourself Heard and this will transfer your call to the police. Pressing 55 only works on mobiles and does not allow police to track your location.Call 999 from a landlineIf the operator can only hear background noise and cannot decide whether an emergency service is needed, you will be connected to a police call handler.If you replace the handset, the landline may remain connected for 45 seconds in case you pick up again.When 999 calls are made from landlines, information about your location should be automatically available to the call handlers to help provide a response.If you are deaf or can’t use a phoneYou can register with the emergencySMS. Text REGISTER to 999. You will get a text which tells you what to do next. Do this when it is safe so you can text when you are in danger.Published 5 October 2018Last updated 21 March 2025 + show all updatesExplore the topicDomestic abuseViolence against women and girlsServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
MenuHome Crime, justice and law  Domestic abuseGuidanceDomestic abuse: how to get helpFind out how to get help if you or someone you know is a victim of domestic abuse.From: Home O?cePublished 5 October 2018Last updated 21 March 2025 — See all updatesRelated contentDefinition of domestic violence and abuse: g uide for local areasApply for the migrant victims of domestic abuse concessionDomestic Abuse Act 2021Domestic abuse: recognise the signs Indefinite leave to remain or enter(  domestic violence or abuse)Translated guidanceIf English is not your first language, information has been translated into several languages as well as an easy read version.Women’s Aid also have g uidance documents on domestic abuse and coronavirus available in a number of languages for victims, family and friends, and community members of those a?ected.If you are deaf, you can access a British Sign Lang uage video that explains how to get help if you or someone you know is a victim of domestic abuse.Recognise domestic abuseDoes your partner, ex-partner or someone you live with: cut you o? from family and friends and intentionally isolate you?  bully, threaten, or control you? take control of your finances? monitor or limit your use of technology?  physically and/or sexually abuse you?Domestic abuse is not always physical violence. It can also include: coercive control and ‘gaslighting’  economic abuse online abuse threats and intimidation  emotional abuse sexual abuseAnyone can be a victim of domestic abuse, regardless of gender, age, ethnicity, religion, socio-economic status, sexuality or background.If you believe that you are a victim of domestic abuse, there are signs that you can look out for including: being withdrawn, or being isolated from your family and friends  having bruises, burns or bite marks on you having your finances controlled, or not being given enough to buy food, medication or pay bills not being allowed to leave your house, or stopped from going to college or work having your internet or social media use monitored, or someone else reading your texts, emails or letters being repeatedly belittled, put down or told you are worthless  being pressured into sex or sexual contact being told that abuse is your fault, or that you’re overreacting See more signs to look for.Get help and supportAll forms of domestic abuse are not acceptable in any situation.If you’re experiencing domestic abuse and feel frightened of, or controlled by, a partner, an ex-partner or family member, it’s important to remember that it’s not your fault and there is no shame in seeking help.It may seem like a di?cult step to take, but there is support available and #YouAreNot Alone.Free, confidential support and advice is available to victims and their concerned family members or friends, 24 hours a day.Nation Helpline	Contact
England Refug e’s National Domestic Abuse HelplineNorthern Domestic and Sexual Abuse
0808 2000 247Online live chat Web form0808 802 1414
Ireland
Helpline
Online live chat help@dsahelpline.org
Scotland Domestic Abuse and Forced Marriage HelplineWales Live Fear Free WelshGovernment funded, 24 hour, 365 day service with
0800 027 1234Online live chat helpline@sdafmh.org.uk0808 80 10 100Online live chat Text
specialists who make referrals info@livefearfreehelpline.wales and link to other services andadvice.
UK-wide The Men’s Advice Line run by Respect is a confidential helpline specifically for male victims.
0808 801 0327info@mensadviceline.org.uk
Bright Sky appBright Sky is a mobile app and website for anyone experiencing domestic abuse, or who is worried about someone else.The app can be downloaded for free from the app stores. Only download the app if it is safe for you to do so and if you are sure that your phone isn’t being monitored.Women’s Aid local support services directoryWomen’s Aid have a  directory of domestic abuse support services across the UK.If you are experiencing domestic abuse or are worried about friends or family, you can access the Women’s Aid live chat service 7 days a week, 10am to 6pm.helpline@womensaid.org.ukVictim SupportVictim Support run these services for victims and survivors of any abuse or crime, regardless of when it occurred or if the crime was reported to the police: free, independent and confidential 24/7 Supportline 08 08 16 89 111  live chat service My Support Space - free online resourceSafe SpacesSafes Spaces are safe, confidential rooms where victims can take some time to reflect, access information on specialist support services or call friends or family.Safe Spaces are also available in Boots, Morrisons, Superdrug and Well pharmacies, TSB banks and independent pharmacies across the UK.Find your nearest Safe Space.Check whether someone has an abusive pastIf you are concerned that a new, former or existing partner has an abusive past you can ask the police to check under the Domestic Violence Disclosure Scheme (also known as ‘Clare’s Law’). This is your ‘right to ask’. If records show that you may be at risk of domestic abuse, the police will consider disclosing the information. A disclosure can be made if it is legal, proportionate and necessary to do so.If you are concerned about a friend or family member, you can apply for a disclosure on behalf of someone you know.You can make a request to the police for information about a person’s previous violent o?ending in person at the police station or elsewhere, by telephone, by email, online or as part of a police investigation. Support agencies and services can also help you ask the police about this.Get a court order to protect you or your childIf you’re a victim of domestic abuse you can apply for a court order or injunction to protect yourself or your child from: your current or previous partner  a family member someone you currently or previously lived with This is called a non-molestation or occupation order. You can apply online, by email or by post.Get a non-molestation or occupation order if you’ve been the victim of domestic abuse.Domestic abuse protection ordersA domestic abuse protection order (DAPO) can: stop someone coming to or near your home  decide who can stay or return to your home order the person to attend a behavioural change programme order the person to wear an electronic tag to check they’re keeping to the conditions of the orderThere are no court fees for applying.You can only apply for a DAPO if the person you need protection from lives in one of the following areas: Hartlepool, Middlesbrough, Redcar and Cleveland and Stockton-on-Tees  Greater Manchester the London boroughs of Croydon, Bromley or Sutton Apply for a domestic abuse protection order.Support someone you knowIf you are worried that a friend, neighbour or loved one is a victim of domestic abuse, you can call the National Domestic Abuse Helpline for free and confidential advice, 24 hours a day on 0808 2000 247.Or you can contact the other support services listed on this page.Seeking help for someone you know can be challenging but #YouAreNotalone. Domestic abuse advisers will o?er confidential, non- judgemental information and advice on the options available to you helping you to keep safe and make informed choices.If you believe there is an immediate risk of harm to someone, or it is an emergency, you should always call 999.If someone confides in you, there is more information on how to support a friend who is being abused.If you are an employerLet your employees know that if they are facing domestic abuse you want to help them to get help. Stay in regular contact with employees you know, or fear, may be facing abuse and if you lose contact with them, take swift action to visit them. If you believe there is an immediate risk of harm to someone, or it is an emergency, always call 999.Encourage employees to look out for others who may be facing domestic abuse and signpost them to support. Your sta? may also be worried about their own abusive behaviour at this time. There is no excuse for domestic abuse, no matter what stresses you are under and support is available.Hestia’s Respond to Abuse Advice Line is a free resource for employers. Employers can call 020 3879 3695 Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm, or email adviceline.eb@hestia.org for support, guidance or information about domestic abuse and how to support employees and colleagues experiencing domestic abuse.The  Employers’ Initiative on Domestic Abuse website provides resources to support employers including an employers’ toolkit.If you are a professional working in the domestic abuse sectorSafeLives provides guidance and support to professionals and those working in the domestic abuse sector, as well as additional advice for those at risk.Find additional information and supportIf you want to access help specifically to cater to your background and needs or want support and help for specific types of abuse there are several organisations that can help - see Domestic abuse: specialist sources of support.You can also find additional information and support here on topics including:  help for children and young people welfare benefits and housing advice help if you don’t have settled status in the UK  support for specific types of abuseGet help if you think you might be an abuserIf you are concerned about your behaviour or the behaviour of someone you know, there is support available.The  Respect Phoneline is an anonymous and confidential helpline for men and women who are abusing their partners and families. It is open Monday to Friday 9am to 8pm. The helpline also takes calls from partners or ex-partners, friends and relatives who are concerned about perpetrators.A webchat service is available Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays from 10am to 11am and from 3pm to 4pm.Telephone: 0808 802 4040How to call the police when you can’t speakIf you are in danger and unable to talk on the phone, call 999 and listen to the questions from the operator and, if you can, respond by coughing or tapping on the handset.Call 999 from a mobileIf prompted, press 55 to Make Yourself Heard and this will transfer your call to the police. Pressing 55 only works on mobiles and does not allow police to track your location.Call 999 from a landlineIf the operator can only hear background noise and cannot decide whether an emergency service is needed, you will be connected to a police call handler.If you replace the handset, the landline may remain connected for 45 seconds in case you pick up again.When 999 calls are made from landlines, information about your location should be automatically available to the call handlers to help provide a response.If you are deaf or can’t use a phoneYou can register with the emergencySMS. Text REGISTER to 999. You will get a text which tells you what to do next. Do this when it is safe so you can text when you are in danger.Published 5 October 2018Last updated 21 March 2025 + show all updatesExplore the topicDomestic abuseViolence against women and girlsIs this page useful?Services and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
MenuHome Crime, justice and law  Domestic abuseGuidanceDomestic abuse: how to get helpFind out how to get help if you or someone you know is a victim of domestic abuse.From: Home O?cePublished 5 October 2018Last updated 21 March 2025 — See all updatesRelated contentDefinition of domestic violence and abuse: g uide for local areasApply for the migrant victims of domestic abuse concessionDomestic Abuse Act 2021Domestic abuse: recognise the signs Indefinite leave to remain or enter(  domestic violence or abuse)Translated guidanceIf English is not your first language, information has been translated into several languages as well as an easy read version.Women’s Aid also have g uidance documents on domestic abuse and coronavirus available in a number of languages for victims, family and friends, and community members of those a?ected.If you are deaf, you can access a British Sign Lang uage video that explains how to get help if you or someone you know is a victim of domestic abuse.Recognise domestic abuseDoes your partner, ex-partner or someone you live with: cut you o? from family and friends and intentionally isolate you?  bully, threaten, or control you? take control of your finances? monitor or limit your use of technology?  physically and/or sexually abuse you?Domestic abuse is not always physical violence. It can also include: coercive control and ‘gaslighting’  economic abuse online abuse threats and intimidation  emotional abuse sexual abuseAnyone can be a victim of domestic abuse, regardless of gender, age, ethnicity, religion, socio-economic status, sexuality or background.If you believe that you are a victim of domestic abuse, there are signs that you can look out for including: being withdrawn, or being isolated from your family and friends  having bruises, burns or bite marks on you having your finances controlled, or not being given enough to buy food, medication or pay bills not being allowed to leave your house, or stopped from going to college or work having your internet or social media use monitored, or someone else reading your texts, emails or letters being repeatedly belittled, put down or told you are worthless  being pressured into sex or sexual contact being told that abuse is your fault, or that you’re overreacting See more signs to look for.Get help and supportAll forms of domestic abuse are not acceptable in any situation.If you’re experiencing domestic abuse and feel frightened of, or controlled by, a partner, an ex-partner or family member, it’s important to remember that it’s not your fault and there is no shame in seeking help.It may seem like a di?cult step to take, but there is support available and #YouAreNot Alone.Free, confidential support and advice is available to victims and their concerned family members or friends, 24 hours a day.Nation Helpline	Contact
England Refug e’s National Domestic Abuse HelplineNorthern Domestic and Sexual Abuse
0808 2000 247Online live chat Web form0808 802 1414
Ireland
Helpline
Online live chat help@dsahelpline.org
Scotland Domestic Abuse and Forced Marriage HelplineWales Live Fear Free WelshGovernment funded, 24 hour, 365 day service with
0800 027 1234Online live chat helpline@sdafmh.org.uk0808 80 10 100Online live chat Text
specialists who make referrals info@livefearfreehelpline.wales and link to other services andadvice.
UK-wide The Men’s Advice Line run by Respect is a confidential helpline specifically for male victims.
0808 801 0327info@mensadviceline.org.uk
Bright Sky appBright Sky is a mobile app and website for anyone experiencing domestic abuse, or who is worried about someone else.The app can be downloaded for free from the app stores. Only download the app if it is safe for you to do so and if you are sure that your phone isn’t being monitored.Women’s Aid local support services directoryWomen’s Aid have a  directory of domestic abuse support services across the UK.If you are experiencing domestic abuse or are worried about friends or family, you can access the Women’s Aid live chat service 7 days a week, 10am to 6pm.helpline@womensaid.org.ukVictim SupportVictim Support run these services for victims and survivors of any abuse or crime, regardless of when it occurred or if the crime was reported to the police: free, independent and confidential 24/7 Supportline 08 08 16 89 111  live chat service My Support Space - free online resourceSafe SpacesSafes Spaces are safe, confidential rooms where victims can take some time to reflect, access information on specialist support services or call friends or family.Safe Spaces are also available in Boots, Morrisons, Superdrug and Well pharmacies, TSB banks and independent pharmacies across the UK.Find your nearest Safe Space.Check whether someone has an abusive pastIf you are concerned that a new, former or existing partner has an abusive past you can ask the police to check under the Domestic Violence Disclosure Scheme (also known as ‘Clare’s Law’). This is your ‘right to ask’. If records show that you may be at risk of domestic abuse, the police will consider disclosing the information. A disclosure can be made if it is legal, proportionate and necessary to do so.If you are concerned about a friend or family member, you can apply for a disclosure on behalf of someone you know.You can make a request to the police for information about a person’s previous violent o?ending in person at the police station or elsewhere, by telephone, by email, online or as part of a police investigation. Support agencies and services can also help you ask the police about this.Get a court order to protect you or your childIf you’re a victim of domestic abuse you can apply for a court order or injunction to protect yourself or your child from: your current or previous partner  a family member someone you currently or previously lived with This is called a non-molestation or occupation order. You can apply online, by email or by post.Get a non-molestation or occupation order if you’ve been the victim of domestic abuse.Domestic abuse protection ordersA domestic abuse protection order (DAPO) can: stop someone coming to or near your home  decide who can stay or return to your home order the person to attend a behavioural change programme order the person to wear an electronic tag to check they’re keeping to the conditions of the orderThere are no court fees for applying.You can only apply for a DAPO if the person you need protection from lives in one of the following areas: Hartlepool, Middlesbrough, Redcar and Cleveland and Stockton-on-Tees  Greater Manchester the London boroughs of Croydon, Bromley or Sutton Apply for a domestic abuse protection order.Support someone you knowIf you are worried that a friend, neighbour or loved one is a victim of domestic abuse, you can call the National Domestic Abuse Helpline for free and confidential advice, 24 hours a day on 0808 2000 247.Or you can contact the other support services listed on this page.Seeking help for someone you know can be challenging but #YouAreNotalone. Domestic abuse advisers will o?er confidential, non- judgemental information and advice on the options available to you helping you to keep safe and make informed choices.If you believe there is an immediate risk of harm to someone, or it is an emergency, you should always call 999.If someone confides in you, there is more information on how to support a friend who is being abused.If you are an employerLet your employees know that if they are facing domestic abuse you want to help them to get help. Stay in regular contact with employees you know, or fear, may be facing abuse and if you lose contact with them, take swift action to visit them. If you believe there is an immediate risk of harm to someone, or it is an emergency, always call 999.Encourage employees to look out for others who may be facing domestic abuse and signpost them to support. Your sta? may also be worried about their own abusive behaviour at this time. There is no excuse for domestic abuse, no matter what stresses you are under and support is available.Hestia’s Respond to Abuse Advice Line is a free resource for employers. Employers can call 020 3879 3695 Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm, or email adviceline.eb@hestia.org for support, guidance or information about domestic abuse and how to support employees and colleagues experiencing domestic abuse.The  Employers’ Initiative on Domestic Abuse website provides resources to support employers including an employers’ toolkit.If you are a professional working in the domestic abuse sectorSafeLives provides guidance and support to professionals and those working in the domestic abuse sector, as well as additional advice for those at risk.Find additional information and supportIf you want to access help specifically to cater to your background and needs or want support and help for specific types of abuse there are several organisations that can help - see Domestic abuse: specialist sources of support.You can also find additional information and support here on topics including:  help for children and young people welfare benefits and housing advice help if you don’t have settled status in the UK  support for specific types of abuseGet help if you think you might be an abuserIf you are concerned about your behaviour or the behaviour of someone you know, there is support available.The  Respect Phoneline is an anonymous and confidential helpline for men and women who are abusing their partners and families. It is open Monday to Friday 9am to 8pm. The helpline also takes calls from partners or ex-partners, friends and relatives who are concerned about perpetrators.A webchat service is available Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays from 10am to 11am and from 3pm to 4pm.Telephone: 0808 802 4040How to call the police when you can’t speakIf you are in danger and unable to talk on the phone, call 999 and listen to the questions from the operator and, if you can, respond by coughing or tapping on the handset.Call 999 from a mobileIf prompted, press 55 to Make Yourself Heard and this will transfer your call to the police. Pressing 55 only works on mobiles and does not allow police to track your location.Call 999 from a landlineIf the operator can only hear background noise and cannot decide whether an emergency service is needed, you will be connected to a police call handler.If you replace the handset, the landline may remain connected for 45 seconds in case you pick up again.When 999 calls are made from landlines, information about your location should be automatically available to the call handlers to help provide a response.If you are deaf or can’t use a phoneYou can register with the emergencySMS. Text REGISTER to 999. You will get a text which tells you what to do next. Do this when it is safe so you can text when you are in danger.Published 5 October 2018Last updated 21 March 2025 + show all updatesExplore the topicDomestic abuseViolence against women and girlsIs this page useful?Services and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
MenuHome Crime, justice and law  Domestic abuseGuidanceDomestic abuse: how to get helpFind out how to get help if you or someone you know is a victim of domestic abuse.From: Home O?cePublished 5 October 2018Last updated 21 March 2025 — See all updatesRelated contentDefinition of domestic violence and abuse: g uide for local areasApply for the migrant victims of domestic abuse concessionDomestic Abuse Act 2021Domestic abuse: recognise the signs Indefinite leave to remain or enter(  domestic violence or abuse)Translated guidanceIf English is not your first language, information has been translated into several languages as well as an easy read version.Women’s Aid also have g uidance documents on domestic abuse and coronavirus available in a number of languages for victims, family and friends, and community members of those a?ected.If you are deaf, you can access a British Sign Lang uage video that explains how to get help if you or someone you know is a victim of domestic abuse.Recognise domestic abuseDoes your partner, ex-partner or someone you live with: cut you o? from family and friends and intentionally isolate you?  bully, threaten, or control you? take control of your finances? monitor or limit your use of technology?  physically and/or sexually abuse you?Domestic abuse is not always physical violence. It can also include: coercive control and ‘gaslighting’  economic abuse online abuse threats and intimidation  emotional abuse sexual abuseAnyone can be a victim of domestic abuse, regardless of gender, age, ethnicity, religion, socio-economic status, sexuality or background.If you believe that you are a victim of domestic abuse, there are signs that you can look out for including: being withdrawn, or being isolated from your family and friends  having bruises, burns or bite marks on you having your finances controlled, or not being given enough to buy food, medication or pay bills not being allowed to leave your house, or stopped from going to college or work having your internet or social media use monitored, or someone else reading your texts, emails or letters being repeatedly belittled, put down or told you are worthless  being pressured into sex or sexual contact being told that abuse is your fault, or that you’re overreacting See more signs to look for.Get help and supportAll forms of domestic abuse are not acceptable in any situation.If you’re experiencing domestic abuse and feel frightened of, or controlled by, a partner, an ex-partner or family member, it’s important to remember that it’s not your fault and there is no shame in seeking help.It may seem like a di?cult step to take, but there is support available and #YouAreNot Alone.Free, confidential support and advice is available to victims and their concerned family members or friends, 24 hours a day.Nation Helpline	Contact
England Refug e’s National Domestic Abuse HelplineNorthern Domestic and Sexual Abuse
0808 2000 247Online live chat Web form0808 802 1414
Ireland
Helpline
Online live chat help@dsahelpline.org
Scotland Domestic Abuse and Forced Marriage HelplineWales Live Fear Free WelshGovernment funded, 24 hour, 365 day service with
0800 027 1234Online live chat helpline@sdafmh.org.uk0808 80 10 100Online live chat Text
specialists who make referrals info@livefearfreehelpline.wales and link to other services andadvice.
UK-wide The Men’s Advice Line run by Respect is a confidential helpline specifically for male victims.
0808 801 0327info@mensadviceline.org.uk
Bright Sky appBright Sky is a mobile app and website for anyone experiencing domestic abuse, or who is worried about someone else.The app can be downloaded for free from the app stores. Only download the app if it is safe for you to do so and if you are sure that your phone isn’t being monitored.Women’s Aid local support services directoryWomen’s Aid have a  directory of domestic abuse support services across the UK.If you are experiencing domestic abuse or are worried about friends or family, you can access the Women’s Aid live chat service 7 days a week, 10am to 6pm.helpline@womensaid.org.ukVictim SupportVictim Support run these services for victims and survivors of any abuse or crime, regardless of when it occurred or if the crime was reported to the police: free, independent and confidential 24/7 Supportline 08 08 16 89 111  live chat service My Support Space - free online resourceSafe SpacesSafes Spaces are safe, confidential rooms where victims can take some time to reflect, access information on specialist support services or call friends or family.Safe Spaces are also available in Boots, Morrisons, Superdrug and Well pharmacies, TSB banks and independent pharmacies across the UK.Find your nearest Safe Space.Check whether someone has an abusive pastIf you are concerned that a new, former or existing partner has an abusive past you can ask the police to check under the Domestic Violence Disclosure Scheme (also known as ‘Clare’s Law’). This is your ‘right to ask’. If records show that you may be at risk of domestic abuse, the police will consider disclosing the information. A disclosure can be made if it is legal, proportionate and necessary to do so.If you are concerned about a friend or family member, you can apply for a disclosure on behalf of someone you know.You can make a request to the police for information about a person’s previous violent o?ending in person at the police station or elsewhere, by telephone, by email, online or as part of a police investigation. Support agencies and services can also help you ask the police about this.Get a court order to protect you or your childIf you’re a victim of domestic abuse you can apply for a court order or injunction to protect yourself or your child from: your current or previous partner  a family member someone you currently or previously lived with This is called a non-molestation or occupation order. You can apply online, by email or by post.Get a non-molestation or occupation order if you’ve been the victim of domestic abuse.Domestic abuse protection ordersA domestic abuse protection order (DAPO) can: stop someone coming to or near your home  decide who can stay or return to your home order the person to attend a behavioural change programme order the person to wear an electronic tag to check they’re keeping to the conditions of the orderThere are no court fees for applying.You can only apply for a DAPO if the person you need protection from lives in one of the following areas: Hartlepool, Middlesbrough, Redcar and Cleveland and Stockton-on-Tees  Greater Manchester the London boroughs of Croydon, Bromley or Sutton Apply for a domestic abuse protection order.Support someone you knowIf you are worried that a friend, neighbour or loved one is a victim of domestic abuse, you can call the National Domestic Abuse Helpline for free and confidential advice, 24 hours a day on 0808 2000 247.Or you can contact the other support services listed on this page.Seeking help for someone you know can be challenging but #YouAreNotalone. Domestic abuse advisers will o?er confidential, non- judgemental information and advice on the options available to you helping you to keep safe and make informed choices.If you believe there is an immediate risk of harm to someone, or it is an emergency, you should always call 999.If someone confides in you, there is more information on how to support a friend who is being abused.If you are an employerLet your employees know that if they are facing domestic abuse you want to help them to get help. Stay in regular contact with employees you know, or fear, may be facing abuse and if you lose contact with them, take swift action to visit them. If you believe there is an immediate risk of harm to someone, or it is an emergency, always call 999.Encourage employees to look out for others who may be facing domestic abuse and signpost them to support. Your sta? may also be worried about their own abusive behaviour at this time. There is no excuse for domestic abuse, no matter what stresses you are under and support is available.Hestia’s Respond to Abuse Advice Line is a free resource for employers. Employers can call 020 3879 3695 Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm, or email adviceline.eb@hestia.org for support, guidance or information about domestic abuse and how to support employees and colleagues experiencing domestic abuse.The  Employers’ Initiative on Domestic Abuse website provides resources to support employers including an employers’ toolkit.If you are a professional working in the domestic abuse sectorSafeLives provides guidance and support to professionals and those working in the domestic abuse sector, as well as additional advice for those at risk.Find additional information and supportIf you want to access help specifically to cater to your background and needs or want support and help for specific types of abuse there are several organisations that can help - see Domestic abuse: specialist sources of support.You can also find additional information and support here on topics including:  help for children and young people welfare benefits and housing advice help if you don’t have settled status in the UK  support for specific types of abuseGet help if you think you might be an abuserIf you are concerned about your behaviour or the behaviour of someone you know, there is support available.The  Respect Phoneline is an anonymous and confidential helpline for men and women who are abusing their partners and families. It is open Monday to Friday 9am to 8pm. The helpline also takes calls from partners or ex-partners, friends and relatives who are concerned about perpetrators.A webchat service is available Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays from 10am to 11am and from 3pm to 4pm.Telephone: 0808 802 4040How to call the police when you can’t speakIf you are in danger and unable to talk on the phone, call 999 and listen to the questions from the operator and, if you can, respond by coughing or tapping on the handset.Call 999 from a mobileIf prompted, press 55 to Make Yourself Heard and this will transfer your call to the police. Pressing 55 only works on mobiles and does not allow police to track your location.Call 999 from a landlineIf the operator can only hear background noise and cannot decide whether an emergency service is needed, you will be connected to a police call handler.If you replace the handset, the landline may remain connected for 45 seconds in case you pick up again.When 999 calls are made from landlines, information about your location should be automatically available to the call handlers to help provide a response.If you are deaf or can’t use a phoneYou can register with the emergencySMS. Text REGISTER to 999. You will get a text which tells you what to do next. Do this when it is safe so you can text when you are in danger.Published 5 October 2018Last updated 21 March 2025 + show all updatesExplore the topicDomestic abuseViolence against women and girlsIs this page useful?Services and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Title: Serious Crime Bill: Computer Misuse Act 1990 -Aggravated OffenceIA No:Lead department or agency: Home Officeother departments or agencies: Crown Prosecution Service, Ministry of Justice, National Crime Agency---  ------	.--------·--.,-··- ····-···-- ---S1.1rn_mary: Intervention and Options
Impact Assessment (IA)Date: 2 June 2014Stage: FinalSource of intervention: DomesticType of measure: Primary legislationContact for enquiries:Caroline Johnson Caroline.Johnson@homeoffice.gsi.gov.uk 020 7035 1562RPC Opinion: RPG Opinion Status
.	Cost of Preferred (or more likely) OptionTotal Net PresentBusiness NetNet cost to business perIn scope of One-In,  Measure qualifies asValuePresent Valueyear (EANCB on 2009 prices)One-Out?N/A£0£0No	I NAIWhat is the problem under consideration? Why is government intervention necessary? v\ maJor cyber attack on essential systems (for example those controlling power supply, communications, ood or fuel distribution etc) could result in a risk to human life, pab"ttctmatthorna:tmrrarse-curity or cause- erious social disruption or economic or environm.ental damage. However, the existing offence of mpairing a computer only carries a maximum sentence of 10 years, which the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) and law enforcement agencies consider too low for the level of economic and personal harm that such an attack could cause. Although to -date no cyber attacks l:tallell"d a? impact nflhi0 nature,- a longer maximum sentence should be available should such an attack occur in future.- -  .. ·-  -	---	..	...  --·-	- - ----What are the policy objectives and the intended effects?	.he policy obJect1ve 1s. to ensure that. all cyber attacks that result in serious damage to human welfare ational security, the economy or the environment can be prosecuted, with a maximum sentence vailable that fully reflects the severity of the conduct.	.Ii' What policy options have been considered, including any alternatives to regulation? Please justify preferred! option (further details-in Evidence Base)fr.  wo options have been considered:1Option 1: Do nothing.Continue with existing arrangements under existing law.Option2: LegislateCreate a new (aggravated) offence of impairing a computer that results, directly or indirectly, in serious damage to th_e economy, the environment, national security or human welfare, or creates a significant risk of such damage  The maximum sentence will be life imprisonment for cyber _attacks which result in oss of life, serious illness or injury or serious damage to national security or 14 years' imprisonment for attacks causing serious economic or environmental damage or social disruption.-· - --·	-·-·,·Will the policy be reviewed? It will not be reviewed. If applicable, set review date: Month/Year
I	Does implementation go beyond minimum EU requirements?Are any of these organisations in scope? If Micros not
Micro
N/A< 20	Small	IMedium ILarge
exempted set out reason ,n Evidence Base.
INo
INo
No	No	No
What is the CO2 equivalent change in greenhouse gas emissions? (Million tonnes CO2 equivalent)---- ·----·---------
Traded:	Non-traded:n/a	n/a
I have read the Impact Assessment and I am satisfied that (a) it represents a fair and reasonable view of the expected costs, benefits and impact of the policy, and (b) that the benefits justify the costs.Signed by the responsible Minister:
Summary: Analysis & Evidence	Policy Option 2Description: Create a new (aggravated) offence of impairing a computer to cause serious damage FULL ECONOMIC ASSESSMENTPrice Base Year 12/13PVBase Year 2016Time Period Years 10Net Benefit (Present Value (PV)) (£m)Low:-	I High: -Best Estimate: -COSTS (£m)Total Transition(Constant Price)	YearsAverage Annual(excl. Transition) (Constant Price)Total Cost(Present Value)Low000High00.121Best Estimate00.060.5Description and scale of key monetised costs by 'main affected groups'Any offences that fall within the scope of the new aggravated offence could already be prosecuted as the existing "section 3" offence. Although we expect the threshold for the aggravated offence to be met only very rarely, potential costs to the criminal justice system would arise for HM Courts and Tribunals SeNice, the Crown Prosecution SeNice and the Legal Aid Agency from more complex investigations and trials and for the Prison and Probation SeNices from longer custodial sentences.Other key non-monetised costs by 'main affected groups'N/ABENEFITS (£m)Total Transition(Constant Price)	YearsAverage Annual(excl. Transition) (Constant Price)Total Benefit(Present Value)Lown/an/an/aHighn/an/an/aBest Estimaten/an/an/aDescription and scale of key monetised benefits by 'main affected groups'N/AOther key non-monetised benefits by 'main affected groups'l\ny cyber attack that had a serious impact on human welfare, national security, the economy or the environment could be appropriately prosecuted and cyber attacks with serious consequences for society would be seen to be taken sufficiently seriously. There is no evidence that cyber criminals will necessarily be deterred by a longer sentence, but there may be deterrence benefits and/or benefits in public confidenceKey assumptions/sensitivities/risks	Discount rate(%) I  3.5	There have so far been no successful cyber attacks that would meet the criteria for the proposed new offence. However as technology improves, an ever-increasing number of people use the internet and more systems rely on it, the number and severity of criminally-motivated cyber attacks is expected to increase, but it is difficult accurately to predict future levels.
BUSINESS ASSESSMENT (Option 1)Direct impact on business (Equivalent Annual) £m: Costs: 0	Benefits:	0	Net:_	0
In scope of OITO?	Measure qualifies asNo	I NA
Evidence Base (for summary sheets)Problem under considerationA major cyber attack on essential systems (for example those controlling power supply, communications, food or fuel distribution etc) could h.ave a significant impact, resulting in a risk to human life, public health or national security or causing serious social disruption or economic or environmental damage.However, the Computer Misuse Act (CMA) "section 3" offence of impairing a computer only carries a maximum sentence of 10 years. The Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) and law enforcement agencies consider a maximum sentence of 10 years for a major attack too low for the level of economic and personal harm that could be caused and out of step with the much higher maximum tariffs available for offences such as drug trafficking or aggravated criminal damage.	In some cases it might be possible to prosecute under another, more serious offence; however this will depend on the precise circumstances of the attack and will not always be possible.To date there have been no successful cyber attacks of this nature. However, reliance on computer systems is increaping, as is the degree to which they are interlinked, increasing the likelihood that a successful cyber attack will cause significant impacts on the real world in a way unforeseen when the Computer Misuse Act was passed.Rationale for interventionCyber attacks have the potential to have a significant impact on public health, essential services, the economy, the environment or national security. It is in society's interest to acquire protection against these attacks.Policy objectiveThe policy objective is to ensure that all cyber attacks that result in serious damage to human welfare, national security, the economy or the environment can be prosecuted, with a maximum sentence available that fully reflects the severity of the conduct.Description of options considered (including do nothing); Two options have been considered:Option 1: Do nothing.Continue with existing arrangements under existing law.Option2: LegislateWe propose to create a new (aggravated) offence of impairing a computer that results, either directly or indirectly, in serious damage to the economy, the environment, national security or human welfare, or creates a significant risk of such damage.As well as knowing that their actions in impairing the computer are unauthorised, the defendant should intend the impairment to cause the harms outlined or be reckless as to whether such harms are caused. The offence will be friable only on indictment, with a maximum sentence of life imprisonment for cyber attacks which result in loss of life, serious illness or injury or serious damage to national security (or a significant risk thereof) or 14 years' imprisonment for cyber attacks causing, or creating a significant risk of, severe economic or environmental damage or social disruption.Groups affectedApart from the individuals who would be prosectJted under this new offence, the main groups affected by the policy would be:ï The Police - who will need to familiarise themselves with the new arrangements.ï HM Courts and Tribunals Service (HIVICTS) - proceedings for the new aggravated offence will potentially be longer and more complex that cases for the existing "section 3" offence of impairing a computer.ï 
ï Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) - the new aggravated offence will be more complex to prosecute than the existing "section 3" offence" as the prosecution will need to prove both the unauthorised act in relation to the computer and the serious impact this had.ï The Legal Aid Agency (LAA) - the cost of legal aid is likely to increase with the increase in length/complexity of cases.ï HM Prison Service, Probation service, National Offender Management Service (NOMS) - there will be an impact on prisons and subsequently on probation from the longer custodial sentences available.Monetised and non-monetised costs and benefits of each optionOption 1: Do nothingJhere are no additional costs or benefits if there is no policy change.Option 2: LegislateMonetised costsThere are no expected costs to business from this option.ProportionalityWe have estimated the costs of the policy assuming that each conviction results in a life seotenc.e. As it is difficult to estimate the volumes overall for the new aggravated offence, it is even more difficult to estimate the volumes for the different sub-sections of the offence. In addition, as we expect relatively few • prosecutions, it could become a bit spurious to try and split out already minimal numbers for thevolumes. Given that the impacts of this policy over a 10 year period are a maximum of £1million, itwould be disproportionate to go in to further detail calculating the impacts. Taking this approach meansthe figures provided are overestimates of the true costTraining costsAll police will need to familiarise themselves with the new regulations. The College of Policing ensures that all new legislation is incorporated into the National Policing Curriculum as matter of course, and falls within existing budgets. The additional cost of training for this policy is therefore expected to be negligible.	•Estimated CJS costs per case (court process)Apart from the impact on those prosecuted for the new offence, the main impacts would be:ï the custodial sentences on the prison system and probation; andï the trial process on the Her Majesty's Courts and Tribunals Service (HMCTS), the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) and the Legal Aid Agency (LAA)Any offences that fall within the scope of the new aggravated offence could already be prosecuted as the existing "section 3" offence (as well as, in some cases and depending on the precise circumstances, another more serious offence). However, as the new aggravated offence is considerably more serious than the existing offence we estimate below the cost of the new offence with reference to other grave offences. The table below presents estimated costs for HMCTS, CPS and LAA. Costs estimates provided are calculated on the basis of assumptions, which have associated risks and limitations. See Annex A for a full outline of the assumptions and associated risks.Estimated Costs per case (000s)CPS(including advocacy costs for homicide and related graveoffences)£17.5HMCTS£2.5Legal Aid£52.6-
ITotal	£731Estimated CJS costs (disposals):We assume an average annual cost of £28,000 per prison place2 and of £2,600 for probation (for supervision on licence following release from custody). We also assume that all offenders prosecuted for the new offence receive the maximum custodial sentence. Where that is life imprisonment, we assume a tariff of 12 years, followed by another 12 years on post-release licence. We expect offenders who are sentenced to 14 years will serve 7 years in custody, followed by 7 years on post-release licence. However as it is difficult, given the small volumes anticipated (please see section below) to estimate how many cases would be subject to the maximum penalty of life imprisonment and how many would be subject to the 14 year maximum, we make the simplifying assumption that all cases would be subject to the higher maximum. Please refer to annex A for a full list of assumptions and risks.Estimated total CJS costsIn the period 2001-2012, 78 offenders were sentenced for the existing "section 3" offence of impairing a computer, an average of seven per year.3 During the same period, 16 offenders (an average of one per year) were sentenced to immediate custody. In 2012, the average custodial sentence length given was 18 months, and the maximum given was 24 months.The proposed new offence is considerably more serious than the section 3 offence, and ii is reasonable to assume that the number of prosecutions will be minimal as, although the likelihood of a cyber attack having an impact of this seriousness is increasing with developments in technology, there have been none to date. We estimate the costs over a period of 10 years.In the high estimate we assume that there will be one case every other yearIn the low estimate we assume no offences will take place which fall under this offence definition (therefore zero cost).Our best estimate is that between 2/3 offences will take place over the next 10 years, for simplicity we have obtained this by dividing the high estimate by two.We assume that all offenders prosecuted for the proposed offence receive a custodial sentence. We also assume that where that custodial sentence is life imprisonment, the tariff is 12 years.4We have not subtracted the Criminal Justice System costs that would have occurred in the absence of this offence.This means the figures represent an over estimate of the true cost.1 To the nearest £1,000, and at 2012 13 prices2 The actual (cashable) cost of an increase in the prison population (Le. the marginal cost per place) depends on the extent of spare capacity inthe prison estBte at that moment, the scale of the expected populaticin change, and planned decisions on future capacity. This cost varies constantly, however, as both the prison population and capacity move over time, which makes it impractical to use. for policy planning purposes. 3 Further breakdown of Ministry of Justice Criminal Justice Statistics, 2012. Every effort is made to ensure that the figures presented arei		accurate and complete. However, it is important to note that these data have been extracted from large administrative data systems generated by the courts. As a consequence, care should be taken to ensure data collection processes and their inevitable limitations are taken into account when those data are used.  Annual tables - Offender management caseload statist_ics 2012 tables, Table A3.5 - Number of first releases from prison on life licence and average time served, England and Wales, 2002-2012.  
The table below sets out the estimated costs per year of the prosecutions and convictions of the proposed offence for our high estimate.
Y4	Y5	Y6
Y7	YB	yg
intake	inlake  mtake	intake	intake	intake
Total CJScosts_(thousands/
- -----j	£100£30£130£60£160£80£190£0	£110£0	£28	£210£0	£28	£0	£140-
Best Estimate_
c t(m) I Present Cost(m).
	Vear 1 £0.05£0.05Vear 2£0.02£0.01-----·Vear 3£0.07£0.06--Vear 4£0.03£0.03Vear 5£0.08£0.07Year 6 -·---£+0.0-4---+-£-0.-0-3 -Vear 7	£0.09 	£0.07	e-----Vear 8-------£0.06	£0.04-1-------Vear9£0.11£0.08---  -- --------,----f--- ------
	Vear 10	£0.07	Total	£0.60The high estimate cost over a ten year period is £1m The best estimate cost over a ten year period is £0.5m The low estimate cost over a ten year period is £0Monetised benefitsN/ANon-monetised costsN/A
£0.05£0.50
Non-monetised benefits.Any cyber attack that had a serious impact on human welfare, national security, the economy or the environment could be appropriately prosecuted and cyber attacks with serious consequences for society would be seen to be taken sufficiently seriously. There is no evidence that cyber criminals will necessarily be deterred by a longer sentence, but there may be deterrence benefits and/or benefits in public confidence.5 Rounded to the nearest 1,000.6 Ibid.7 Rounded to the nearest 10,000.5 
RisksThere are risks that:ï any proposed offence could be changed during its passage through Parliament;ï as technology improves, an ever-increasing number of people use the internet and more systems rely on it. The number and severity of criminally-motivated cyber attacks may increase significantly beyond current expected levelsSee Annex A for risks and assumptions related to CJS costs.ConsultationA full public consultation will not be taken due to the tight time frame before the 4th session. However stakeholders have been consulted. List is below.Within Government:ï Ministry of Justiceï Crown Prosecution Serviceï Scotland Officeï Northern Irelandï GCHQOutside Government:ï Policeï National Crime AgencySummary and preferred option with description of implementation planIn summary, we have identified that the existing offence of impairing a computer, which carries a maximum sentence of 10 years, would be insufficiently serious to prosecute cyber attacks which caused serious personal, societal or economic harm. We intend to create a new (aggravated) offence of impairing a computer that causes serious damage to human welfare, national security, the economy or the environment to address this gap.The main purpose of this approach is to proof our legislation against future threats and we would expect the number of prosecutions for the new offence to be very small.Implementation planThe government plans to implement these changes through the Serious Crime Bill (to be introduced in parliament in June 2014). Dependent on its safe passage, commencement would be in 2015 with enactment in 2016.MonitoringThis policy will not be reviewed after a certain date, but instead will be monitored routinely. We expect to monitor any cases in which the new offence is used.
Annex ARisks and Assumptions
AssumptionNumber of cases:ï We estimate costs for a period of 10 years_ We assume that there will be:one case every other year (high estimate); one case every 2 or 3 years (best estimate); or no cases in a 1O year period (low estimate)Source: HO estimate
- --Risks/Limitationsï The number of cases could differ from our assumption, particularly bearing in mind the concerns below.ï There are particular coneerns that the proposed offence may bepotentially very wide-ranging (it would cover loss of life, but also damage and disruption across a wide range of activities and assets) and there is some lack of clarity as to what the lowest threshold would be judged to be in defining disruption or damage, especially as the offence would be subjeel to a maximum penalty of life imprisonment.

Progression of a case through the CJS (eg, proportion sentenced to immediate custody):ï We assume that all offenders prosecuted for the proposed offence       receive a custodial sentence. Source: MoJ internal analysis, 2013.Sentence length givenï We also assume that in all cases the custodial sentence is lifeimprisonment, with a tariff of 12 years.Source: MoJ internal analysis, 2013.
ï There is a risk that fewer offenders will be sentenced to immediate custody.ï There is the risk that the sentence will be shorter than the maximum.ï There is a risk that the tariff could be longer or shorter.ï There is a risk that some offences will cause only the types of damagefor which the lower (14 year) maximum sentence is available

CPS costs:ï The estimated CPS costs consist of two broad categories, advocacy costsand Activity Based Costings • (ABC).The primary purpose of the ABC model is resource distribution, and has several limitations (see risks). The CPS ABC Crown court cost per
ï The key limitation of the ABC model is that it is built purely on staff timeand excludes accommodalion and other ancillary costs (e.g. those associated with complex cases and witness care). It also relies on several assumptions. This could
case is a weiqhted average for a		mean there is a risk that costs are
AssumptionCrown Court (across timeous guilty pleas, late guilty pleas, guilty/not guilty contests, dropped prosecutions and write offs), and inclusive of a pre? charge decision). The CPS advocacy costs were estimated by considering the advocacy costs for Category A (Homicide and related grave offences). The total ABC and advocacy costs are estimated as£17,500 (in 201213 prices and rounded to the nearest £100).Source: MoJ internal analysis based on CPS advice, 2013.HMCTS costs:Crown Courts CostsThe estimated Crown court cost for indictable only offences is £2,500. Timings data for types of case (eg, indictable only, triable either way) were applied to Crown court costs per sitting day. This was added to the cost of the initial hearing in the Magistrates, as all criminal cases start in the Magistrates courts. Crown Court cost is £1,600 per sitting day in 2012113 prices, assuming a sitting day is 5 hoursSource: The HMCTS costs are based on average judicial and staff costs, found at HMCTS Annual Report and Accounts 2012- 2013
Risks/Limitationsunderestimated. For further informati"on about how CPS ABC costs are calculated please see the following CPS guidance (CPS, 2012): http://www.cps.gov.uk/publications/fin ance/abc_guide.pdf.Timings data for types of cases:ï The average time figures which provide the information for the timings do not include any down time. This would lead to an underestimate in the court costing.ï Timings do not take into account associated admin time related with listing a case for court hearings. This could mean that costings are an underestimate.ï The data which informed the timings data excludes cases where a bench warrant was issued, no pleaï recorded, indictment to lie on file, found unfit tci plead, and other results.ï Committals for sentence exclude committals after breach, 'bring backs' and deferred sentences.HMCTS average costs per sitting day:ï HMCTS court costs used may be an underestimate as they include only judicial and staff costs. Other key costs which inevitably impact on the cost ,of additional cases in the courts have not been considered; for example juror costs.ï 
-	-------- 	_JLegal Aid costs:We assume 100% eligibility for cases in the	•	 There is a risk that variance in the Crown Court.		Legal Aid eligibility rate assumed for The average legal aid cost for Category A		 cases in the magistrates' courts_(f:iomicide and related:,irave_o_ff_e_n_ce_s_,)'--i_n_t_h_e ,		...cw o u ld im p a ct t h e_c o s ti nyg s .	_
AssumptionCrown Court was assumed- around £52,600 (based on Crime Higher Report, Legal Aid Agency).We use an average cost including all offence types from the dataset that includes both standard and non-standard fees to estimate the cost to the Legal Aid Agency.-··-··---
Risks/Limitationsï Assuming 100% eligibility for Legal Aid in the Crown court carries several risks. Firstly, an individualmay refuse Iegal aid. Secondly, an individual may contribute to legal aid costs. Lastly, the size of this contribution can vary. This could mean that the costings provided are a slight overestimate.-ï There is a risk that the cost could be higher for specific new offenceswhere Legal Aid is paid under the more expensive non standard fee scheme.ï There is as ubstantial risk that the LA costs are an underestimate,given the erass jurisdiction aspects	I of the cases and their relative complexity.		
Prison costs:We assume that for life sentences a tariff of 12 years is served.The average cost per prison place is £28,000.Source: NOMS management accounts addendum (2012/13), MoJ Annual tables - Offender management caseload statistics 2012 tables, Table A3.5Probation costs:We typically assume that an offender given a custodial sentence of 12 months or more will serve half of their sentence in custody and the other half on post-release licence.However, with the assumption that the custodial sentence will be life imprisonment with a tariff of 12 years, we assume the post- release licence_ will be another 12 years.ï We also assume that independent probationary sentences consist of community orders and suspended sentence orders.Costs for probation and community.sentences are approximately £2,600 per year in 2012/13 prices.The probation costs are based on national costs for community order/ suspendedsentence order, found at NOMS, Probation
ï The cost of additional prison places is also dependent on the existingprison population, as if-there is. spare capacity in terms of prison places then the marginal cost of accommoda ting more offenders will be low dueto existing large fixed costs and low variable costs.Conversely, if the current prison population is running at or over capacity then marginal costs may be significantly higher as contingency measures will have tobe found.		ï Costs represent the national average fully apportioned costbased on delivery by 35 Probation Trusts in 2012/13.ï Unit costs are calculated from the total fully apportioned cost ofrelevant services divided by starts in that year and do not consider which elements of cost are fixed and which will vaiy based on service volumes. Majar changes to the volume, Iength or content of community sentences or the characteristi cs of the offender population could affect the unit cost.ï The costs consist of costs for both(a) managing the sentence and. (b) delivering court-ordered r_e_q_uirements. Excludescentrally	.. 
-- ---·-·····	-
Trust Unit Costs, Financial Year 2012-13. Source: MoJ internal analysis, 2013.
·I!
Title: Serious Crime Bill: Amendments to Computer Misuse Act 1990IA No:Lead department or agency: Home OfficeOther departments or agencies: Ministry of JusticeSummary: Intervention and Options-·---	··-- -- ·- --·-·	- -
Impact Assessment (IA)Date: 03/03/2014Stage: FinalSource of intervention: Domestic Type of measure: Primary legislation Contact for ennuiries: Shabana FazalRPC Opinion: N/A
Cost of Preferred (or more likely) Option
Total Net Present Value
Business Net Present Value
Net cost to business peryear {EANCB on 2009 prices)
In scope of One-In, Measure qualifies as One-Out?
Negli9ible	N/A	N/A	No	IN/A	-What is the problem under consideration? Why is government intervention necessary?-The EU adopted the Directive on attacks against information systems (2013/40/EU) in August 2013_ The UK is compliant with the Directive save for two points:ï tools used for committing offences andï jurisdictionrhe relevant legislation in the UK is the Computer Misuse Act (1990). The Computer Misuse Act do not prevent individuals from obtaining tools such as malware with the intention to personally commit a cyber crime. It also does not enable UK law enforcement agencies to take action against UK citizens committing cyber crime offences whilst physically outside the UK on the basis of their nationality alone,=quired rrv he EU Directive.-	-	-	-	-hat are the policy objectives and the intended effects?Implement the EU Directive on Attacks against Information Systems as referenced in objective one of ther	UK Cyber Security Strategy;12		Contribute to the Home Secretary's commitment in the Serious and Organised Crime Strategy to relentlessly disrupt organised crime; and3_	Reduce the threat and impact of cyber crime by ensuring our legislation is up to dale and so bringoffenders to justice and deter individuals from committing cyber offences in the first instance_- -!I have read the Impact Assessment and I am satisfied that (a) it represents a fair and reasonable view of the expected costs, benefits and impact of the policy, and (b) that the benefits justify the costs.Signed by the responsible Minister:	Date: '6 IG.I l'-f
Summary: Analysis & EvidenceDescription:FULL ECONOMIC ASSESSMENT
Policy Option 2
.Price Base
.PV Base	Time Period	Net _Elenefit (Present Value (PV)) (£m)
l Year	Year	Years	Low:	I High:
Best Estimate: Negligible
COSTS (£m)Low HighBest Estimate
Total Transition(Constant Price)	Years.
Average Annual(excl. Transition) (Constant Price).
Total Cost(Present Value).Negligible
Description and scale of key monetised costs by 'main affected groups'N/A.Other key non-monetised costs by 'main affected groups'Any increase in prosecutions under the extended offence or by extending jurisdiction for the existing Computer Misuse Act offences would incur costs to police, Her Majesty's Courts and Tribunals Services, the Crown Prosecution Service, the Legal Aid agency and HM prison and probation services.The total cost to the Criminal Justice System is uncertain, but the additional number of prosecutions following the change in legislation is expected to be negligible.
BENEFITS (£m)Low HighBest Estimate
Total Transition(Constant Price)	Years
Average Annual(excl. Transition) (Constant Price)
Total Benefit(Present Value)NK
Description and scale of key monetised benefits by 'main affected groups'NIAOther key non-monetised benefits by 'main affected groups'? The amendment to include the 'obtain for use' offence will allow police to intervene in an attack before it has taken place, when the offender has procured the malware to use themselves.? The extension of extra territorial jurisdiction by nationality will cover all offences in the Computer Misuse Act and therefore provide some extra territorial jurisdiction cover to section 3A for the first time.? The pan-EU approach means that offenders who may have previously escaped justice due to a gap in legislation or lack of clear legal procedure could be dealt with under clear EU and UK legislation. Key assumptions/sensitivities/risks	Discount rate (%) I	3.5 There is no evidence available to estimate how many further prosecutions would occur as a result of the change in legislation. Section 3A of the Computer Misuse Act has only had two prosecutions in England and Wales over the past three years and the extra territorial jurisdiction provisions have not been exercised against any Computer Misuse Act offenders.There is a risk that as the threat of cyber crime develops, and the materials used to commit cyber crime offences becomes more accessible, there could be an increase in offences under section 3A. This has been highlighted in a sensitivity analysis.BUSINESS ASSESSMENT (Option 2)In scope of 0100?	Measure qualifies asNO	N/A
Evidence Base (for summary sheets)BackgroundThe legislation available in the UK which covers the offences defined in the EU Directive is the Computer Misuse Act (1990). The offences under the Act are covered under sections 1-3A. Section 3A was added in 2006 and deals with making, supplying or obtaining articles for use in offences under sections 1 (unauthorised access to computer material) or 3 (unauthorised acts with intent to impair, or with recklessness as to impairing, operation of a computer etc).Section 4 covers the territorial scope of offences under sections 1 and 3 and establishes that for offences under sections 1 or 3 it is immaterial whether any act or other event occurred in the home country concerned or whether the accused was in the home country concerned at the time of any such act or event. This section also establishes that at least one significant link with domestic jurisdiction must exist in _the circumstances of the case for the offence to be committed.Section 5 sets out the criteria for establishing a significant link with domestic jurisdiction - either the accused was in the home ·country at the time of the offence or the affected/intended affected computer was in the home country at the time of the offence. The existing extra territorial jurisdiction provisions (i.e. the legal ability for the government to exercise authority beyond its normal bouhdaries) do not include section 3AThe EU Directive on Attacks Against Information Systems1 was adopted in August 2013 and Member States have two years to implement.Problem· under considerationIn order to implement the EU Directive and assist in addressing constant advances in technology, we need to extend the coverage of the existing offences in the Computer Misuse Act.The UK is compliant with the EU Directive save for two points:ï Article 7 of the EU Directive covers the tools used to commit computer offences (e.g. malware).This section states that Member States should have offences in their legislation to criminalise the intentional 'production, sale, procurement for use, import, distribution, or otherwise making available' of tools with the intention that it is used to commit any of the further offences in the Directive.	•As the legislation stands, section 3A of the Computer Misuse Act meets all of the provisions under Article 7 with the exception of the offence of 'procuring for use' of such tools.Individuals can increasingly obtain tools such as malware and the knowledge on how to commit a cyber offence, to commit the offence personally and are less likely to need a third party to commit the offence •There is a risk that a person acting in isolation and obtaining a tool for personal use to commit a Computer Misuse Act offence is not caught by the existing offence as the prosecution would need to show that the tool was being obtained with a view to its being supplied to commit a Computer Misuse Act offence.1 (2013/40/EU), which replaces Council Framework decision 2005/222/JHA,
ï Article 12 of the EU Directive covers jurisdiction and requires Member states to establish their jurisdiction with regards to a cyber offence being committed by one of their nationals. Currently, extra territorial jurisdiction provisions within the Computer Misuse Act cover offences under sections 1 and 3 and require the prosecution to show a significant link to the UK. This means that if an individual commits a Computer Misuse Act section 1 or 3 offence, in order lo exercise extra territorial jurisdiction and pursue a Computer Misuse Act prosecution in the UK, either the· individual or the affected/intended affected computer needs to be present in the UK at the time of the offence. The offender cannot be extradited on the basis of their nationality alone.In addition, section 3A which was added in 2006, is not currently included in extra territorial provisions. This means that an individual committing a section 3A offence whilst physically outside the UK cannot be easily extradited under the existing Computer Misuse Act provisions to face justice in the UK.In the absence of an amendment, the UK (from individuals up to big business) Is exposed, and law enforcement agencies will not have the necessary powers to intervene early enough in order to prevent potential criminal damage.RationaleCyber crime is a risk to our national security and causes significant harm to our society. Government has a role in protecting its citizens and ensuring law enforcement agencies have the necessary powers and offences to tackle ii.Objectives1. Implement the EU Directive on Attacks against Information Systems as referenced in objective one of the UK Cyber Security Strategy;2. Contribute to the Home Secretary's commitment in the Serious _and Organised Crime Strategy to relentlessly disrupt organised crime; and3. Reduce the threat and impact of cyber crime by ensuring our legislation is.up to date and so bring offenders to justice and deter individuals from committing cyber offences in the first instance.OptionsThere are two options that have been considered:1) Do not amend UK legislation and continue current arrangements under existing law.If we do not extend section 4 to include extra territorial jurisdiction by nationality and extend the offence under section 3A to include obtain for use, the identified gaps in legislation would remain.In addition, the UK could face infraction proceedings as we would not be transposing the EU Directive fully into UK law. It could therefore eventually be referred to the European Court of Justice. If the Court rules that the UK has failed to comply with its obligations under EU law, it could face a minimum lump sum fine of £7.9 million. The UK could also face daily fines until it is seen to be compliant.2) Amend domestic legislation to fill identified legislative gaps and bring the UK legislation in line with the Directive.This option would involve the following amendments to the Computer Misuse Act 1990:a) Amend section 3A of the Computer Misuse Act to include reference to 'obtain for use'.b) Extend sections 4 and 5 of the Computer Misuse Act to include extra territorial jurisdiction by nationality so all Computer Misuse Act offences are covered, including section 3A.Appraisal (Costs and Benefits)Option 1: Do nothingPotential infraction costs with a minimum lump sum fine of £7.9 million. There are no identified benefits.
Option 2: Amend existing legislationGroups affectedApart from the individuals who would be prosecuted under the new offence or extended jurisdiction for all offences, the main groups affected by the policy would be:ï The Police: we predict there could be a small increase in the number of investigations and arrests.ï Ministry of Justice: any increase in arrests could. mean an increase in the number of cases that enter the Justice system.ï HM Courts and Tribunals Service: any increase in cases entering the justice system is likely to increase the administrative burden on the courts.ï Crown Prosecution Service: any increase in cases entering the justice system means a likely increase in the number of cases being presented to the courts.ï Legal aid: there will be an impact on legal aid with the increase in the number of offenders arrested and proceeded against.ï HM Prison Service: any guilty verdicts resulting in a custodial sentence will impact on prison places.ï Probation service: there will be an impact from offenders sentenced to probation.ï Extradition bodies: agencies and officials dealing with extradition may see a small increase in workload.Monetised costs:There are no expected costs to business from this option.It is important to note that the below costs should be viewed as opportunity costs. The additional costs created by this option to the Criminal Justice system may be absorbed within existing resources.Training costsAll police will need to familiarise themselves with the new regulations. The College of Policing ensure that all new legislation is incorporated into the National Policing Curriculum as matter of course, and falls within existing budgets. The additional cost of training for this policy is therefore expected to be negligible.Ongoing costsAmending section 3A of the Computer Misuse Act to include 'obtain for use'This is a future proofing policy and we expect very few additional prosecutions to come from it.Between 2006, when section 3A came into force, and 2012 there have only been two prosecutions under section 3A and only one found guilty.2 Following consultation with the Police and the Crown Prosecution Service, we have not found any evidence to suggest that there would be a significant increase in cases due to the new offence.As we do not expect many cases we have not given a monetised benefit, however we have demonstrated what the costs would be. It would be disproportionate to analyse the costs in more detail than this.The Ministry of Justice have provided estimates of the weighted cost to the Criminal Justice System per proceeding under the amendment of 'obtain for use'.2 Further br akdown of Criminal Justice Statistics publication, MoJ
Table 1: Weighted estimated Criminal Justice Syst m cost per case for nevv_off ence3:Criminal Justice System Lower bound costs (all Upper bound costs (all Agency1	cases tried in a	cases tried in a Crown                          Magistrates Court)	 Court) Her Majesty's Courts and  £600	£1,100 Tribunals ServiceCrown Prosecution	£200	£2,600 ServiceLegal Aid	£200	£7,700Prison	£7,000	£30,600Probation5	£0	£0_weighted cost per case	£8,000	£42,000There is insufficient data on similar Computer Misuse Act offences to give a robust estimate of proceedings, convictions and disposals. A lower and upper bound estimate of the Criminal Justice System costs has been calculated. As the offence is. triable either way, it is assumed that cases could progress through the Magistrates' Court (lower bound) or through the Crown Court (upper bound). The estimated Criminal Justice System cost per case for the new offence is £8k-£42k.'Worst case' estimates are derived for both scenarios by assuming that all proceedings lead to a custodial sentence and that an offender is given the maximum custodial sentence available; that is 6 months if tried in the Magistrates Court and 2 years if in the Crown Court. The costs may be lower if the average custodial sentence length given is less than the maximum.(See Annex A for further details, including sensitivities of assumptions).Sensitivity analysisLimited evidence has been found to suggest there would be a significant increase in prosecutions from the 1- 2 which we have experienced in the 6 years the current legislation has been in place. As an illustration, if, due to the changing nature of the threat, there was an increase of 10 offences each year, this could cost the Criminal Justice System up to £0.42m per year6. As we expect so few prosecutions, it would be disproportionate to go in to further detail on the costs.Extending extra territorial jurisdiction by nationalityThe UK has never brought extradition proceedings under the Computer Misuse Act and so we expect minimal new cases to arise. Under the proposals section 3A would include extra territorial jurisdiction provisions for the first time, however we do not expect a significant increase in cases brought under this section.It is expected that the UK is only likely to use this provision where a UK National commits a serious offence in another country that does not impact on the UK (as this is already covered through 'significant link to UK' provisions in section 4), and where the offence was also an offence in the country where ii took place. In practice, use would be considered on a case by case basis and there would be no obligation on the UK to exercise these provisions in any give.n case. We would either need cooperation from the other state to extradite the individual or else arrest on return to the UK. The UK may also receive requests from other EU states to aid in the extradition of foreign nationals. The courts would determine compliance on a case by case basis.The Ministry of Justice have provided the following estimated units costs to illustrate the potential cost of extending territorial jurisdiction to existing Computer Misuse Act offences.Table 2: Weighted cost per case for extra territorial jurisdiction 73 MoJ internal analysis 2014	.4 All cosls are in 2012/13 prices and are rounded to the nearest 100.5 As we assume that all proceedings result in immed_iate custody, there would be no probationary sentences (including community orders andsuspended sentence orders).6 Based on estimate of £42,000 for Criminal Justice System costs multiplied by 10 new prosecut1onS.7 MoJ ir\ternal analysis 2014
Criminal Justice System Agency
Lower cost estimate (using	 Upper cost estimate (all average Computer Misuse	 cases tried in a Crown Act offence as a proxy')	Court)10
Her Majesty's Courts and	£1,000	£1,200 Tribunals Serviceï Crown Prosecution Service	£150,000	£150,000 Legal Aid	£4,600	£7,700Prison	£6,300	£76,500Probation	£1,300	£0Weighted cost p e_r_c_a_s_e		£_1_6_3 ,0_0_0	£_2_3_5 ,3_0_0	Lower bound for extra territorial jurisdiction = £163k per caseFor the lower bound estimate, data from 2012 for all offences contained within the Computer Misuse Act was used to estimate a weighted costper case. Given that all Computer Misuse Act offences are triable either way, data about the numbers tried in each court for all Computer Misuse Act offences was used to estimate the proportion of people tried Magistrates and Crown Court. Data from 2012 shows that approximately 41% of Computer Misuse Act cases were tried in the Magistrates Court and 59% in the Crown Court. Data also shows that across all Computer Misuse Act offences approximately 30% of offenders are sentenced to immediate custody and 50% to community orders and suspended sentence orders. It is assumed that this will be the same for any future Computer Misuse Act offences committed outside the UK but prosecuted in the UK by extending jurisdiction.Upper bound for extra territorial jurisdiction = £235k per caseFor the upper boun_d estimate we assume that all cases progress through the Crown Court. We assume that all proceedings result in a custodial sentence. To estimate the custodial sentence length we use data from 2012 to indicate the maximum custodial sentence awarded across all Computer Misuse Act offences. From 2002-2012 the longest custodial sentence awarded for a Computer Misuse Act offence was 60 months.11 It is assumed that any cases prosecuted in the UK through extending jurisdiction will have the same custodial sentence length.Note that the UK is likely to extend jurisdictiori, only in cases where the offence committed is deemed serious or if prosecution in the UK is in the public interest If the cases tried by extra territorial jurisdiction are more complicated or longer than domestic Computer Misuse Act offence trials, there is a risk that even the upper cost estimate underestimates the cost per case. For example, in highly complicated cases the Legal Aid costs alone could be up to £1m12. See the risks and assumptions in Annex A for a full outline of all the caveats.There are other costs to the Criminal Justice System associated with extra territorial jurisdiction cases that are additional to usual cases where the offence is committed and tried domestically. These have not been monetised in this impact assessment but are outlined in Table 3 below.Table 3: Additional costs for cases involving extra territorial jurisdictionCosts of extra territorialjuri_s_d_ic_t_io_n	--1-D_e_s_c_ri~p_ti_o_n	,
Police,		--- 	Crown Prosecution Service
Transportation and evidence. A previous Home Office Impact Assessment on Human Trafficking estimated that these additional costs of gathering and transporting evidence/witnesses from overseas in extra territorial jurisdiction cases could be around £20,000 per case.Liaising with other authorities, familiarising themselv_es with processes and procedures relating to another country as well as, in a small number of cases, paying for UK prosecutors to
0 All costs are in 2012/13 prices and are rounded to the nearest 100.9 Numbers may not add due to rounding10 Ibid.11 For the offence of unauthorised access with intent to commit or facilitate commission of further offences (CMA S.2)12 MoJ internal analysis 2014
-,i
·--  -- ..travel overseas to assist with the case or tofacilitate the execution ofa request for mutual legal assistance		 -Cases may take longer than normal e.g. time takento gather evidence.		 	 There may be a very small number of cases. in which a decision not to prosecute when the UK has extra territorial jurisdiction over the offence is challenged by way of a judicial review. Such cases will incur costs for the Crown Prosecution Service and the Courts but (as of June 2012) there have been no instance where the argument has been successfully made that where domestic prosecution is an option it should be the preferred one.
-	-
Fine enforcement costs-
If the fines are not paid, there may be additional enforcement costs associaled with them.
Monetised benefits:NIANonamonetised costs:NIANon-monetised benefits:As the UK becomes more reliant on technology, and thus more vulnerable to cyber crime, the benefits of this policy will become more significant over time.Police will be able to intervene when a person obtains an article such as a trojan (malware) to use themselves with the intention of committing a CMA offence, before the actual cyber attack lakes place. Therefore the benefit will be fewer cyber attacks occurring.	•For example, a person may obtain malware to gain access.to another persons computer to directly enable theft of financial information directly as opposed to with the intention of supplying that malware to a third party. Under the new legislation, police can arrest that person for obtaining that malware for personal use to commit a CMA offence, before they gain access to the computer and steal information. By arresting the individual before the information is stolen, a cyber attack is prevented.The extension of extra territorial jurisdiction by nationality will cover all offences in the Computer Misuse Act and the pan-EU approach means that offenders who may have previously· escaped justice due to a gap in legislation or lack of clear legal procedure could be dealt with under clear EU and UK legislation.Furthermore, with the cross-EU implementation, it will also allow for other EU countries to extradite and prosecute their own nationals committing computer offences in the UK.Implementing the EU Directive has a number of non-monetised reputational benefits:ï maintains the UK's position as a world leader in the field of combating cyber crime and cyber security;ï reinforces the message that the UK is a pre-eminent safe space for individuals and businesses to operate online;ï the UK will continue to set the precedent for creating strong and robust legislation to prosecute and punish cyber criminals;ï encourages other countries to introduce robust legislation in this area; andï provides a consistent approach across Europe.ï 
In order for the policy to break-even, the benefits of the change in legislation (the potential prevention of future cyber attacks and also the reputational benefits) will need to outweigh the costs of up to £235k per prosecution.Risksï As the threat of cyber crime changes and individuals have greater access to malware, there is a risk that there could be an increase in prosecutions under section 3A.ï The changes to the legislation will only lead to a reduction in the number of cyber attacks if the police are able to arrest the offenders when they obtain the tools but before they carry out the attack.ï There is also a risk that there could be a greater increase than expected in.extradition cases particularly in relation to section 3A which is not currently covered by extra territorial jurisdiction provisions. This could incur significant cost to the Criminal Justice System.ï See Annex A for assumptions and risks for Criminal Justice costs.ConsultationCross-government consultation and parliamentary scrutiny took place during the negotiations related to the Directive. Following adoption, further consultation has taken place in relation to compliance with the_  Directive.Within Government:ï Ministry of Justiceï Crown Prosecution Serviceï Attorney General's Officeï Cabinet Officeï Security and Intelligence AgenciesOutside Government:ï A selection of police forces in England and Walesï National Crime AgencySummary and preferred option with description of implementation planIn summary, the threat from and impact of cyber crime is growing and the nature of these crimes are changing. We need our legislation to be up to date with emerging technical capabilities and to operate across geographical boundaries, as do many of these crimes. We are also required to implement the EU Directive, which we are compliant with save for two elements. Amending the Computer Misuse 'Act as outlined will support us in these' aims.Implementation planThe government plans to implement these changes through the [Serious Crime Bill] (expected to be introduced in parliament in [June] 2014). Dependant on its safe passage, commencement would need to be in September 2015.MonitoringWe expect to monitor the number of prosecutions under the amendments and the range of sentences handed down. In addition the EU has committed to evaluating the EU Directive within 5 years of entering into force; the UK will contribute to this review.
Annex A: Assumptions and risks/limitations of Criminal Justice costsf- ------------A_s_s_u_m p t_io_n	I::::::_-_·_·-···_·-_·-_·_R:i-sks/Limitation_s		_Progression of a case through the courts (e.g., proportion proceeded against in the Magistrates v.Crown)
Section 3A offenceIn the absence of robust proxy data for the new offence of procuring malware for personal use to commit offences under section 1 or 3 of the 1990 Computer Misuse Act, two scenarios were estimated. One where all cases progress through the Magistrates court and the otherwhere all progress through the Crown Court.
It is unlikely in reality that all cases will progress through one court.There is a risk that more/fewer offenders may be tried in the Magistrates' Courts or the Crown Courts
Extension of extra territorial jurisdictionFor the lower cost estimate, data from 2012 was used across all four Computer Misuse Act offences to estimate the proportion of cases tried in the Magistrates and Crown Court.For the upper cost estimate it is assumed that all cases progress through the Crown Court. This is to cover the risk that jurisdiction will only be extended for more serious crimes, where proceedings are likely to occur in the Crown Court.Source: MoJ internal analvsis, 2013.		Proportion sentenced to immediate custody and average custodial sentence length
Section 3A offenceï In the absence of robust proxy data for the new offence, 'worst case scenarios' wereestimatedby assuming that all those proceeded against are sentenced to immediate custody and that the offender receives the maximum sentence possible; that is 6 months if tried in the Magistrates Court and 2 years if in the Crown Court.
There is a risk that fewer defendants will be sentenced to immediate custody.There is a risk that the average custodial sentence length given will be shorter.There,. is a risk that jurisdiction will only be extended in the most serious cases and that the average custodial sentence length given could be higher.
Extension of extra territorial jurisdictionï For the lower cost estimate data from 2012 was used across all Computer Misuse Act offences. Data shows that approximately 30% of all Computer Misuse Act proceedings resulted in a custodial sentence and that the average custodial sentence length given was approximately 18 months across all cases, in all courts.ï For the upper cost estimate, it is assumed that all those proceeded against are sentenced to immediate custody. To estimate the custodial sentence length we use data from 2012 to indicate the maximum custodial sentence given across all Computer Misuse Act offences. From2002-2012 the lonqest custodial sentence.._g iv_e_n_ ------·--- 	·--		.		
Assumptionfor a Computer Misuse Act offence was 60months (for the offence of 'unauthorised acts with intent to impair or with recklessness as to impairing, operation of computer'). It is assumed that the custodial sentence length for cases where jurisdiction is extended will be the same.,,Source: MoJ internal analysis,_20_13_.	
Risks/Limitations-	j
Crown Prosecution Service costs
Section 3A offenceï The estimated Crown Prosecution Service costs consist of two broad categories, advocacy costs and Activity Based Costings. The primary purpose of the Activity Based Costings model is resource distribution, and has several limitations (see risks). The costs reflect the different Activity Based Costings and advocacy costs for guilty plea, cracked and effective trials.Source: MoJ internal analysis, 2013Extension of extra territorial jurisdiction
The key limitation of the Activity Based Costings model is that it is built purely on staff time and excludes accommodation and other ancillary costs (e.g. those associated with complex cases and witness care). II also relies on several assumptions. This could mean there is a risk that costs are underestimated. For further information about how Crown Prosecution Service Activity Based Costings costs are calculated please see the following Crown Prosecution Service guidance (Crown Prosecution Service, 2012): http://www.cps.gov.uk/publicalions/finance/abc guid e.pdf.

ï The estimated Crown Prosecution Service costs consist of two broad categories, advocacy costs and preparation of case costs; these are based·on Crown Prosecution Service experience in. prnseculing extraterritoria_lj_u_ri_sd_i_c_tio_n_c_a_se_s_.  
Extra territoria.I jurisdiction cases are likely to be complex, which impacts on the preparation of the case. Each case will be treated on its merits, and there is a risk thatthe Crown Prosecution Service costs could be higher or lower.-----·	<
Her Majesty's Courts and Tribunals Service costs (Magistrates' Courts)Timings data for offence categories:
To generate the costs by offence categories, Her Majesty's Courts and Tribunals Service timings data for each offence group were applied to court costs per sitting day. Magistrates Court costs are £1,200 per sitting day in 2012/13 prices. A sitting day is assumed to be 5 hours.Source: Her Majesty's Courts and Tribunals Service costs are .based on average judicial and staff costs, found at Her Majesty's Courts and Tribunals Service Annual Report and Accounts 2012-13. Her Majesty's Courts and Tribunals Service timings data from the Activity based costing model, the Timeliness Analysis Report data set and the costing process.
ï The timings data are based on the time that a legal advisor is present in court. This is used as a proxy for court time. Please note that, there may be a difference in average hearing limes as there is no timing available e.g. when a District Judge (Magistrates Court) sits.ï Timings do not lake into account associated admin time related with having a case in court. This could mean that costings are an underestimate. There is some information is available on admin time, however we have excluded it for simplicity.ï The timings are collection of data from February 2009. Any difference in these timings could influence costings.ï The data also excludes any adjournments (although the Activity Based Costings mode.I does), and is based on a case going through either one guilty plea trial (no trial) or one effective trial. However a combination of cracked, ineffective and effective trials could occur in the case route. As aï 
	 -
Assumption
Risks/Limitationsresult the costings could ultimately be underestimates.
ï Guilty plea proportions at the Initial hearing from Q2 in 2012 are used, based on the Time Analysis Report. As these can fluctuate, any changes In these proportions could influence court calculations (effective trials take longer in court than no trials (trials where there was a guilty plea at the initial hearing).Her Majesty's Courts and Tribunals Service average costs per sitting day:Her Majesty's Courts and Tribunals Service court costs used may be an underestimate as they include only judicial and staff costs. Other key costs which inevitably impact on the cost of additional cases in the courts have not been considered; for example juror costs.In cases where jurisdiction is extended, there is the risk that cases involving other jurisdictions may take longer for several reasons, such as problems/delays in gathering evidence from overseas and the need for interpreters. This would potentially result in higher costs.Her Majesty's Courts and Tribunals Service costs (Crown Courts)
Timings data for types of case (e.g., indictable only, triable either way) were applied to Crown Court costs per sitting day. This was added to the cost of the initial hearing in the Magistrates, as all criminal cases start in the Magistrates' Courts. Crown Court cost is £1,600 per sitting day in 2012/13 prices, assuming a sitting day is 5 hours.Source: Her Majesty's Courts and Tribunals Service costs are based on average judicial and. staff costs, found at Her Majesty's Courts and Tribunals Service Annual Report and Accounts 2012-13.
Timings data for types of cases:ï The average time figures which provide the information for the timings do not include any down time. This would lead to an underestimate in the court costing.ï Timings do not take into account associated admin time related with listing a case for court hearings. This could mean that costings are an underestimate.ï The data which informed the timings data excludes cases where a bench warrant was issued, no plea recorded, indictment to lie ori file, found unfit to plead, and other results.ï Committals for sentence exclude committals after breach, 'bring backs' and deferred sentences.Her Majesty's Courts and Tribunals Service average costs per sitting day:Her Majesty's Courts and Tribunals Service court costs used may be an underestimate as they include only judicial and staff costs. Other key costs which inevitably impact on the cost of additional cases in the courts have not been considered; for example juror costs.
Assumption	•	Risks/Limitations-----·----- ----+	'In cases where jurisdiction is extended, there is -the risk that cases involving other jurisdictions may . take longer for several reasons, such as problems/delays in gathering evidence from overseas and the need for interpreters. This would	 potentially result in higher costs.
Assume an eligibility rate of 50% for cases in the
Legal aid costsThere is a risk that variance in the Legal Aid eligibility
Magistrates' Courts and 100% in the Crown Court The average legal aid cost in the Magistrates assumed is approximately £400, and £5,000 in the Crown Court (based on Crime Lower Report and Crime Higher Report, Legal Aid Agency).Used an average cost including all offence types from the dataset that inclµdes both standard and non-standard fees to estimate the cost to the Legal Aid Agency.
rate assumed for cases in the magistrates' courts would impact the costings.Assuming 100% eligibility for Legal Aid in the Crown Court carries several risks. Firstly, an individual may refuse legal aid. Secondly, an individual may contribute to legal aid costs. Lastly, the size of this contribution can vary. This could mean that the costings provided are a slight overestimate.There is a risk that the cost could be higher for specific new offences where Legal Aid is paid under the more expensive non standard fee scheme.This is particularly true of cases prosecuted in the UK by extending jurisdiction, where the offence may be more serious or complicated to prosecute. As such the Legal Aid costs could be significantly higher in extra territorial jurisdiction cases.

Assume that 50% of a prison sentence over 12
Prison costsThe cost of additional prison places is.also
months is served on probation and that there is no element of licence for a sentence under 12 months. The proportions of offenders who are sentenced to probation are determined by the proportion of those who receive an over 12 month sentence. Assume that half the given average custodial sentence length is served.The cost per prison place is £28,000.
dependent on the existing prison population, as if there is spare capacity in terms of prison places then the marginal cost of accommodating more offenders will be low due to existing large fixed costs and low variable costs. Conversely, if the current prison population is running at or over capacity then marginal costs may be significantly higher as contingency measures will have to be found.
Source: National Offender Management Service manag_e,rnent accounts_ a_ddendum (2011).Probation costsThere is a risk that Suspended Sentence Orders
Assume that suspended sentences are broadly similar to community sentences.Costs for probation and community sentences are approximately £2,600 per year in 2012/.13 prices. The probation costs are based on national costs for community order/ suspended sentence order, found at National Offender Management Service, Probation Trust Unit Costs, Financial Year 2012-13.Source: MoJ internal analysis, 2013.
could ultimately be more costly than community sentences if an offender breaches conditions of their suspended sentence and receives a custodial sentence.Costs represent the national average fully apportioned cost based on delivery by 35 Probation Trusts in 2012/13.Unit costs are calculated from the total fully apportioned cost of relevant services divided by starts in that year and do not consider which elements of cost are fixed and which will vary based
		o_n_s_e_rv_ic_e volumes. Major chanqes to the volume,
	Risks/Limitationslength or content of community sentences or the. characteristics of the offender population could affectï the unit cost.The costs consist of costs for both (a) managing the sentence and (b) delivering court-ordered requirements. Excludes centrally managed contract costs for Electronic Monitoring and Sentence Order	Attendance Centres.
Remember your rights whilst detainedThe rights in this Notice are guaranteed to you under the law in England and Wales and comply with EU Directive 2012/13 on the right to information in criminal proceedings.1. Tell the police if you want a solicitor to help you while you are at the police station. This is free.2. Tell the police if you want someone to be told where you are. This is free.3. Tell the police if you want to look at their rules – they are called the Codes of Practice.4. Tell the police if you need medical help. Tell the police if you feel ill or have been injured. Medical help is free.5. If you are asked questions about a suspected offence, you do not have to say anything. However, it may harm your defence if you do not mention when questioned something which you later rely on in court. Anything you do say may be given in evidence.6. The police must tell you about the offence they think you have committed and why you have been arrested and are being detained.7. The police must let you or your solicitor see records and documents about why you have been arrested and are being detained and about your time at the police station.8. If you need an interpreter, the police must get you one. You can also have certain documents translated. This is free9. Tell the police if you are not British and you want to contact your embassy or consulate or want them to be told you are detained. This is free.10. The police must tell you how long they can detain you for.11. If you are charged and your case goes to court, you or your solicitor will have a right to see the prosecution evidence before the court hearing.This version of the Notice of Rights and Entitlements has effect from 21 August 2019
1. Getting a solicitor to help youï A solicitor can help and advise you about the law.ï Asking to speak to a solicitor does not make it look like you have done anything wrong.ï The Police Custody Officer must ask you if you want legal advice. This is free.ï The police must let you talk to a solicitor at any time, day or night, when you are at a police station.ï If you ask for legal advice, the police are usually not allowed to ask you questions until you have had the chance to talk to a solicitor. When the police ask you questions, you can ask for a solicitor to be in the room with you.ï If you tell the police that you don’t want legal advice but then change your mind, tell the police custody officer who will then help you to contact a solicitor.ï If a solicitor does not turn up or contact you at the police station, or you need to talk to a solicitor again, ask the police to contact them again.Free legal advice about some less serious matters:ï In some cases involving less serious matters, free legal advice is limited to telephone advice from qualified advisors from the Criminal Defence Service (CDS) Direct unless limited exceptions apply when a solicitor should come to the police station, such as:~ the police want to ask you questions about an offence or carry out an eye witness identification procedure.~ you need help from an “appropriate adult”. See “People who need help”.~ you are unable to communicate over the telephone, or~ you allege serious misconduct by the police.When free advice is not limited to telephone advice from CDS Direct:ï You can ask to speak to a solicitor you know and you won’t have to pay if they do legal aid work. If you do not know a solicitor or the solicitor you know cannot be contacted, you can speak to the duty solicitor. This is free.ï The duty solicitor has nothing to do with the police.ï 
To arrange free legal advice:ï The police will contact the Defence Solicitor Call Centre (DSCC). The DSCC will arrange for legal advice to be given, either from CDS Direct, from a solicitor you have asked for or from the Duty Solicitor.ï The DSCC and CDS Direct are independent services responsible for arranging free legal advice and have nothing to do with the police.If you want to pay for legal advice yourself:ï In all cases you can pay for legal advice if you want to.ï When free legal advice is limited to telephone advice from CDS Direct you can still speak to a solicitor of your choice on the telephone if you want to, but they would not be paid for by legal aid and may ask you to pay them. The DSCC will contact your own solicitor on your behalf.ï You are entitled to speak in private with your chosen solicitor on the telephone or they may decide to come to see you at the police station.ï If a solicitor of your choice cannot be contacted, the police can still call the DSCC to arrange free legal advice from the Duty Solicitor.2. Telling someone that you are at the police stationï You can ask the police to contact someone who needs to know that you are at the police station. This is free.ï They will contact someone for you as soon as they can.3. Looking at the Codes of Practiceï The Codes of Practice are rules which will tell you what the police can and cannot do while you are at the police station. They include details of the rights summarised in this Notice.ï The police will let you read the Codes of Practice, but you cannot do this if it holds up the police finding out if you have broken the law.ï If you want to read the Codes of Practice, tell the Police Custody Officer.4. Getting medical help if you are unwell or injuredï Tell the police if you feel ill or need medicine or have an injury. They will call a doctor or nurse or other healthcare professional and it is free.ï You may be allowed to take your own medicine, but the police will have to check first. A nurse will usually see you first, but the police will send for a doctor if you need one. You can ask to see another doctor, but you may have to pay for this.ï 
5. Right to remain silentIf you are asked questions about the suspected offence, you do not have to say anything.However, it may harm your defence if you do not mention when questioned something which you later rely on in court.Anything you do say may be given in evidence.6. Knowing about the offence you are suspected of committing and knowing why you have been arrested and detainedï The police must tell you about the nature of the offence they think you have committed. This includes when and where they think it was committed.ï The police must tell you why they think you committed the offence and why they believe they needed to arrest you.ï At the police station, the police must tell you why they believe you need to be detained.ï Before you are asked any questions about any offence, the police must give you and your solicitor enough information about what the police think you have done so you can defend yourself but not at a time which would harm the police investigation.ï This applies to any other offences the police think you have committed.7. Seeing records and documents about your arrest and detentionï When you are detained at a police station, the police must:~ Record in your custody record, the reason and need for your arrest and why they believe you need to be detained.~ Let you and your solicitor look at these records. The police custody officer will arrange this.ï This applies to any other offences the police think you have committed.ï The police must allow you or your solicitor access to documents and materials essential to effectively challenging the lawfulness of your arrest and detention.ï 
8. Getting an interpreter and translations of certain documents to help youï If you do not speak or understand English, the police will arrange for someone who speaks your language to help you. This is free.ï If you are deaf or have difficulty speaking, the police will arrange for a British Sign Language English interpreter to help you. This is free.ï If you do not speak or understand English, the police will get the interpreter to tell you why they are detaining you. This must be done each time a decision is made to keep you in custody.ï After each decision to keep you in custody and after you have been charged with any offence, the police must also give you a record in your own language of why you are being detained and of any offence you have been charged with, unless there are special reasons not to. These are:~ If you decide you don’t need the record to defend yourself because you fully understand what is happening and the consequences of not having the record and you have had an opportunity to ask a solicitor for help to decide. You must also give your consent in writing.~ If having an oral translation or summary through an interpreter instead of a written translation would be enough for you to defend yourself and to fully understand what is happening. The custody officer must also authorise this.ï When the police ask you questions and don’t make an audio recording, the interpreter will make a record of the questions and your answers in your own language. You will be able to check this before you sign it as an accurate record.ï If you want to make a statement to the police, the interpreter will make a copy of that statement in your own language for you to check and sign as correct.ï You are also entitled to a translation of this Notice. If a translation is not available, you must be given the information through an interpreter and provided with a translation without undue delay.9. Contacting your embassy or consulateIf you are not British, you can tell the police that you want to contact your High Commission, Embassy or Consulate to tell them where you are and why you are in the police station. They can also visit you in private or arrange for a solicitor to see you.
10. For how long you can be detainedï You can normally be detained for up to 24 hours without being charged. This can be longer but only if the offence could be tried by a judge and jury in a crown court and a Police Superintendent or a court allows it to happen. After 36 hours, only a court can allow the police more time to detain you without being charged.ï Every so often a senior police officer must look into your case to see if you should still be kept at the police station. This is called a review and the officer is the review officer. Unless you are not in a fit state, you have the right to have a say about this decision in writing or by telling the review officer in person or over a television link. Your solicitor also has a right to have a say about this on your behalf.ï If the review officer doesn’t release you, you must be told why and the reason recorded in your custody record.ï If your detention is not necessary, you must be released. If the police tell you that they want to continue investigating the offence, you will be released either on bail or without bail. If bailed, you must be given a written notice to tell you that you must return to the police station and about any conditions that may apply to your bail.ï When police want to ask a court to extend your detention:~ You must be brought to court for the hearing unless a television link is set up, so you can see and hear the people in the court and they can see and hear you.~ A television link cannot be set up unless the custody officer considers it is appropriate, a solicitor has advised you about its use and you have given your consent.~ You must be given a copy of the information which tells the court about the evidence and why police want to keep you in custody.~ You have a right to have a solicitor with you for the court hearing.~ The police will only be allowed to keep you in custody if the court believes it is necessary and that the police are investigating your case carefully and without wasting time.ï If the police have enough evidence to send you to court, you may be charged at the police station or by post, to appear at court to be tried.11. Access to the evidence if your case goes to Courtï If you are charged with an offence, you or your solicitor must be allowed to see the evidence against you as well as evidence which may help your defence. This must be done before your trial starts. The police and the Crown Prosecution Service must arrange this and provide access to the relevant documents and materials.ï 
Other things to know about being at a police stationHow you should be treated and cared forThese notes tell you about what you can expect while you are kept at the police station. To find out more, ask to see the Codes of Practice. They include a list of where to find more information about each of these things. Ask the police custody officer if you have any questions.People who need helpï If you are under 18 or are vulnerable, for example if you have learning difficulties or mental health problems, then you have a right to have someone with you when the police do certain things. This person is called your “appropriate adult” and they will be given a copy of this Notice.ï Your appropriate adult will help you understand what’s happening and look after your interests. He or she must be with you when the police tell you about your rights and tell you why you are being kept at the police station. He or she must also be with you when the police read the police caution to you.ï Your appropriate adult can also ask for a solicitor on your behalf.ï You can speak to your solicitor without your appropriate adult in the room if you want to.ï The police might also need to do one of the things listed below while you are at the police station. Unless there are special reasons, your appropriate adult must be with you for the whole time if the police do any of these things:~ Interview you or ask you to sign a written statement or police notes.~ Remove more than your outer clothes to search you.~ Take your fingerprints, photograph or a DNA or other sample.~ Carry out anything to do with a witness identification procedure.ï Your appropriate adult should be given a chance to be available in person or on the phone to help you when the police review your case to see whether you should be detained further.ï If your appropriate adult is available, they must be present when the police charge you with an offence.Getting details of your time at the police stationï Everything that happens to you when you are at the police station is recorded. This is called the Custody Record.ï When you leave the police station, you, your solicitor or your appropriate adult can ask for a copy of the Custody Record. The police have to give you a copy of your Custody Record as soon as they can.ï You can ask the police for a copy of your Custody Record up to 12 months after you leave the police station.ï 
Keeping in touchï As well as talking to a solicitor and having a person told about your arrest you will usually be allowed to make one phone call.ï Ask the police if you would like to make a phone call.ï You can also ask for a pen and paper.ï You may be able to have visitors but the custody officer can refuse to allow that.Your Cellï If possible you should be kept in a cell on your own.ï It should be clean, warm and lit.ï Your bedding should be clean and in good order.ï You must be allowed to use a toilet and have a wash.Personal needs – health, hygiene and welfareï You must be asked if you want to speak in private with a member of the custody staff about any personal needs relating to your health, hygiene and welfare that might affect or concern you while you are detained.ï The police will arrange to provide the products considered necessary to meet your needs. If you wish, the person you speak to may be the same sex as you.ï If you are a woman aged 18 or over, you must be asked if you require or are likely to require any menstrual products while you are detained and must be told that:~ products will be provided free of charge;~ replacement products are available; and~ products may be supplied by your family or friends at their expense if the custody officer agrees.ï If you are a girl under 18, the custody officer will ensure that a woman at the police station is available to look after you and to ask you about your personal needs and menstrual products.ClothesIf your own clothes are taken from you, then the police must provide you with an alternative form of clothing.Food and drinkYou must be offered 3 meals a day with drinks. You can also have drinks between meals.
ExerciseIf possible you should be allowed outside each day for fresh air.When the police question youï The room should be clean, warm and lit.ï You should not have to stand up.ï The Police Officers should tell you their name and their rank.ï You should have a break at normal meal times and a break for a drink after about two hours.ï You should be allowed at least 8 hours rest in any 24 hours you are in custody.Faith NeedsTell the police if you need anything to assist you to practise your religion whilst at the station. They can provide religious books and other items, as necessary.Times when the normal rules are differentGetting a solicitor to help youThere are some special times when the police urgently need to ask you questions before you have talked to a solicitor. Information about these special times is given in the Codes of Practice. These set out what the police can and cannot do while you are at the police station. If you want to look up the details, they are in paragraph 6.6 of Code C of the Codes of Practice.There is one special time when the police will not let you speak to the solicitor that you have chosen. If this happens you must be allowed to choose another solicitor. If you want to look up the details, they are in Annex B of Code C of the Codes of Practice.Telling someone that you are at the police stationThere are some special times when the police will not allow you to contact anyone. Information about these special times is given in the Codes of Practice. If you want to look up the details, they are in Annex B of Code C of the Codes of Practice.Drink drive and drug drive offencesIf you are under arrest because of a drink drive offence or for a drug drive offence, you have the right to speak to a solicitor. That right does not mean you can refuse to give the police samples of breath, blood or urine even if you have not yet spoken to the solicitor.
Detention under the Mental Health Act 1983The police can also detain you at a police station for assessment under the Mental Health Act if you are aged 18 or over and because there is a risk that your behaviour is going to cause serious injury or death to you or to others, you cannot be reasonably expected to be detained anywhere else. If you have been detained under the Mental Health Act this does not mean that you have been arrested for an offence.It means that the police must arrange for you to be seen by a doctor and an Approved Mental Health Professional qualified to carry out the assessment. You must be assessed within 24 hours of your arrival, or of being detained at the police station, but the police will try to arrange this as soon as possible. At a police station, the 24-hour detention period for assessment may be extended by a further 12 hours if a doctor considers it is necessary and a very senior police officer approves it. During this time the police may transfer you to a more suitable location to enable the assessment to take place.While you are waiting to be assessed, the police may arrange for you to be seen by an Approved Healthcare Practitioner. They cannot make the assessment, but they will help you with any other health concerns you may have and help explain what the assessment means.Independent Custody VisitorsThere are members of the community who are allowed access to police stations unannounced. They are known as independent custody visitors and work on a voluntary basis to make sure that detained people are being treated properly and have access to rights.You do not have a right to see an independent custody visitor or to ask them to visit you but a visitor may ask to see you. If an independent custody visitor does visit you while you are in custody they will be acting independently of the police to check that your welfare and rights have been protected. However, you do not have to speak to them if you do not wish to.How to make a complaintIf you want to complain about the way you have been treated, ask to speak to a police officer who is an inspector or a higher rank. After being released, you can also make a complaint at any police station, to the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) or through a solicitor or your MP on your behalf.
ANNEX A: GRANT DETERMINATION 2022 TO 2024Offensive Weapons Act 2019 – Trading Standards costs for sales and delivery provisions relating to corrosive productsGrant Determination 2022 to 2024: No 31/7142.The Minister for Crime, Policing and Fire within the Home Office (“the Minister of State”), in exercise of the powers conferred by section 31 of the Local Government Act 2003, makes the following determination:Citation1. This determination may be cited as the Offensive Weapons Act 2019 – Trading Standards costs Grant Determination 2022 to 2024 [31/7142].Purpose of the grant2. The purpose of this grant is to meet the new burdens imposed on Local Authority Trading Standards Authorities in England and Wales as the enforcing agencies for the sales and delivery provisions within the Offensive Weapons Act 2019. The Act introduced prohibitions on the sale and delivery of corrosive products to under-18s, prohibitions on the delivery of corrosive products to residential premises and lockers and prohibitions on the delivery of corrosive products to under-18s on UK delivery companies in relation to overseas sales. These measures were commenced in April 2022.3. The grant is to meet the costs of the statutory obligations that have been placed on Trading Standards as the enforcement agency for these legislative measures and which they have embedded into their day-to-day activities. This includes awareness raising and compliance visits, conducting regular test purchasing operations and follow-up actions, investigations and prosecutions of retailers and delivery companies who fail any test purchasing operations.Determination4. The Minister of State determines as the authorities to which grant is to be paid and the amount of grant to be paid, the authorities and amounts which are set out in Annex A.UK Government Branding5. The Grant Recipient shall at all times during and following the end of the Funding Period:ï comply with requirements of the Branding Manual in relation to the Funded Activities; andï cease use of the Funded by UK Government logo on demand if directed to do so by the Authority.ï 
6. “Branding Manual” means the HM Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland ‘Funded by UK Government branding manual’ first published by the Cabinet Office in November 2022 and is available at https://gcs.civilservice.gov.uk/guidance/marketing/branding-guidelines/ including any subsequent updates from time to time.Treasury consent7. Before making this determination in relation to local authorities in England and Wales, the Minister of State obtained the consent of the Treasury.Signed by authority of the Minister of State for the Home Office.Deputy Director, Home Office
Annex A: Offensive Weapons Act 2019 – Trading Standards costs allocations to local authorities 2022/23 to 2023/24Local authority2022/232023/24TotalBarking & Dagenham London Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Barnet London Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Bath & North East Somerset Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Bedford Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Bexley London Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Birmingham City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Blackburn with Darwen Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Blackpool Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Bolton Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Bracknell Forest Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Bradford City of Metropolitan District Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Brent Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Brighton & Hove City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479
Bristol City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Bromley Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Buckinghamshire Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Bury Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Calderdale Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Cambridgeshire County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Camden London Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Central Bedfordshire Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Cheshire East Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Cheshire West and Chester Council£19,075£10,404£29,479City of London Corporation£19,075£10,404£29,479Cornwall County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Coventry City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Croydon London Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Cumberland Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Darlington Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Derby City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Derbyshire County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Devon County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479
Doncaster City of Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Dorset Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Dudley Metropolitan Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Durham County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Ealing Council£19,075£10,404£29,479East Riding of Yorkshire Council£19,075£10,404£29,479East Sussex County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Enfield Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Essex County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Gateshead Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Gloucestershire County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Greenwich Royal Borough£19,075£10,404£29,479Hackney London Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Halton Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Hammersmith & Fulham London Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Hampshire County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Haringey Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Harrow Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Hartlepool Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479
Havering London Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Herefordshire Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Hertfordshire County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Hillingdon London Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Hounslow London Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Hull City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Isle of Wight Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Islington Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Kensington & Chelsea Royal Borough£19,075£10,404£29,479Kent County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Kingston-upon- Thames Royal Borough£19,075£10,404£29,479Kirklees Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Knowsley Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Lambeth Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Lancashire County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Leicester City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Leicestershire County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Leeds City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Lewisham Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Lincolnshire County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479
Liverpool City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Luton Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Manchester City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Medway Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Merton London Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Middlesbrough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Milton Keynes City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Newcastle City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Newham London Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Norfolk County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479North East Lincolnshire Council£19,075£10,404£29,479North Lincolnshire Council£19,075£10,404£29,479North Northamptonshire Council£19,075£10,404£29,479North Somerset Council£19,075£10,404£29,479North Tyneside Council£19,075£10,404£29,479North Yorkshire County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Northumberland County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Nottingham City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479
Nottinghamshire County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Oldham Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Oxfordshire County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Peterborough City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Plymouth City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Portsmouth City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Reading Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Redbridge London Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Redcar and Cleveland Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Richmond upon Thames London Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Rochdale Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Rotherham Metropolitan Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Salford City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Sandwell Metropolitan Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Sefton Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Sheffield City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Shropshire Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Slough Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479
Solihull Metropolitan Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Somerset County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479South Gloucestershire Council£19,075£10,404£29,479South Tyneside Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Southampton City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Southend-on-Sea City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Southwark Council£19,075£10,404£29,479St Helens Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Staffordshire County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Stockport Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Stockton-on-Tees Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Stoke-on-Trent City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Suffolk County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Sunderland City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Surrey County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Sutton Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Swindon Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Tameside Metropolitan Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479
Telford & Wrekin Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Thurrock Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Torbay Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Tower Hamlets Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Trafford Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Wakefield Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Walsall Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Waltham Forest Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Wandsworth Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Warrington Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Warwickshire County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479West Berkshire Council£19,075£10,404£29,479West Northamptonshire Council£19,075£10,404£29,479West Sussex County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Westminster City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Westmorland & Furness Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Wigan Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Windsor & Maidenhead Royal Borough£19,075£10,404£29,479Wiltshire Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Wirral Council£19,075£10,404£29,479
Wokingham Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Wolverhampton City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Worcestershire County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479York City of Council£19,075£10,404£29,479England£2,880,325£1,571,004£4,451,329Isle of Anglesey County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Blaenau Gwent County Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Bridgend County Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Caerphilly County Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Cardiff Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Carmarthenshire County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Ceredigion County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Conwy County Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Denbighshire County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Flintshire County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Gwynedd Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Merthyr Tydfil County Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479
Monmouthshire County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Neath Port Talbot Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Newport City Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Pembrokeshire County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Powys County Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Rhondda Cynon Taff County Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Swansea Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Torfaen County Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Vale of Glamorgan Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Wrexham County Borough Council£19,075£10,404£29,479Wales£419,650£228,888£648,538TOTAL£3,299,975£1,799,892£5,099,867
•Ministryof Justice
RtHonDamian Green MPMinister of State for Policing, Criminal Justice and Victims102 Petty France London, SW1H 9AJE general.queries@justice.gsi.gov.ukwww.gov.uk/moj

Simon Calvert	Deputy Director-'..----------- ------- The Christian InstituteWilberforce House4 Park RoadGosforth Business Park Newcastle upon Tyne NE12 BOG
----- -
1 2 JUN 2014nrUd'1Serious Crime Bill: Updating the criminal law on child crueltyI have seen the commentary on your website about the Government's proposal to update the offence of child cruelty as set out in clause 62 of the Serious Crime Bill which was published on 6 June 2014. I am writing to ensure that there is no misunderstanding about the impact of the changes we are making to the offence as provided for in section 1 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933.You may be aware that the charity, Action for Children, launched a campaign to change the law on child cruelty in April 2012. They argue that the current criminal law is not fit for purpose for several reasons, in particular that it does not cover emotional or psychological suffering or injury. I met with Action for Children and also held a roundtable discussion on this issue with other experts at the end of last year. It was clear that further work was needed in this area to ascertain whether there were any gaps in the criminal law.I therefore asked my officials to engage with those with a particular interest, including a number of children's charities and organisations, the Crown Prosecution Service and representatives from the police and social workers, to gauge views on how the law was operating. I have been considering the outcome of this work over the last few months. Contrary to suggestions in some sections of the press, we are only bringing forward our current proposals after careful consideration of the implications.
Under section 1 of the 1933 Act it is already an offence to ill-treat a child in a way likely to cause unnecessary suffering or injury, including "mental derangement". Whilst I believe that this section is still effective and that the courts are able to interpret it appropriately, I have concluded that it would benefit from further clarity and updating.Clause 62 of the Bill would make it absolutely clear that cruelty likely to result in physical or psychological suffering or injury is covered under section 1. The clause would also modernise the language of section 1, in particular by-	replacing the outdated term 'mental-derangement'I am aware of concerns that the Government's proposed changes could criminalise parents for teaching their children particular religious tenets, for example, that same sex marriages are wrong. I would emphasise that the focus, as now, would be on targeting cruelty likely to cause physical or psychological suffering or injury. We are not proposing to extend criminal liability under section 1 more broadly. The offence already encompasses psychological harm; something that is explicitly recognised by the Crown Prosecution Service Legal Guidance and the Sentencing Council guidelines in relation to section 1 of the 1933 Act.We fully expect that the reference to 'psychological suffering or injury' under clause 62 of the Bill would continue to be interpreted by the courts as it currently is. The courts have long held that such suffering or injury must be more than trivial (for example, a slight fright or low level mental anxiety). The Government's proposed clarification of the law should therefore not affect the way the law operates.As with all Bills, the provision will be subject to debate in both Houses of Parliament before it could become law.I am placing a copy of this letter on the Serious Crime Bill page of the Government website.v	IRt Hon Damian Green MPPage 2
Dstl/BSC/27/01/11 dated 4th April 2011 (amended 27th January 2012)Defence Scientific Advisory Council Sub-Committee on the Medical Implications of Less-Lethal Weapons (DOMILL)Statement on the Medical Implications of Use of the Taser X26 and M26 Less-Lethal Systems on Children and Vulnerable Adults1Background1. DOMILL2 reports to the Secretary of State for Defence to provide:(a) Advice on the biophysical, biomechanical, pathological and clinical aspects of generic classes of less-lethal weapons (LLWs);(b) Independent statements on the medical implications of use of specific LLW systems given specific guidance to users;3(c) Advice on the risk of injury from specific LLW systems striking specific areas of the body in a format that will assist users in making tactical decisions as well as developing guidance to users to minimise the risk of injury.2. DOMILL has issued five previous statements relating to the medical implications of the Taser M26 and Taser X26 less-lethal systems.4 The Taser X26 conducted energy device was introduced into UK policing in 2005 as a replacement for the Taser M26. Recent data from the Home Office Centre for Applied Science and Technology (CAST) indicate that the Taser X26 is the device primarily in use by the UK police.53. In 2007, the Northern Ireland Policing Minister formally tasked DOMILL with conducting an assessment of the medical implications of use of the Taser system on children and vulnerable adults. The present medical statement constitutes DOMILL?s response to this tasking.Executive summary4. DOMILL has considered the medical implications of use of the Taser X26 and M26 systems on children (defined as persons less than 18-years-old) and vulnerable adults (namely, people with conditions or illnesses that may make them more susceptible to the Taser than otherwise healthy persons).1 The first version of this medical statement was endorsed by DOMILL on 4th April 2011. This second DOMILL- endorsed version updates the original and contains a small number of clarifications.2 On 16 July 2009, DOMILL was replaced by the cross-government Scientific Advisory Committee on the Medical Implications of Less-Lethal Weapons (SACMILL). However, for administrative reasons, SACMILL is not a functional committee at the time of drafting of this medical statement. DOMILL has therefore agreed to continue providing medical advice to government until SACMILL becomes operational.3 The term ‘system’ applies not just to the weapon, but also to how the weapon is used operationally, how users are trained, how the weapon is maintained, and other aspects that have the potential to influence overall weapon safety.4 These statements may be found in Appendix B of the Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) Policy and Operational Use of Taser by Authorised Firearms Officers December 2008 (http://www.westmercia.police.uk/about- us/acpo-armed-policing.html; retrieved October 2010).5 CAST was formerly known as the Home Office Scientific Development Branch (HOSDB).1
5. DOMILL?s principal findings, based on the evidence presented in the main body of this statement, are as follows:(a) A recent human study has shown that Taser discharge, applied through a barb that has penetrated the frontal chest in a region overlying the heart, is capable of inducing an inappropriately high heart rate by a mechanism known as cardiac capture. Although the device used in the study was neither the Taser X26 nor M26, DOMILL is concerned that a comparable effect could be elicited by these latter devices. While a short period of rapid cardiac capture in young and healthy individuals may not have major clinical implications, serious complications could arise in those with impaired heart function caused by an underlying heart condition or through the action of certain licit or illicit drugs. Cardiac capture from chest-penetrating barbs may be more likely to arise in children and thin adults as the heart will generally be closer to the source of discharge.(b) The physiological burden arising from the Taser-induced muscle contractions and associated pain, combined with the stressful circumstances in which Tasers are likely to be used, may adversely affect certain groups. These susceptible groups include the elderly, those with heart conditions, people who have taken certain drugs, and those affected by asthma or other pulmonary conditions.(c) Risks to the pregnant woman and fetus from Taser discharge are incompletely understood. While there is no evidence that abdominal application of Taser discharge is able directly to induce uterine muscle contraction, Taser-induced muscle contraction commonly leads to falls. Fall injuries in general have been associated with an increased probability of delivery by caesarian section and low birth weight.(d) Others who may be at heightened risk of injury from Taser-induced falls include people whose protective reflexes may be impaired, such as those intoxicated with alcohol, illicit drugs or certain prescription medications. People affected by osteoporosis, young people during the adolescent growth period, individuals with a history of a bleeding or clotting disorder and those on anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy, may also be more prone to an adverse outcome following a fall.(e) Superficial burns from the discharge current passing through the skin are a recognised minor complication of Taser use. Children and vulnerable adults are unlikely to be differentially affected compared with notionally healthy adults.(f) The intense muscle contractions induced by the Taser discharge may lead to musculoskeletal injury. Older people may be more prone to this type of injury.(g) Children and thin adults may be at greater risk of internal injury from tissue-penetrating Taser barbs as body wall thickness generally will be less in these groups. Children and adults of short stature may also be at greater risk of injury to sensitive structures in the head and neck regions due to the closer proximity of these structures to the most commonly used point of aim (the frontal chest).(h) There is equivocal evidence to indicate that Taser discharge may induce epileptic seizures following barb penetration of the scalp. There is also evidence to indicate that Taser discharge may trigger seizures in those affected by epilepsy, irrespective of barb location. Consistent with this, emotional stress and physical exertion, both of which are likely to feature in incidents involving administration of Taser discharge and many other forms of force, are among the seizure-precipitating factors reported by those affected by epilepsy.(i) There is the potential for Taser discharge to be administered to individuals whose behaviour has been influenced by an underlying medical condition or with whom communication is in some way impaired due to non-medical reasons.2
* Aggressiveness and non-cooperation may be manifested during and shortly after an epileptic seizure.* Adverse changes to behaviour may be exhibited by those with uncontrolled diabetes.* Language barriers and hearing or vision impairment may lead to difficulties in communication which may increase the likelihood of exposure to Taser discharge.* Mental health conditions, learning difficulties and neurodevelopmental or neurobehavioural conditions (for example, cerebral palsy and autistic spectrum disorders) may negatively influence how affected individuals interact with the police and thereby elevate the risk of exposure to Taser discharge or other forms of force.(j) The longer-term psychological implications of exposure to an extremely painful Taser discharge, especially among children, remain unexplored.(k) Taser discharge is unlikely to differentially affect persons fitted with cardiac pacemakers or implantable cardioverter defibrillators. However, the effect of Taser discharge on the function of other types of implantable electronic devices, such as vagus nerve stimulators and cochlear implants, is unknown.6. The present statement concludes with a series of recommendations designed to mitigate and further inform the risks to children and vulnerable adults exposed to the Taser system.7. Having reviewed the most recent evidence relating to the medical implications of the Taser X26 and M26 systems, and despite the potential injury mechanisms outlined above, DOMILL remains of the view that the overall risk of serious injury associated with UK use of these systems is low. This view is borne out by the low rate of reported serious adverse events in UK operational use of the Taser system. Incorporation into use policy and user guidance of a number of the recommendations made in this statement should help to ensure that the risk of serious injury continues to remain low.Technical approach8. The evidence concerning whether children and other vulnerable groups may be at greater risk from the Taser less-lethal system was collated by the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl) and presented to the Committee in the form of a comprehensive report. This report was designed to provide DOMILL with a technical and law enforcement foundation with which to explore the issues relevant to an assessment of the relative susceptibility to the Taser system of children and vulnerable adults, compared with notionally healthy adults.9. DOMILL considered the Taser system as a whole, which included the device itself (use, performance and maintenance), user training, ACPO policy and guidance for use, the quality of data from post-incident medical audit, and the post-incident medical management of vulnerable individuals who have been subjected to Taser discharge.Definitions10. For the purposes of the present medical statement, children are defined as people less than 18-years-old.3
11. Vulnerable adults are defined as people aged 18 years or more who are affected by any condition that might render them more susceptible to the effects of the Taser. Among the susceptible groups considered by DOMILL are pregnant women, those with low body weight or small stature, persons under the influence of certain illicit or prescription drugs, those with mental health problems, neurological conditions (including epilepsy), heart disease, diabetes, osteoporosis, asthma or haemophilia, people with implanted pacemakers, and those among whom verbal communication may be an issue.Injury mechanisms associated with Taser use12. Reports in the medical literature and the media highlight multiple possible injury mechanisms:6* Interaction of the Taser discharge current with the heart.* Adverse cardiac or respiratory outcomes triggered by the physiological stress imposed by the Taser discharge.* Interaction of the Taser discharge current with cardiac pacemakers and other implantable devices.* Spontaneous abortion and other implications for fetal well-being.* Burns from an interaction of the Taser discharge current with the skin.* Musculoskeletal complications arising from the intense muscle contraction induced by the Taser discharge.* Injuries from Taser-induced falls.* Injuries from tissue penetration of the Taser barbs.* Triggering of epileptic seizures.* Administration of Taser discharge to seemingly uncooperative and threatening persons.* Special considerations among those with mental ill health, learning difficulties or neurodevelopmental and neurobehavioural conditions.* Deaths associated with the use of the Taser.13. DOMILL has considered whether children and other vulnerable groups may be differentially affected by these multiple potential injury mechanisms compared with notionally healthy adults.Interaction of the Taser discharge current with the heart14. Until recently, none of the human volunteer studies investigating the cardiac effects of the Taser (mostly the X26 type) had shown a direct influence of the discharge current on heart rhythm. However, in none of these studies was the discharge applied to the frontal chest in a region directly over the heart. A recently reported human study using a pre-production variant of a new type of Taser device has illustrated the potential for this kind of adverse effect to occur in the circumstance where discharge is administered through a barb that has fully penetrated the frontal chest overlying the heart.7 In this study, one subject showed ventricular capture at 2406 Payne-James, J et al (2010). Medical implications of the Taser. BMJ 2010;340:c853.7 Ho, JD et al. (2011). Forensic Sci Int 204:50-7.4
beats per minute. The subject was reported to have an atypically thin chest wall, which the authors suggested led to the barb tip being unusually close to the heart.15. Although the waveform characteristics of the pre-production Taser are unknown, DOMILL believes that, in the absence of human experimental evidence to the contrary, it would be prudent to assume that a similar effect could be exerted by the Taser X26 or M26, particularly in circumstances where one or both of the device?s barbs have penetrated the frontal chest over the heart region and especially in individuals who may have smaller skin-to-heart distances (generally children and thin adults).16. In forming a view of the medical implications of rapid ventricular capture, DOMILL obtained additional clinical opinion from two consultant cardiologists, one of whom is a paediatric cardiologist. These opinions are summarised below (paras. 17-19).17. In a young individual with a healthy heart, rapid ventricular capture for 5 seconds (the maximum duration of Taser X26 or M26 discharge following a single activation of the trigger) would be unlikely to produce an arrhythmia sustained beyond the duration of the Taser discharge.8 The acute effect of a 5-second period of rapid ventricular capture is likely to be minor – it would be unlikely to induce syncope (fainting) but the subject may be aware of palpitations. Similarly, rapid ventricular capture for 10-15 seconds (corresponding to 2-3 contiguous activations of the Taser trigger or to prolonged trigger depression) would not be expected to induce a sustained arrhythmia or syncope in a young individual with a healthy heart.18. Individuals of any age with established heart conditions (for example, coronary artery disease,„healed? myocardial infarct, dilated or hypertrophic cardiomyopathies, corrected congenital heart disease, primary inherited electrical conditions of the heart, such as Brugada syndrome9 and long QT syndrome), are at greater risk of developing serious sustained ventricular arrhythmias, if provoked by abnormal heart stimulation.19. The use of certain recreational drugs (particularly cocaine or amphetamine-like drugs), may lead to abnormal levels of cardiac stimulation or to active myocardial ischaemia by inducing prolonged spasm of otherwise normal coronary arteries. In such a context, random cardiac stimulation could have unpredictable implications, with induction of arrhythmias which would not normally occur under the same provocation without concomitant use of these drugs.20. Two reports of ventricular fibrillation temporally associated with Taser discharge have been published.10 There is one report of atrial fibrillation (fast and irregular beating of the atria) in a 16-year-old male that may have been triggered by Taser discharge.11 Myocardial infarction associated with Taser discharge has been reported in a 20-year-old male.12 In all of these case reports from the United States, the strength of the association between application of Taser discharge and arrhythmia development is difficult to determine.21. Whether or not the discharge current from the Taser X26 or M26 is able directly to influence heart rhythm remains controversial. Additional human experimental studies with these devices8 Rapid ventricular pacing is a technique used clinically in an effort to induce ventricular tachycardia (VT). Induction of VT in this way would be rare in patients with normal hearts.9 Brugada syndrome is an inherited heart rhythm disorder that can lead to sudden unexpected cardiac death in apparently healthy individuals. http://www.brugada.org/about/about.html (retrieved 25 Feb 2011).10 Kim, PJ and Franklin, WH (2005). N Engl J Med 353:958-9; Naunheim, RS et al (2010). Emerg Med J 27:645-6.11 Multerer, S et al (2009). Pediatr Emer Care 25:851-3.12 Baldwin, DE et al (2010). J La State Med Soc 162:291-5.5
should help to clarify the risk from discharge applied to the frontal chest through skin-embedded Taser barbs.Adverse cardiac or respiratory outcomes triggered by the physiological stress imposed by the Taser discharge22. The physiological impact of Taser discharge, combined with the stressful and emotionally charged circumstances in which Tasers (as well as other forms of less-lethal force) are likely to be used, have the potential to precipitate adverse cardiac effects in individuals with underlying heart conditions.23. Adverse effects from application of Taser discharge or other forms of force could range from angina, arrhythmia or myocardial infarction through to sudden cardiac death in extreme cases.* Sudden cardiac death can strike at any age and has been associated with coronary atherosclerosis, dilated cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy and myocarditis.13 In many cases no structural abnormality is evident, which may implicate “cardiacchannelopathy” as the predisposing mechanism.13* Sudden cardiac death has been defined as an out-of-hospital death caused by any cardiac condition that occurs within one hour of onset of symptoms.1324. Some drugs used in the treatment of certain mental health conditions exert effects on the heart that may predispose to an adverse cardiac event. For example, some antipsychotic and antidepressant drugs can induce electrocardiographic changes (Q-T interval prolongation) that have been associated with the development of potentially lethal arrhythmias.1425. Intoxication with recreational drugs, including cocaine, ecstasy and methamphetamine, has been associated with cardiac complications.15 Hence, the threshold for development of cardiac adverse outcomes in drug-intoxicated individuals subjected to Taser discharge or other types of force may be lowered.26. Trigger factors known to acutely exacerbate asthma include strong emotions and exercise,16 both of which may be present in asthmatic persons in the circumstances in which Taser or other form of force is deployed.Interaction of the Taser discharge current with cardiac pacemakers and other implantable devices27. The effect of Taser discharge on the functioning of cardiac pacemakers and implantable cardioverter defibrillators has been recently reviewed.17 The authors concluded that the evidence indicated that discharges from the conducted energy devices like the Taser do not exert effects on device function that would be injurious to health.13 Fishbein, MC (2010). Cardiovasc Pathol 19:326-8.14 http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/575632_4 (retrieved 21 Sep 2010).15 Ghuran, A et al (2001). BMJ 323:464-6.16 www.asthma.org.uk/all_about_asthma/asthma_triggers_az/ (retrieved 21 Sep 2010).17 Vanga, SR et al (2009). Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 1:3199-204.6
28. The possible effects of Taser discharge on other implanted electronic devices, such as vagus nerve stimulators used in the management of drug-resistant epilepsy and depression, are unknown.Spontaneous abortion and other implications for fetal well-being29. The risks to the pregnant woman and fetus from Taser discharge are poorly understood.30. A case report describes spontaneous abortion in an 11-week pregnant, 32-year-old woman seven days after being subjected to discharge from a conducted energy device.18 One of the device?s barbs had lodged in the abdominal skin overlying the uterus, while the second barb had lodged in the left thigh. Spotting occurred one day after exposure to discharge and the woman miscarried six days later.31. Amnesty International report a second case in which fetal death was diagnosed some 12 hours after exposure to Taser discharge.1932. In both of the above cases, the contribution of the Taser discharge (or of any other force used at the time) to the reported adverse outcomes is uncertain.33. It has been suggested that Taser-induced muscle contractions in pregnant women may lead to induction of labour or other obstetric complications. DOMILL is unaware of any evidence either to substantiate or alleviate these concerns.34. Fall injuries have been associated with a significantly increased probability of delivery by caesarian section and low birth weight20, and these may be additional factors to consider when planning to use a Taser on a woman who is known to be pregnant or in the post-incident medical management of a pregnant woman who has been subjected to Taser discharge.35. No pregnancy-associated adverse outcomes in the UK have emerged during DOMILL?s on- going review of injury data from Taser incidents.Burns from an interaction of the Taser discharge current with the skin36. Although minor skin burns are a recognised complication in Taser use, there is no evidence to suggest that these have clinically significant implications (as gauged from the absence of clinical case reports relating to this type of injury).37. There is no reason to believe that children or other vulnerable groups will be differentially susceptible to this form of superficial injury.18 Mehl, LE (1992). Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 71:118-23.19 See: www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/AMR51/010/2008/en (report ref: AMR 51/010/2008) (retrieved 13 Oct 2010).20 Weiss, HB et al (2008). Accid Anal Prev 40:1088-95.7
Musculoskeletal complications arising from the intense muscle contraction induced by the Taser discharge38. There are two case reports of compression fractures of the thoracic spine following exposure to Taser X26 discharge.21 It is thought that these fractures, which were observed in young police officers during Taser training, resulted from discharge-induced muscle contraction.39. It is conceivable that individuals affected by the age-related condition, osteoporosis, may be more susceptible to this type of injury, whether from the Taser-induced muscle contractions or from the application of other forms of physical force.22Injuries from Taser-induced falls40. The muscle contractions induced by Taser discharge commonly lead to loss of the ability to maintain an upright posture and can lead to falls.41. In the United States, at least six fatal head injuries have been linked to the use of Taser.6 There are no reported cases of this type in the UK.42. Individuals intoxicated with alcohol, illicit drugs or certain prescription medications may be at heightened risk of sustaining fall injuries, as postural control and any residual protective fall- arresting reflexes could be impaired. Falls from height may be a particular risk for persons whose perception of the environment has been impaired by alcohol or drug intoxication.43. Persons affected by osteoporosis may be at greater risk of fractures from Taser-induced falls.44. During the adolescent growth period (typically 12- to 14-years-old), children are at a heightened risk of bone fracture (particularly of the distal end of the radius or ulna).23 During this period, children may be at greater risk of sustaining fractures following falls.45. Falls could lead to cuts, abrasions and blunt trauma, which may be of particular concern in individuals with a bleeding or clotting disorder and those on anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy.24 In people affected by blood-borne pathogens (e.g. viral hepatitis, HIV) cuts and abrasions may be associated with a secondary risk to others who may come into contact with the affected individual.46. People with diabetes who are taking antidiabetic drugs in the thiazolidinedione class (pioglitazone and rosiglitazone) may be at enhanced risk of fractures.25Injuries from tissue penetration of the Taser barbs47. The Taser X26 barbs used in the UK have a length of nearly 10 mm. When striking compressible tissue, the effective penetration depth may be greater. The barbs therefore have the potential to injure deeper structures.21 Winslow, JE et al (2007). Ann Emerg Med 50:584-6; Sloane, CM et al (2008). J Emerg Med 34:283-5.22 http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/000443.htm (retrieved 11 Oct 2010).23 Saggese, G et al (2002). Best Prac Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 16:53-64.24 NICE Clinical Guideline 56: Head Injury (2009). http://guidance.nice.org.uk/CG56/NICEGuidance/pdf/English (retrieved 3 Mar 2011); Major, J and Reed, MJ (2009). Emerg Med J 26:871-6.25 Douglas, IJ et al (2009). PLoS Med 6:e1000154.8
48. Because of the dispersion of impact points around the aim point, barbs that have been aimed at the frontal chest may present a hazard to sensitive structures in the head and neck regions, especially in children and adults of small stature.49. There are four case reports (all from the U.S.) of ocular penetration by Taser barbs.26 Children and adults of small stature may be at higher risk of sustaining this type of injury because the eyes may be closer to the barb aim point.50. Two case reports describe barb penetration of the skull (in one case entering the brain superficially).27 Age-related changes in skull thickness28 carry the implication that children may be at greater risk of brain injury from skull-penetrating barbs.51. Pneumothorax from a Taser barb has been reported in a 16-year-old male.29 In general, the lesser body wall thickness of children30 may place them at greater risk of sustaining injuries to the lung and other organs (e.g. liver) from Taser barbs that have penetrated to their full depth. This injury mechanism would also apply to thin adults.Triggering of epileptic seizures52. A case report describes an apparent generalised tonic-clonic seizure with loss of consciousness after a Taser shot in which one barb entered the skin at the back of the head while the other lodged in the upper back.3153. DOMILL is aware of one incident in the UK involving use of the Taser in which an epileptic seizure occurred during the discharge (which was applied through barbs located in the region of the lower back). It was subsequently established that the person had an existing epilepsy disorder.54. It is recognised that emotional stress, alcohol intoxication and physical exercise are among the seizure-precipitating factors reported by those with epilepsy.32 Poor compliance with anti- epileptic medication may further predispose to seizure induction during Taser deployment.Administration of Taser discharge to seemingly uncooperative and threatening persons55. DOMILL is aware of an incident, widely reported in the press, in which UK police officers administered Taser discharge to an individual with epilepsy who had earlier collapsed,reportedly after experiencing “a major epileptic seizure”.3356. While not able to comment on this specific incident, DOMILL notes that aggressiveness can sometimes be a feature of the ictal and post-ictal states.34 Apparently intentionally threatening behaviour may not be under conscious control.3426 See: Han, JS et al (2009). CJEM 11:90-3 (and references cited therein.); Teymoorian, S et al (2010). Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg 26:306-308.27 Rehman, T-U et al (2007). Am J Emerg Med 25:733.e3-e4; Mangus, BE et al (2008). Am Surg 74:862-5.28 Letts, M et al (1988). J Bone Joint Surg [Br] 70-B:277-9.29 Hinchey, PR and Subramaniam, G (2009). Prehosp Emerg Care 13:532-5.30 Sandler, G et al (2010). Injury 41:506-9.31 Bui, ET et al (2009). CMAJ 180:625-6.32 Nakken, KO et al (2005). Epilepsy Behav 6:85-9.33 http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/uk/crime/article7096598.ece (retrieved 21 Sep 2010).34 Marsh, L and Krauss, GL (2000). Epilepsy Behav 1:160-8; Ito, M et al (2007). Epilepsy Behav 10:611-4.9
57. Police officers should be aware of the possibility that some displays of aggression and violence by individuals may be linked to an underlying epilepsy disorder. This would be particularly relevant in situations in which a person is known by the police to be affected by epilepsy, where post-incident medical intervention should be sought as early as possible.58. People with diabetes who have marked hypoglycaemia can display confusion, drowsiness, changes in behaviour, coma and seizure. Under certain circumstances, these symptoms and signs may lead to the use of Taser. Officers should be alert to the possibility that altered behaviour may be linked to poorly controlled blood sugar and seek medical assistance if in doubt.59. Individuals for whom English is not their first language may have an impaired comprehension of spoken English and, as a result, may not respond appropriately to instructions issued by police officers. This may raise the risk of Taser and other forms of force being used within this group and consequently may increase injury rates. Similar communication barriers (and potential for increased injury rates) may apply to those who are hearing impaired or who have significant visual impairment.Special considerations among those with mental ill health, learning difficulties, neurodevelopmental conditions or neurobehavioural conditions60. Mental ill health, learning difficulties, neurodevelopmental conditions or neurobehavioural conditions have the potential to negatively influence how affected individuals interact with the police.35 For this reason, there is the possibility that people in these groups may be at an elevated risk of exposure to Taser discharge or to other forms of force and may experience higher injury rates as a consequence.61. The short-, medium- or longer-term psychological impact of exposure to the Taser system, and of adverse interactions with the police in general, are unexplored. In this respect, children may be more (or less) vulnerable than adults.Deaths associated with the use of the Taser62. Amnesty International has published a report documenting 334 deaths in the United States that were associated temporally with application of Taser discharge.3663. The report summarises autopsy findings for 283 of the 334 deaths. In 203 of these, three factors emerge as having been causal or contributory in the deaths: (a) drugs (mostly cocaine or methamphetamine), (b) alcohol, and (c) some form of delirium (variously described as agitated psychosis, excited delirium or psychotic delirium).64. Heart disease, positional asphyxia (due to the method of police restraint), head trauma and cardiac arrhythmia/arrest feature prominently among the remaining 80 deaths for which autopsy data were available.35 ACPO Guidance on Responding to People with Mental Ill Health or Learning Disabilities. www.npia.police.uk/en/docs/Mental_ill_Health.pdf (retrieved 21 Sep 2010).36 Amnesty International report no. AMR 51/146/2008: http://www.amnestyusa.org/uploads/ListOfDeaths.pdf (retrieved 21 Sep 2010).10
65. Deaths associated with use of Taser continue to be reported in the international media, particularly that emanating from the United States. A high profile Taser-associated death in Canada in 2007 led to the Braidwood Inquiry, which concluded that death in this case was contributed to by the physiological stress imposed by multiple applications of Taser discharge.3766. Deaths from various causes in police custody, while not commonplace, do occur. In the UK, there were 17 deaths in or following police custody in the 12 months from April 2009 to March 2010, with 37 deaths reported in the preceding 24 month period.3867. To date, there have been two deaths in the UK following administration of Taser discharge. In one case, death occurred three days after exposure to the Taser; the Coroner found that the death was linked to profound atherosclerotic coronary artery disease and the Taser was deemed not to have been a causal factor.39 A second death in association with Taser discharge and use of irritant spray is currently under investigation by the Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC).40Conclusions68. DOMILL has conducted an evidence-based review centred around the particular susceptibilities of children and other vulnerable groups to the Taser less-lethal system.69. DOMILL considered the susceptibilities of these vulnerable populations with reference to the multiple known (and plausible) injury mechanisms that the Taser system may invoke.70. Inevitably, DOMILL?s review cannot be exhaustive. In addition to the susceptibilities considered in the present statement, there are many other conditions, and combinations of conditions, that may render those affected more likely to experience an adverse response as a consequence of use of the Taser (or other form of force). This underlines DOMILL?s view that the medical evaluation of persons detained in custody following Taser deployment should be conducted by a Forensic Medical Examiner. This approach should help to ensure that the low rates of serious injury or death associated with use of the Taser in the UK remain low.71. DOMILL considers that it is important to remain alert for any upward trends in the incidence of death or serious injury occurring in association with use of the Taser system in the UK. This can only be effectively achieved through an efficient system of post-incident medical audit.72. The recommendations below may have implications for the medical management of individuals exposed to the Taser system. There may also be implications for use policy and user guidance and training.73. Several of the recommendations point to the need for additional research to inform further the analysis of the medical risks associated with Taser use, but DOMILL remains of the view that the risk of serious adverse medical outcome from exposure to the Taser is low, provided the system is employed by trained users in accordance with ACPO policy and guidance. This37 http://www.braidwoodinquiry.ca/ (retrieved 04 Jan 2011).38 Deaths during or following police contact: Statistics for England and Wales 2009/10. IPCC Research and Statistics Series: Paper 18. http://www.ipcc.gov.uk/deaths_report_2009-10_v5.pdf (retrieved 04 Jan 2011).39 http://www.thenorthernecho.co.uk/news/1651953.family_attacks_inquest_ruling_on_taser_death/ (retrieved 21 Sep2010).40 http://www.cumbria.police.uk/news/latest-news/ipcc-continue-investigating-death-of-dale-burns (retrieved 03 Jan2012).11
view is confirmed by the consistently low incidence of reports of adverse outcomes arising from use of the Taser system in the UK, together with the relatively low rates of reported adverse outcomes internationally.74. No evidence has come to light in this most recent review of evidence relevant to the Taser X26 and M26 systems to contradict the views expressed in DOMILL?s earlier statements concerning the overall medical implications of these less-lethal options.4Recommendations75. For the majority of known Taser injury mechanisms (para. 12), reducing the physiological burden imposed by the discharge would likely reduce the risk of adverse outcome. DOMILL, therefore, considers that the duration of application of Taser discharge should be limited to that necessary to achieve the desired operational effect. Multiple discharges should be avoided where tactically feasible. These recommendations further reinforce advice given to users in the ACPO Guidance on Operational Use of Taser.4176. It is not known whether there is a risk of cardiac capture with the Taser X26 or M26 (paras. 14- 21). If there is a risk, then children and thin adults may be more vulnerable to discharge administered through barbs that have penetrated the frontal chest in the region overlying the heart. Although DOMILL does not provide operational advice on Taser point-of-aim, the Committee notes that any risk that does exist would be mitigated by avoiding, where tactically feasible, the firing of barbs into the frontal chest overlying the heart. While the outcome of a short (five second) period of rapid cardiac capture, should it occur in an otherwise healthy individual, would likely be benign (para. 17), those with established heart conditions or who are under the influence of certain drugs may be at higher risk (paras. 18-19). There is a need for further human experimental studies to inform the risk of cardiac capture from the Taser devices currently available for police use in the UK.77. Individuals with heart disease, or who have taken certain prescription or recreational drugs, may be more likely to experience adverse cardiac effects as a result of Taser discharge (paras. 22- 25). DOMILL considers that all Tasered individuals with an existing heart condition should be assessed by a physician at the earliest opportunity. Individuals without a diagnosed heart condition but who report symptoms consistent with a possible cardiac adverse event (for example, palpitations, chest or arm pain, shortness of breath) should be similarly assessed.78. Use of Taser discharge may trigger respiratory distress in those with asthma (para. 26) or trigger seizures in those affected by epilepsy (para. 52-54). Police officers should be alert to these possibilities and seek urgent medical assistance if considered necessary.79. The evidence for Taser-induced malfunction of cardiac pacemakers and implantable cardioverter defibrillators is limited, while data for other forms of implantable electronic device is scant (paras. 27-28). DOMILL will continue to maintain a watch for adverse medical outcomes involving persons fitted with these devices.80. The medical implications of exposure of pregnant women to Taser discharge are not well- documented (paras. 29-35). DOMILL recommends that women who are pregnant, or who41 http://www.westmercia.police.uk/about-us/acpo-armed-policing.html (retrieved 24 Sep 2010).12
suspect they may be pregnant, receive specialist obstetric review as part of the post-incident medical assessment.81. Post-incident medical assessment should seek evidence for sudden-onset back pain consistent with spinal compression fracture occurring around the time the Taser was discharged (paras. 38-39). Evidence for other types of musculoskeletal injury should also be sought. Those with osteoporosis may be more susceptible in this regard, although musculoskeletal injury is not confined to the older age group (para. 38).82. Several categories of vulnerable person may be more likely to sustain injuries from Taser- induced falls (paras. 34, 40-46). Post-incident medical assessment should be guided by this. Investigation of head injury should be undertaken by a physician and appropriate follow-up diagnostic procedures requested if considered necessary. Follow-up of fall-associated blunt trauma of any form may be particularly important for individuals with a history of a bleeding or clotting disorder and those on anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy (para. 45).83. Children may be at higher risk of internal injury from barbs that have penetrated the torso (para.51). Penetrating torso injuries in children (and thin adults) should be carefully evaluated. DOMILL further recommends that X26 firing trials should be conducted using a suitable skin/tissue simulant to establish how depth of barb penetration varies with target distance. This will help subsequently to inform guidance on operational use of the device.84. Injuries to the eye and other sensitive regions in the head and neck region may be more likely to arise in children and adults of short stature (paras. 49-50). DOMILL recommends that systematic firing trials are conducted over a range of distances using anthropometrically relevant targets in order to understand the extent of this perceived increase in risk to shorter people and to inform user guidance. Additionally, ACPO should consider revising Taser guidance and training to recommend a lower aim point for children and small adults, where tactically feasible.85. Certain conditions (e.g. hypoglycaemic and post-ictal states) could induce behaviour that may evoke administration of Taser discharge (paras. 55-58). Officers should be aware of this possibility and seek medical support if required. A similar vulnerability could exist in those who may respond inappropriately to directions from police officers as a result of language barriers, hearing disorders, visual impairment, mental health issues, neurodevelopmental and neurobehavioural disorders or learning difficulties (paras. 59-60).86. The psychological impact of exposure to the Taser less-lethal system is unexplored (para.61). DOMILL recommends that a review of the psychological issues is undertaken, with a focus on the potential implications for children and other vulnerable groups (particularly those highlighted in para. 60).87. The post-incident medical management of individuals exposed to Taser discharge would be enhanced by the introduction of a Taser-specific medical assessment form to guide post-incident medical examinations in line with the injury mechanisms associated with use of the device. DOMILL recommends that such a form is implemented nationally for use by Forensic Medical Examiners and other medical assessment staff.88. DOMILL notes that medical audit information is mostly unavailable from incidents in which individuals exposed to Taser discharge have been transferred directly to hospital. Paradoxically, this means that DOMILL is unable to review outcomes in cases that are likely to be at the more13
serious end of the injury spectrum. DOMILL, therefore, recommends that Forensic Medical Examiners separately review the hospitalised patient using the proposed Taser-specific medical assessment form (para. 87).89. DOMILL is aware that the manufacturer of the Taser has issued technical guidance for confirming that the output parameters of the device (charge per pulse, peak voltage per pulse, pulse duration and pulse repetition rate) are within specification. The Committee is concerned that there is no mechanism in place in the UK through which the output of individual Taser devices is routinely monitored. The output of the Taser is key in determining its ability to induce muscular incapacitation and consequently underpins its operational effectiveness. Use of a device that is only partially effective (or ineffective) due, for example, to a below- specification pulse charge, may carry indirect medical implications. Conversely, above- specification output parameters may directly increase the risk of occurrence of a medical adverse outcome. DOMILL therefore recommends that consideration should be given to the design and implementation of a nationwide quality control programme, with clear guidelines on the management of Tasers found to be out-of-specification. This may become increasingly important as the age of deployable Tasers in the UK increases.90. DOMILL welcomes this opportunity to examine the issues associated with use of the Taser less- lethal system on children and vulnerable adults. Whilst recognising that training is already given to police officers on interacting with people having many of the conditions considered in this document, DOMILL recommends that a review of the ACPO Guidance on Operational Use of Taser is undertaken to ensure that the correct lessons are identified for the training of personnel and the deployment of the Taser system in the UK.91. DOMILL recommends that CAST5 continues to notify the Committee in a timely fashion of any adverse events associated with operational use of the Taser system in the UK. DOMILL also recommends that CAST continues to compile annual Taser use reports for subsequent review by the Committee.[signed on original]Chairman, DOMILL14
Home Office CircularSerious Crime Act 2015March 2015
Issue date: 26 March 2015Implementation dates: 3 May and 1 June 2015Home Office Circular Serious Crime Act 2015From: Strategic Centre for Organised Crime – Pursue UnitFor more information contact: See Annex B for list of contacts for each policy area.Broad subject: Serious and organised crime, criminal lawSub-categories: proceeds of crime, cyber crime, organised crime, serious crime prevention orders, gang injunctions, drug cutting agents, child protection, prisons, female genital mutilation, counter- terrorismThis circular is addressed to: Lord Chief Justice, Justices of the Supreme Court, President of the Queen?s Bench Division, Master of the Rolls, Senior Presiding Judge, Lords Justices of Appeal, Chairman of the Judicial College, High Court Judges, Presiding Judges, Resident Judges, Crown Court Judges, District Judges (Magistrates? Courts), Chairmen of the Justices, Director of Public Prosecutions, HM Chief Inspector of Constabulary, Chief Officers of Police in England and Wales, Director General of the National Crime Agency, Police and Crime Commissioners in England and Wales, Mayor?s Office for Policing and Crime, College of Policing, HM Revenue and Customs, Chief Crown ProsecutorsCopies of this circular go to: Council of Circuit Judges, Magistrates? Association, Association of District Judges, Justices? Clerks? Society, Registrar of Criminal Appeals, Association of Chief Police Officers, Association of Police & Crime Commissioners, Police Superintendents? Association, Police Federation, The Law Society, the Bar Council, the Criminal Bar Association, Institute of Chartered Accountants of England and Wales, Citizens Advice Bureaux, Association of Chief Police Officers, Chief Probation Officers, Local Government Association
ContentsSubject	ParagraphIntroduction	1-4Part 1: Proceeds of crime (Sections 1-12, 14, 37, 39 and 40)	5Part 2: Computer misuse (Sections 41to 44)	6-15Section 45: Offence of participating in activities of organised	16-18crime groupSections 47 to 50: Serious crime prevention orders	19-34Section 51: Gang injunctions	35-43Part 4: Seizure and forfeiture of drug cutting agents	44-47Section 66: Child cruelty offence	48-50Section 68: Child sexual exploitation	51-53Section 69: Possession of a paedophile manual	54-58Section 70: FGM Extension of extra-territorial jurisdiction	59-64Section 71: Anonymity for victims of FGM	65-68Section 72: Offence of failing to protect girl from	69-73risk of genital mutilationSection 78: Unauthorised possession of knives and other	74-78offensive weapons in prisonsSection 81: Preparation and training for terrorism	79-82
Dear Colleague1. The Serious Crime Act 2015 („„the 2015 Act??) received Royal Assent on 3 March. The 2015 Act gives effect to a number of legislative proposals set out in the Serious and Organised Crime Strategy published in October 2013 and, in doing so, will ensure that the National Crime Agency, the police and other law enforcement agencies have the powers they need to pursue, disrupt and bring to justice those engaged in serious and organised crime. The 2015 Act also introduces measures to enhance the protection of vulnerable children and others, including by strengthening the law to tackle female genital mutilation (“FGM”) and domestic abuse. In addition, the 2015 Act includes provisions to tighten prison security and to guard against the threat of terrorism.2. The 2015 Act itself provides for a small number of its provisions to come into force either on the day of Royal Assent or two months afterwards (that is, on 3 May). In addition, the Minister for Modern Slavery and Organised Crime has now made the first commencement regulations (the Serious Crime Act 2015 (Commencement No. 1) Regulations 2015) bringing other provisions of the Act into force on either 3 May or 1 June. This circular provides details of those provisions of the 2015 Act that are coming into force on or before 1 June. It will be supported by more detailed operational guidance to the police and others issued by, amongst others, the College of Policing.3. A glossary of abbreviations used in this circular is contained in Annex A.4. A point of contact for each of the provisions in this circular can be found in Annex B.1. 
Sections 1-12, 14:Sections 37, 39:Section 40:5. Sections 1-12, 14, 37 and 39 make amendments to the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (“POCA”). Section 40 amends section 97 of the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005, which makes provision for confiscation orders to be made in magistrates? courts. These provisions, which come into force on 1 June, will be detailed in a subsequent Home Office circular to be issued in May. That circular will also cover other amendments to POCA (made by the Policing and Crime Act 2009 and the Crime and Courts Act 2013) which are similarly scheduled to come into force on 1 June.Introduction6. Sections 1 to 3A of the Computer Misuse Act 1990 (“CMA”) provided for a number of criminal offences to tackle cyber crime as follows: Section 1 – unauthorised access to computer material or data (commonly known as „„hacking??); Section 2 – unauthorised access with intent to commit or facilitate commission of further offences;
 Section 3 – unauthorised acts with intent to impair the operation of a computer (this offence includes circulating viruses, deleting files and inserting a „„Trojan Horse?? to steal data as well as effectively criminalising all forms of denial of service attacks in which the attacker denies the victim(s) access to a particular resource, typically by preventing legitimate users of a service accessing that service, for example by overloading an Internet Service Provider of a website with actions, such as emails); Section 3A – making, adapting, supplying or offering to supply an article („„hacker tools??) intending it to be used to commit, or to assist in the commission of, an offence under sections 1 or 3; supplying or offering to supply an article believing that it is likely to be used in this way; and obtaining an article with a view to its being supplied for use in this way.7. Part 2 of the 2015 Act makes four changes to the CMA, these: Create a new offence to ensure that the most serious cyber attacks attract penalties commensurate with the harm caused;Extend the section 3A offence to cover articles (or tools) for personal use; Extend the extra-territorial reach of the CMA offences; andClarify the savings provision for law enforcement agencies.Section 41: Unauthorised acts causing, or creating risk of, serious damage8. Section 41 of the 2015 Act inserts new section 3ZA into the CMA creating a new offence of unauthorised acts causing, or creating risk of serious damage. It is designed to address the most serious cyber attacks, for example those on essential systems controlling power supply, communications, food or fuel distribution. A major cyber attack of this nature could have a significant impact, resulting in loss of life, serious illness or injury, severe social disruption or serious damage to the economy, the environment or national security.Elements of the Offence9. The conduct element of the offence comprises of the following elements: a person must do an unauthorised act to a computer (as defined in section 17(8) of the CMA); and, that unauthorised act must result, whether directly or indirectly, in serious damage to the economy, the environment, national security or human welfare, or create a significant risk of such damage.10. 	The mental element of the offence comprises of two distinct elements. The first is that, in relation to the unauthorised act, the defendant must know that the act he or she does is unauthorised (section 3ZA(1)(b) of the CMA). The second element relates to the consequences, the defendant will have intended to cause1. 
harm (that is serious damage to the economy, environment, human welfare or national security) or have been reckless as to whether such harm was caused.Section 42: Obtaining articles for purposes relating to computer misuse11. 	This section amends the offence of making, supplying or obtaining articles (that is “hacker tools” or malware) for use in an offence under section 1, 3 or 3ZA of the CMA.12. 	Before this amendment, the prosecution was required to show that the individual obtained a tool (i.e. malware) with a view to its being supplied for use to commit, or assist in the commission of an offence under section 1 or 3 of the CMA. In other words the offence requires the involvement (or intended involvement) of a third party.13. 	Section 42 extends the section 3A offence so that it also covers obtaining a tool for use to commit a section 1 or 3 or the new section 3ZA offence, regardless of an intention to supply that tool and therefore extends the existing offence to capture the personal use of tools to commit computer misuse offences. This removes the requirement of the involvement, or intended involvement, of a third party and ensures that the offence covers individuals acting alone.Section 43: Territorial scope of computer misuse offence14. 	Section 43 extends the existing territorial scope of offences in the CMA by adding “nationality” to the categories of “significant link to the domestic jurisdiction” in section 5 of the CMA. This provides a legal basis to prosecute a UK national who commits any section 1 to 3A offence whilst outside the UK, where the offence has no link to the UK other than the offender?s nationality, provided that the offence was also an offence in the country where it took place. The extended extra-territorial jurisdiction arrangements also apply to conspiracy or attempt to commit offences under the CMA (section 6 and 7 of the CMA in1. 
relation to inchoate offences). To prevent individuals potentially being prosecuted twice – outside and then inside the UK – double jeopardy applies in case of concurrent jurisdiction.Section 44: Savings15. 	Section 44 clarifies section 10 of the CMA. Section 10 of the CMA contained a savings provision whereby criminal investigations by law enforcement agencies did not fall foul of the offences in the Act. However, section 10 pre-dates a number of the powers, warrantry and oversight arrangements on which law enforcement now rely to conduct their investigations, such as those in Part 3 of the Police Act 1997. The changes do not extend law enforcement agencies? powers but merely clarify the use of existing powers (derived from other enactments, wherever exercised) in the context of the offences in the CMA.The offence16. The new participation offence provides a new means for law enforcement agencies and prosecutors to tackle serious organised crime. The offence targets those who “oil the wheels” of organised crime by participating in activities, for example by providing materials, services, expertise or information which contributes to the overall capability of the group, but without being aware of the precise nature of the criminality in which they are involved. It also provides for the prosecution of those who head criminal organisations but who do not themselves directly participate in the commission of the criminal acts. The participation offence complements the existing offence of conspiracy; it does not change the way that conspiracy is currently used for organised crime prosecutions.Elements of offence17. 	The provision makes it an offence to participate in the criminal activities of an organised crime group. A person does this if they take part in any activities that they know or reasonably suspects are criminal activities or will help an organised crime group to carry on such activities.1. 
Defence18. 	It is a defence for a person charged with the participation offence to prove that participation was necessary for a purpose related to the prevention or detection of crime. The defence is required to protect, for example, undercover police officers who are participating in the activities of an organised crime group for the purpose of frustrating those activities or collecting sufficient information to bring the perpetrators to justice. It is also available to anyone whose actions were genuinely intended to assist law enforcement agencies.Background19. 	Part 3 of the 2015 Act makes provision for improvements to the serious crime prevention order (“SCPO”). The SCPO is intended for use against those involved in serious offences, including drugs trafficking, fraud and money laundering. The SCPO was introduced by Part 1 of the Serious Crime Act 2007 (“the 2007 Act”). It is a court order that is used to protect the public by preventing, restricting or disrupting a person?s involvement in serious crime. A SCPO can prevent involvement in serious crime by imposing various conditions on a person; for example, restricting who he or she can associate with, restricting his or her travel, or placing an obligation to report his or her financial affairs to the police. Detailed information on SCPOs can be found in the CPS guidance.120. 	The Director of Public Prosecutions or Director of the Serious Fraud Office can make applications to a court for an SCPO to be made in England and Wales. In Northern Ireland, the Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland makes1 http://www.cps.gov.uk/legal/s_to_u/serious_crime_prevention_orders_(scpo)_guidance/
the applications. Section 46 of and Schedule 1 to the 2015 Act also extends SCPOs to Scotland, where the Lord Advocate makes applications2. The court hearing the case decides whether an SCPO is necessary. There is an indicative list of „„serious offences?? in Schedule 1 to the 2007 Act for SCPO applications. An order can last for up to five years. While SCPOs can be made as „stand alone? orders in the High Court, they have mostly been used against those convicted of a serious crime in the Crown Court.21. 	Breach of a SCPO?s conditions is a criminal offence under section 25 of the 2007 Act, subject to a maximum penalty of five years? imprisonment. A person can be prosecuted for the breach offence in any part of the UK, regardless of where the order was made (for example, a prosecution can take place in Scotland for breach of an SCPO made by an English court).Section 47: Adding indicative offences for imposing an SCPO22. 	Section 47 of the 2015 Act adds the cultivation of cannabis, firearms possession and cyber crime offences to the list of indicative offences for making an SCPO. The list can be found in Schedule 1 to the 2007 Act – Part 1 for England and Wales and Part 2 for Northern Ireland. The new participation offence (see section 45 above) has also been added to the list. It should be noted that the list of offences in Schedule 1 to the 2007 Act is indicative and that a court can make an order in relation to other crimes if appropriate. The new offences are listed below.23. For England, Wales and Northern Ireland: An offence under section 6 of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (restriction on cultivation of cannabis plants). Note that other offences relating to drugs trafficking are already SCPO indicative offences. Offences under the following provisions of the Computer Misuse Act 1990:o section 1 (unauthorised access to computer material);o section 2 (unauthorised access with intent to commit or facilitate commission of further offences);o section 3 (unauthorised acts with intent to impair, or with recklessness as to impairing the operation of computers etc);o section 3ZA (unauthorised acts causing, or creating risk of, serious damage to human welfare etc);o section 3A (making, supplying or obtaining articles for use in an offence under sections 1, 3 or 3ZA).2 The provisions that will extend SCPOs to Scotland are expected to be commenced later in 2015. Further information will be circulated by the Scottish Government in due course.
24. For England and Wales only. Offences under the following provisions of the Firearms Act 1968. Note that offences relating to arms trafficking are already SCPO indicative offences.o section 1(1) (possession etc of firearms or ammunition withouto certificate);o section 2(1) (possession etc of shot gun without certificate);o sections 5(1), (1A) or (2A) (possession, manufacture etc of prohibited weapons).25. For Northern Ireland only. An offence under any of the following provisions of the Firearms (Northern Ireland) Order 2004 (S.I. 2004/702 (N.I. 3)). Note that offences relating to arms trafficking are already SCPO indicative offences.o Article 3 (possession etc of firearms or ammunition without certificate);o Article 45 (possession, manufacture etc of prohibited weapons).Section 48: Making a new SCPO when a person has been convicted of breaching an existing order26. 	Section 48 of the 2015 Act made provision for an existing SCPO to be replaced in the event of a conviction for the offence of breaching an SCPO. Breach of an SCPO is a potential indicator of continued involvement in serious crime, but previously the Crown Court did not have the power to impose a new order following a conviction for the breach offence (although a new order could be made following conviction for another serious offence under section 19 of the 2007 Act). The prosecutor would need to make the application to the court upon conviction as with a normal application for an SCPO.Section 49: Extending an SCPO when a person has been charged27. 	If a person currently subject to a SCPO has been charged with a serious offence or the breach offence and the order is about to run out, section 49 of the 2015 Act allows the order to be kept in place until the criminal proceedings have been concluded. In England and Wales or Northern Ireland the prosecutor would need to make an application to the Crown Court for an extension of the duration of the order once the charging decision has been made. As with any other SCPO application, the prosecutor needs to demonstrate to the court that the subject is continuing to be involved in serious crime.28. 	This power is of particular relevance if the subject of the SCPO has only been charged with the breach offence and the investigator is planning to obtain a replacement order under the new power described above (section 48).1. 
Section 50: Consolidation of the Financial Reporting Order into the SCPO29. 	As a result of the changes made by section 50 of the 2015 Act, the SCPO will become the means of imposing financial reporting requirements on a person following a conviction instead of the Financial Reporting Order (“FRO”). The aim of this change is to improve the use of financial reporting requirements as a means of preventing further involvement in crime.30. 	The FRO was a „post conviction? order introduced by Chapter 3 of Part 2 of the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005. While FROs have been used by law enforcement agencies, the total usage was less than expected. A limitation of the FRO is that breaching the order is a summary only offence and, as such, subject to a maximum penalty of six months? imprisonment. This also restricts the powers that could be used to investigate the breach offence.31. 	The SCPO was introduced after the FRO and there is overlap between the two civil orders. The large majority of FRO and SCPO qualifying offences are the same, they can both be used to impose financial reporting requirements, and they are both used „post conviction?. However, breach of an SCPO is an either way offence (that is, it can be dealt with by a magistrates? court or the Crown Court) and therefore does not have the drawbacks of the FRO. The starting date of an SCPO can also be delayed – for example, until the subject is released from prison.32. 	Section 50 of the 2015 Act therefore repeals the FRO legislation; henceforth financial reporting requirements will be imposed through an SCPO. This change will also simplify the landscape of preventative civil orders and reduce the administrative burden on the agencies who work on applications. Section 50 also replicates the information sharing provisions in the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 so that law enforcement officers can verify the reports of individuals subject to a SCPO (for example, by seeking information from banks and other financial institutions).33. 	Prosecutors other than the CPS (for example, the Financial Conduct Authority) previously had the power to make applications for the FRO but do not have the power to make applications for SCPOs. The CPS has agreed to make the applications on their behalf.34. 	Under transitional provisions in section 86 of the 2015 Act, existing FROs will remain active until they expire, and the existing offence of breaching an FRO will remain available.1. 
Background35. 	Gang injunctions are civil orders designed to prevent an individual from being involved in gang-related violence; the statutory framework is to be found in Part 4 of the Policing and Crime Act 2009 (“the 2009 Act”). Under the 2009 Act applications for a gang injunction may be made to the County Court, or the High Court, by the police or a local authority. Gang injunctions allow courts to place a range of prohibitions and requirements (including supportive, positive requirements) on the behaviour and activities of a person (aged 14 or over) involved in gang-related violence. These conditions could include prohibiting someone from being in a particular place or requiring them to participate in rehabilitative activities.36. 	Gang injunctions for adults have been available since January 2011, and gang injunctions for 14 to 17 year olds have been available since January 2012. In deciding whether to grant a gang injunction, two conditions must currently be satisfied. The first condition is that the respondent has engaged in, assisted or encouraged “gang-related violence”. Once this condition is satisfied, the court may grant an injunction if a second condition is satisfied, namely that it thinks it is necessary to do so in order “to prevent the respondent from engaging in, encouraging or assisting gang-related violence” or “to protect the respondent from gang-related violence”. The 2009 Act defines gang-related violence as:“Violence or a threat of violence which occurs in the course of, or is otherwise related to, the activities of a group that:a) consists of at least 3 people;b) uses a name, emblem or colour or has any other characteristic that enables its members to be identified by others as a group; andc) is associated with a particular area.”37. 	The way gangs operate is changing. Gangs do not always have a name, emblem or colour or other characteristic which enables its members to be identified as a group. Instead, a group of individuals may operate as a group and engage in criminality with some degree of organisation without these features.1. 
38. 	In addition, gangs are increasingly involved in criminality beyond their own areas and can be less associated with a particular area. Moreover, gang structures change over time such that it is possible for gangs to disappear from certain locations and re-appear in other locations relatively quickly.39. 	Gangs also tend to be engaged in a wider range of criminality than simply violence. In addition to violence, street level gangs are involved in drug dealing. In recognition of these changes to the way gangs operate, section 51 of the 2015 Act revises the test for the grant of a gang injunction. In particular, expanding the range of activities to include any involvement in support of the illegal drugs market will allow gang injunctions to be used to prevent individuals from engaging in such activity and to protect people from being further drawn into this illegal activity. This change will also enable local agencies to address the cross-over between urban street gangs and street drug dealing controlled by organised criminal groups.Revised test for the grant of gang injunctions40. 	Section 51 of the 2015 Act recasts the key features of a gang, for the purposes of the 2009 Act, to be a group which: Consists of at least three people; Has one or more characteristics that enable its members to be identified by others as a group; and Engages in gang-related violence or is involved in the illegal drug market.41. 	The identifying characteristics of a gang may, but need not, relate to any of the following: The use by the group of a common name, emblem or colour;  The group?s leadership or command structure; The group?s association with a particular area; The group?s involvement with a particular unlawful activity.42. 	As now, the court will be able to attach prohibitions or requirements to an injunction. Such prohibitions or requirements may, for example, bar the respondent from going to a particular place or area or from associating with and/or contacting a specified person or persons, or requiring him or her to participate in set activities on specified days.1. 
43. 	Alongside the amendments made to the 2009 Act by the 2015 Act, the provisions in section 18 of and Schedule 12 to the Crime and Courts Act 2013 also come into force on 1 June. These provisions will transfer proceedings, in respect of gang injunctions, in relation to respondents under 18 years, from the County Court to the Youth Court.Power of seizure44. 	These powers will be available to UK police forces (including the British Transport Police and Ministry of Defence Police); Border Force and the National Crime Agency. Law enforcement officers will have the power to seize and detain any substances suspected of being intended for use as a drug cutting agent. They will be able to do this in two ways: while legally on premises (for example at a port), or with a new cutting agents warrant. It is anticipated that many of these seizures will occur at the border, where large shipments of suspicious substances are often imported under false labelling. This is not likely to affect legitimate businesses, since seizures of suspected cutting agents are currently undertaken in a targeted manner using existing criminal or customs powers. The new powers will be used in a similar intelligence-led fashion.Power of forfeiture45. 	Once the suspected cutting agents have been seized under the new powers, they can be detained for up to 30 days while investigations proceed (with a possible further 30 days extension upon application to a court3). The responsible officer must make reasonable efforts to give proper notice of the seizure and the consequences of this to the person from whom the substances were seized and the owner of the substances (if they may belong to a different person).46. 	There will be further judicial oversight if the law enforcement agency wishes to destroy the substances, since it will need to apply to a magistrates? court for forfeiture. The court must grant forfeiture if satisfied, to the civil standard of proof, that the substance was intended for use as a drug cutting agent. Once the court has ordered the substances either to be returned or forfeited, a „party to the3 For the purposes of Part 4 in respect of Scotland, references to a court mean a sheriff
proceedings? (most likely either the relevant law enforcement agency or the owner of the substances) or a person entitled to the substances (if not a party to those proceedings) will have 30 days to appeal against the decision.47. 	In the unlikely event that the property of a legitimate business is seized under these powers (that is, where substances are seized but no forfeiture is granted), the owner will be able to apply for compensation. The compensation would be paid by the law enforcement agency which made the seizure. To prevent unreasonable claims, the value of the compensation will be no more than the wholesale value of the substances seized (unless exceptional circumstances exist).Children and Young Persons Act 193348. 	Section 1 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 (“the 1933 Act”) provides for an offence of child cruelty. This offence is committed where a person age 16 or over, who has responsibility for a child under that age, willfully (i.e. intentionally or recklessly) assaults, ill-treats, neglects, abandons, or exposes that child in a manner likely to cause “unnecessary suffering or injury to health”; or causes or procures someone else to treat a child in that manner. The maximum penalty for the offence is ten years? imprisonment or a fine or both.49. 	Section 1(2)(b) of the 1933 Act provides that, in a case where the death of a child under three is proved to have been caused by suffocation while the child was in bed with a person aged 16 or over, that person is deemed, for the purposes of the child cruelty offence, to have neglected the child in a manner likely to cause injury to its health, if he or she went to bed under the influence of drink.Section 66 amendments50. 	Section 66 clarifies, updates and modernises some of the language of, section 1 of the 1933 Act. The effect of the changes made by section 66 are to:1. 
(a) make it absolutely clear – by substituting for the current list of examples of relevant harm (which includes the outdated term “mental derangement”) the words “whether the suffering or injury is of a physical or psychological nature” – that cruelty which causes psychological or physical suffering or injury is covered under section 1 of the 1933 Act;(b) make it absolutely clear that the behaviour necessary to establish the ill- treatment limb of the offence can be non-physical (for example a sustained course of non-physical conduct, including, for instance, isolation, humiliation or bullying, if it is likely to cause unnecessary suffering or injury to health);(c) replace the outdated reference to „misdemeanour? with „offence?; and(d) amend section 1(2)(b) (see paragraph 49 above) so that:a. a person is also deemed to have neglected a child in the relevant manner where the person concerned is under the influence of„prohibited drugs?;b. it is clear that the provision applies where the person comes under the influence of the substance in question at any time before the suffocation occurs; andc. it applies irrespective of where the adult and child were sleeping (for example if they were asleep on a sofa).Amendments to sections 47 to 51 of the Sexual Offences Act 200351. Section 68(1) to (6) amends the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (“the 2003 Act”) to remove references to child prostitution and child pornography. These terms are referred to in the titles of sections 48 (causing or inciting child prostitution or pornography), 49 (controlling a child prostitute or a child involved in pornography) and 50 (arranging or facilitating child prostitution or pornography) of the 2003 Act, and in the body of those sections (and also in section 51, which contains definitions). The amendments to those sections replace these terms with references to the sexual exploitation of children, but do not alter the scope of the relevant offences. The changes to the terminology used are intended to reflect a modern understanding of the position of children involved in such activities. They1. 
do not however change the behaviour to which the offences apply, which remains the recording of an indecent image of a person or the offer or provision of sexual services to another person in return for payment or a promise of payment.Amendment to section 1 of the Street Offences Act 195952. 	Section 1 of the Street Offences Act 1959 (“the 1959 Act”) makes it an offence for a common prostitute to loiter or solicit in a street or public place for the purpose of prostitution. The offence currently applies to both adults and children and young persons aged 10 years or over.53. 	Section 68(7) amends section 1 of the 1959 Act so that the offence of loitering or soliciting for the purposes of prostitution applies only to persons aged 18 and over. It, in effect, decriminalises under-18s selling sex in the street and in doing so again recognises children as victims in such circumstances rather than consenting participants (buying sex from an under-18 in any circumstances would remain illegal).The offence54. 	This section creates a new offence of possession of a paedophile manual, which is any item that contains advice or guidance about abusing children sexually. For these purposes an „„item” includes anything in which information of any description is recorded (and could therefore include, for example, an electronic audio/video file).55. 	There are already a number of criminal offences that seek to prevent the possession, creation and distribution of indecent images of children, and the dissemination of obscene material. However, existing offences do not criminalise mere possession of material containing advice and guidance about grooming and abusing a child sexually. The new offence plugs the gap in the law by criminalising this behaviour.1. 
Defence56. 	Possible defences include that the individual concerned had a legitimate reason for being in possession of the material, or that he had not himself seen the material; and did not know, nor had any cause to suspect it to be a paedophile manual. A further defence would be that the person had received the material unsolicited and did not keep it for an unreasonable time.57. 	Further, in recognition of the sensitivity of this type of offence, the consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions (in England and Wales), or the Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland (in Northern Ireland) is required before a prosecution can be brought.Forfeiture58. 	The offence allows for the most commonly used and broad power of forfeiture, which is contained in section 143 of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000. Section 143 provides a general power of forfeiture allowing the courts to make an order depriving an offender of his or her rights to articles used, or intended to be used, in the commission or facilitating of an offence and conferring power on the police to take possession of the property. In addition, section 5 of and the Schedule to the Protection of Children Act 1978 confers on the police the power to forfeit any indecent photograph or pseudo-photograph of a child, and any property which it is not reasonably practicable to separate from that property following any lawful seizure. These powers will also apply to paedophile manuals.1. 
Female Genital Mutilation Act 200359. 	Under the Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003 („„the FGM Act??) it is an offence for any person in England, Wales or Northern Ireland (regardless of their nationality or residence status) to perform female genital mutilation (FGM) (section 1); or to assist a girl to carry out FGM on herself (section 2). It is also an offence to assist (from England, Wales or Northern Ireland) a non-UK national or resident to carry out FGM outside the UK on a UK national or permanent UK resident (section 3).60. 	Section 4 of the FGM Act extends sections 1 to 3 to extra-territorial acts, making it also an offence for a UK national or permanent UK resident to: perform FGM abroad; assist a girl to perform FGM on herself outside the UK; and assist (from outside the UK) a non-UK national or resident to carry out FGM outside the UK on a UK national or permanent UK resident.The amendment61. 	Section 70(1) of the 2015 Act amends section 4 of the FGM Act so that the extra-territorial jurisdiction extends to prohibited acts done outside the UK by a UK national or any UK resident. Consistent with that change, section 70(1) also amends section 3 of the 2003 Act so it extends to acts of FGM done to a UK national or any UK resident.62. 	“UK resident” is defined as “an individual who is habitually resident in the UK”. The term „habitually resident? covers a person's ordinary residence, as opposed to a short, temporary stay in a country.63. 	These changes will mean that the FGM Act can capture offences of FGM committed abroad by or against those who are at the time habitually resident in the UK, irrespective of whether they are subject to immigration restrictions. It will be for the courts to determine on the facts of individual cases whether or not those involved are habitually resident in the UK and thus covered by the FGM Act.64. 	Section 70(2) of the 2015 Act makes equivalent amendments to the Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation (Scotland) Act 2005.1. 
Protection for victims of FGM65. 	Section 71 of the 2015 Act inserts a new section 4A and Schedule 1 into the FGM Act which make provision for the anonymity of victims of FGM. The provisions are modelled on those in the Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act 1992 which provides for a scheme to protect the anonymity of victims of certain sexual offences, such as rape. The effect of these provisions is to prohibit the publication of any matter that would be likely to lead members of the public to identify a person as the alleged victim of an offence under the FGM Act (including the new offence provided for in section 72, as well as aiding, abetting, counselling and procuring the “principal offence”). The prohibition lasts for the lifetime of the alleged victim. The prohibition covers not just more immediate identifying information, such as the name and address or a photograph of the alleged victim, but any other information which, whether on its own or pieced together with other information, would be likely to lead members of the public to identify the alleged victim. “Publication” is given a broad meaning and would include traditional print media, broadcasting and social media such as Twitter or Facebook.Exemptions66. 	There are two limited circumstances where the court may disapply the restrictions on publication: The first is where a person being tried for an FGM offence, could have their defence substantially prejudiced if the restriction to prevent identification of the person against whom the allegation of FGM was committed is not lifted. The second circumstance is where preventing identification of the person against whom the allegation of FGM was committed, could be seen as a substantial and unreasonable restriction on the reporting of the proceedings and it is considered in the public interest to remove the restriction.
Breach of the restrictions67. 	Contravention of the prohibition on publication is an offence. It will not be necessary for the prosecution to show that the defendant intended to identify the victim. In relation to newspapers or other periodicals (whether in print form or online editions) and radio and television programmes, the offence is directed at proprietors, editors, publishers or broadcasters rather than individual journalists. Any prosecution for the offence requires the consent of the Attorney General or the Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland as the case may be.Defence68. 	There are two defences. The first is where the defendant had no knowledge (and no reason to suspect) that the publication included content that would be likely to identify a victim or that a relevant allegation had been made. The second is where the victim (where aged 16 or over) had freely given written consent to the publication. These defences impose a reverse burden on the defendant, that is, it is for the defendant to prove that the defence is made out on a balance of probabilities, rather than imposing a requirement on the prosecution to show, beyond reasonable doubt, that the defence does not apply.The offence69. 	Section 72 of the 2015 Act inserts a new section 3A into the FGM Act which creates a new offence of failing to protect a girl from FGM. This means that if an offence under section 1, 2 or 3 of the FGM Act (see paragraph 59 above) is committed against a girl under the age of 16, each person who is responsible for the girl at the time of FGM occurred will be liable under the new offence.1. 
Elements of the offence70. To be “responsible” for a girl, the person will either: have „parental responsibility? for the girl (for example, mothers, fathers married to the mothers at the time of birth, and guardians) and have„frequent contact? with her); or be a person aged 18 or over who has assumed responsibility for caring for the girl “in the manner of a parent” (for example family members to whom parents might send their child during the summer holidays).71. 	The requirement in the first case for “frequent contact” is intended to ensure that a person who, in law, has parental responsibility for a girl, but who in practice has little or no contact with her, would not be liable. Similarly, the requirement in the second case that the person should be caring for the girl “in the manner of a parent” is intended to ensure that a person who is looking after a girl for a very short period – such as a baby sitter – would not be liable.Defence72. It would be a defence for a defendant to show that at the relevant time, either: they did not think that there was a significant risk of FGM being committed, and could not reasonably have been expected to be aware that there was any such risk; or they took such steps as he or she could reasonably have been expected to take to protect the girl from being the victim of FGM.73. 	A defendant would only need to produce evidence to support either defence. The onus would then be on the prosecution to prove, to the normal criminal standard of beyond reasonable doubt that the defence did not apply. It would be for the jury or magistrate, in any particular case, to decide what was reasonable in the circumstances.
The offence74. 	Section 78 makes it an offence to possess any article which has a blade or is sharply pointed, or other offensive weapon in prison without authorisation. This includes makeshift weapons manufactured by prisoners from everyday items.75. 	The main aim of the new offence is to address the disparity in the criminal law as, while it is a criminal offence to possess such articles in a public place or school, it is not currently a criminal offence to possess such articles within a prison establishment. Instead the unauthorised possession of weapons by prisoners is currently dealt with internally through the prison adjudication system or, for staff, as part of internal disciplinary procedures.76. 	The new legislation will ensure that there are adequate measures available to deal with such crimes with punishments proportionate to both the seriousness of the offence and comparable to that available in the community. It will allow longer sentences for more serious offences, provide a greater deterrent effect for prisoners, and allow stronger public confidence in the fairness of the justice system. It will also enable more serious weapon possession offences to be punished through the criminal justice system.Elements of offence77. 	The conduct element of the offensive is satisfied if the person is in possession of an article which has a blade or is sharply pointed or other offensive weapon in prison without authorisation. The Prison Act 1952 (section 40E) enables authorisation to be given in certain circumstances when it is deemed necessary for persons in prison (including prisoners) to be in possession of a knife or other offensive weapon.Defence78. 	It is a defence for the person to show that either he or she reasonably believed that he or she had authorisation to be in possession of the article in question, or1. 
in all the circumstances there was an overriding public interest which justified his or her possession of the article.79. Under section 5 of the Terrorism Act 2006 (“the 2006 Act”), it is an offence to engage in any conduct in preparation for giving effect to an intention to commit, or assist another to commit, one or more acts of terrorism. Section 6 of the 2006 Act makes it an offence to provide or receive training for terrorism. The maximum penalty for these offences is life imprisonment for section 5 and, from 13 April 2015, life imprisonment for section 6.480. 	Section 17 of the 2006 Act provides for extra-territorial jurisdiction in respect of certain terrorism offences, allowing those offences to be tried in this country in respect of acts committed abroad. The relevant offences are: sections 1 (encouragement of terrorism), 6 (training for terrorism), 8 (attendance at a place used for terrorism training) and 9 to 11 (offences involving radioactive devices and materials and nuclear facilities) of the 2006 Act, and sections 11 (membership of proscribed organisations) and 54 (weapons training) of the Terrorism Act 2000.4 Until 13 April 2015, the maximum penalty for training for terrorism under section 6 is 10 years’ imprisonment. The change in maximum tariff was made by the Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015, which received Royal Assent on 12 February 2015.
81. 	However, in the case of the section 1 and 6 offences, the extra-territoriality is limited in that it only applies insofar as those offences are committed in relation to the commission, preparation, or instigation of one or more “Convention offences”. “Convention offences” are those to which Council of Europe Member States are required to extend extra-territorial jurisdiction as a result of Article 14 of the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism (May 2005); the relevant offences are set out in Schedule 1 to the 2006 Act. In the case of the section  5  offence,  there  was  no  previous  extra-territorial  jurisdiction.82. 	Section 81 of the 2015 Act amends section 17(2) of the 2006 Act to provide for extra-territorial jurisdiction for the section 5 offence and to extend the existing extra-territorial jurisdiction of the section 6 offence. As a result, a person who does anything outside of the UK which would constitute an offence under section 5 or 6 (whether in relation to a Convention offence or terrorism more widely) could be tried in the UK courts were they to return to this country.1. 
ANNEX AGLOSSARY1933 ActChildren and Young Persons Act 19331959 ActStreet Offences Act 19592003 ActSexual Offenders Act 20032006 ActTerrorism Act 20062007 ActSerious Crime Act 20072009 ActPolicing and Crime Act 20092015 ActSerious Crime Act 2015CMAComputer Misuse ActCPSCrown Prosecution ServiceE. W. S. NIEngland, Wales, Scotland andNorthern IrelandFGMFemale genital mutilationFGM ActFemale Genital Mutilation Act 2003FROFinancial Reporting OrderPOCAProceeds of Crime Act 2002SCPOSerious Crime Prevention Order
ANNEX BPOINTS OF CONTACTProvision:Contact:Telephone:Email:Part 1: Proceeds of crimeAlison Moore0207 035 1717Alison.Moore@homeoffice.x.gsi.gov.ukPart 2: Computer misuseCatherine Crowe0207 035 1150Catherine.Crowe@homeoffice.x.gsi.gov.ukSection 45: Offence of participating in activities of an organised crimegroupCaroline Johnson0207 035 1562Caroline.Johnson@homeoffice.x.gsi.gov.ukSections 47 to50: Serious crime preventionordersAnthony Townsin0207 035 8105Anthony.Townsin@homeoffice.x.gsi.gov.ukSection 51: Gang injunctionsEsperanza Gomez0207 035 0264Esperanza.Gomez@homeoffice.gsi.gov.ukPart 4: Seizure and forfeiture of drug cuttingagentsLisa Dillon0207 035 0936Lisa.Dillon2@homeoffice.gsi.gov.ukSection 66: Child crueltyoffenceJean McMahon0203 334 3208jean.mcmahon@justice.gsi.gov.ukSection 68:Child sexual exploitationWayne Jones0207 035 3236wayne.jones@homeoffice.gsi.gov.ukSection 69: Possession of a paedophile manualDavid Pearson0203 334 5005dave.pearson@justice.gsi.gov.ukSection 70: FGM extension of extra- territorialjurisdictionLouise Douglas0203 334 5013Louise.Douglas@justice.gsi.gov.ukSection 71: Anonymity for victims of FGMNadia Rosun07580 701510Nadia.Rosun@justice.gsi.gov.ukSection 72: Offence of failing to protect a girl from therisk of genital mutilationLouise Douglas0203 334 5013Louise.Douglas@justice.gsi.gov.ukSection 78: Unauthorised possession of knives and other offensiveweaponsEmma Prince0300 047 6202 emma.prince@noms.gsi.gov.uk
Section 81: Preparation and training for terrorismSukina Smith0207 035 3483sukina.smith2@homeoffice.x.gsi.gov.uk
Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesAnti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 20142014 CHAPTER 12An Act to make provision about anti-social behaviour, crime and disorder, including provision about recovery of possession of dwelling-houses; to make provision amending the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991, the Police Act 1997, Schedules 7 and 8 to the Terrorism Act 2000, the Extradition Act 2003 and Part 3 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011; to make provision about firearms, about sexual harm and violence and about forced marriage; to make provision about the police, the Independent Police Complaints Commission and the Serious Fraud Office; to make provision about invalid travel documents; to make provision about criminal justice and court fees; and for connected purposes.	[13th March 2014]BE IT ENACTED by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:—PART 1INJUNCTIONS
2	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 1 – InjunctionsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesInjunctions1 Power to grant injunctions(1) A court may grant an injunction under this section against a person aged 10 or over (“the respondent”) if two conditions are met.(2) The first condition is that the court is satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the respondent has engaged or threatens to engage in anti-social behaviour.(3) The second condition is that the court considers it just and convenient to grant the injunction for the purpose of preventing the respondent from engaging in anti-social behaviour.(4) An injunction under this section may for the purpose of preventing the respondent from engaging in anti-social behaviour—(a) prohibit the respondent from doing anything described in the injunction;(b) require the respondent to do anything described in the injunction.(5) Prohibitions and requirements in an injunction under this section must, so far as practicable, be such as to avoid—(a) any interference with the times, if any, at which the respondent normally works or attends school or any other educational establishment;(b) any conflict with the requirements of any other court order or injunction to which the respondent may be subject.(6) An injunction under this section must—(a) specify the period for which it has effect, or(b) state that it has effect until further order.In the case of an injunction granted before the respondent has reached the age of 18, a period must be specified and it must be no more than 12 months.(7) An injunction under this section may specify periods for which particular prohibitions or requirements have effect.(8) An application for an injunction under this section must be made to—(a) a youth court, in the case of a respondent aged under 18;  (b) the High Court or the county court, in any other case. Paragraph (b) is subject to any rules of court made under section 18(2).2 Meaning of “anti-social behaviour”(1) In this Part “anti-social behaviour” means—(a) conduct that has caused, or is likely to cause, harassment, alarm or distress to any person,(b) conduct capable of causing nuisance or annoyance to a person in relation to that person's occupation of residential premises, or(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	3PART 1 – InjunctionsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) conduct capable of causing housing-related nuisance or annoyance to any person.(2) Subsection (1)(b) applies only where the injunction under section 1 is applied for by—(a) a housing provider,(b) a local authority, or(c) a chief officer of police.(3) In subsection (1)(c) “housing-related” means directly or indirectly relating to the housing management functions of—(a) a housing provider, or(b) a local authority.(4) For the purposes of subsection (3) the housing management functions of a housing provider or a local authority include—(a) functions conferred by or under an enactment;(b) the powers and duties of the housing provider or local authority as the holder of an estate or interest in housing accommodation.Contents of injunctions3 Requirements included in injunctions(1) An injunction under section 1 that includes a requirement must specify the person who is to be responsible for supervising compliance with the requirement.The person may be an individual or an organisation.(2) Before including a requirement, the court must receive evidence about its suitability and enforceability from—(a) the individual to be specified under subsection (1), if an individual is to be specified;(b) an individual representing the organisation to be specified under subsection (1), if an organisation is to be specified.(3) Before including two or more requirements, the court must consider their compatibility with each other.(4) It is the duty of a person specified under subsection (1)—(a) to make any necessary arrangements in connection with the requirements for which the person has responsibility (the “relevant requirements”);(b) to promote the respondent's compliance with the relevant requirements;(c) if the person considers that the respondent—(i) has complied with all the relevant requirements, or(ii) has failed to comply with a relevant requirement,to inform the person who applied for the injunction and the appropriate chief officer of police.
4 Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 1 – InjunctionsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) In subsection (4)(c) “the appropriate chief officer of police” means—(a) the chief officer of police for the police area in which it appears to the person specified under subsection (1) that the respondent lives, or(b) if it appears to that person that the respondent lives in more than one police area, whichever of the relevant chief officers of police that person thinks it most appropriate to inform.(6) A respondent subject to a requirement included in an injunction under section 1 must—(a) keep in touch with the person specified under subsection (1) in relation to that requirement, in accordance with any instructions given by that person from time to time;(b) notify the person of any change of address.These obligations have effect as requirements of the injunction.4 Power of arrest(1) A court granting an injunction under section 1 may attach a power of arrest to a prohibition or requirement of the injunction if the court thinks that—(a) the anti-social behaviour in which the respondent has engaged or threatens to engage consists of or includes the use or threatened use of violence against other persons, or(b) there is a significant risk of harm to other persons from the respondent.“Requirement” here does not include one that has the effect of requiring the respondent to participate in particular activities.(2) If the court attaches a power of arrest, the injunction may specify a period for which the power is to have effect which is shorter than that of the prohibition or requirement to which it relates.Applications for injunctions5 Applications for injunctions(1) An injunction under section 1 may be granted only on the application of—(a) a local authority,(b) a housing provider,(c) the chief officer of police for a police area,(d) the chief constable of the British Transport Police Force,(e) Transport for London,(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	5PART 1 – InjunctionsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F1(ea)  Transport for Greater Manchester,](f) the Environment Agency,(g) the Natural Resources Body for Wales,(h) the Secretary of State exercising security management functions, or a Special Health Authority exercising security management functions on the direction of the Secretary of State, or(i) the Welsh Ministers exercising security management functions, or a person or body exercising security management functions on the direction of the Welsh Ministers or under arrangements made between the Welsh Ministers and that person or body.(2) In subsection (1) “security management functions” means—(a) the Secretary of State's security management functions within the meaning given by section 195(3) of the National Health Service Act 2006;(b) the functions of the Welsh Ministers corresponding to those functions.(3) A housing provider may make an application only if the application concerns anti- social behaviour that directly or indirectly relates to or affects its housing management functions.(4) For the purposes of subsection (3) the housing management functions of a housing provider include—(a) functions conferred by or under an enactment;(b) the powers and duties of the housing provider as the holder of an estate or interest in housing accommodation.(5) The Secretary of State may by order—(a) amend this section;(b) amend section 20 in relation to expressions used in this section.6 Applications without notice(1) An application for an injunction under section 1 may be made without notice being given to the respondent.(2) If an application is made without notice the court must either—(a) adjourn the proceedings and grant an interim injunction (see section 7), or(b) adjourn the proceedings without granting an interim injunction, or(c) dismiss the application.(a) 
6	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 1 – InjunctionsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesInterim injunctions7 Interim injunctions(1) This section applies where the court adjourns the hearing of an application (whether made with notice or without) for an injunction under section 1.(2) The court may grant an injunction under that section lasting until the final hearing of the application or until further order (an “interim injunction”) if the court thinks it just to do so.(3) An interim injunction made at a hearing of which the respondent was not given notice may not have the effect of requiring the respondent to participate in particular activities.(4) Subject to that, the court has the same powers (including powers under section 4) whether or not the injunction is an interim injunction.Variation and discharge8 Variation or discharge of injunctions(1) The court may vary or discharge an injunction under section 1 on the application of—(a) the person who applied for the injunction, or(b) the respondent.(2) In subsection (1) “the court” means—(a) the court that granted the injunction, except where paragraph (b) applies;(b) the county court, where the injunction was granted by a youth court but the respondent is aged 18 or over.(3) The power to vary an injunction includes power—(a) to include an additional prohibition or requirement in the injunction, or to extend the period for which a prohibition or requirement has effect;(b) to attach a power of arrest, or to extend the period for which a power of arrest has effect.(4) If an application under this section is dismissed, the party by which the dismissed application was made may make no further application under this section without—(a) the consent of the court, or(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	7PART 1 – InjunctionsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) Section 3 applies to additional requirements included under subsection (3)(a) above as it applies to requirements included in a new injunction.Breach of injunctions9 Arrest without warrant(1) Where a power of arrest is attached to a provision of an injunction under section 1, a constable may arrest the respondent without warrant if he or she has reasonable cause to suspect that the respondent is in breach of the provision.(2) A constable who arrests a person under subsection (1) must inform the person who applied for the injunction.(3) A person arrested under subsection (1) must, within the period of 24 hours beginning with the time of the arrest, be brought before—(a) a judge of the High Court or a judge of the county court, if the injunction was granted by the High Court;(b) a judge of the county court, if—(i) the injunction was granted by the county court, or(ii) the injunction was granted by a youth court but the respondent is aged 18 or over;(c) a justice of the peace, if neither paragraph (a) nor paragraph (b) applies.(4) In calculating when the period of 24 hours ends, Christmas Day, Good Friday and any Sunday are to be disregarded.(5) The judge before whom a person is brought under subsection (3)(a) or (b) may remand the person if the matter is not disposed of straight away.(6) The justice of the peace before whom a person is brought under subsection (3)(c) must remand the person to appear before the youth court that granted the injunction.10 Issue of arrest warrant(1) If the person who applied for an injunction under section 1 thinks that the respondent is in breach of any of its provisions, the person may apply for the issue of a warrant for the respondent's arrest.(2) The application must be made to—(a) a judge of the High Court, if the injunction was granted by the High Court;(a) 
8	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 1 – InjunctionsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(i) the injunction was granted by the county court, or(ii) the injunction was granted by a youth court but the respondent is aged 18 or over;(c)	a justice of the peace, if neither paragraph (a) nor paragraph (b) applies.(3) A judge or justice may issue a warrant under this section only if the judge or justice has reasonable grounds for believing that the respondent is in breach of a provision of the injunction.(4) A warrant issued by a judge of the High Court must require the respondent to be brought before that court.(5) A warrant issued by a judge of the county court must require the respondent to be brought before that court.(6) A warrant issued by a justice of the peace must require the respondent to be brought before—(a) the youth court that granted the injunction, if the person is aged under 18;(b) the county court, if the person is aged 18 or over.(7) A constable who arrests a person under a warrant issued under this section must inform the person who applied for the injunction.(8) If the respondent is brought before a court by virtue of a warrant under this section but the matter is not disposed of straight away, the court may remand the respondent.11 RemandsSchedule 1 (remands under sections 9 and 10) has effect.12 Powers in respect of under-18sSchedule 2 (breach of injunctions: powers of court in respect of under-18s) has effect.
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	9PART 1 – InjunctionsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesExclusion from home13 Power to exclude person from home in cases of violence or risk of harm(1) An injunction under section 1 may have the effect of excluding the respondent from the place where he or she normally lives (“the premises”) only if—(a) the respondent is aged 18 or over,(b) the injunction is granted on the application of—(i) a local authority,(ii) the chief officer of police for the police area that the premises are in, or(iii) if the premises are owned or managed by a housing provider, that housing provider, and(c) the court thinks that—(i) the anti-social behaviour in which the respondent has engaged or threatens to engage consists of or includes the use or threatened use of violence against other persons, or(ii) there is a significant risk of harm to other persons from the respondent.(2) For the purposes of this section a housing provider owns a place if—(a) the housing provider is a person (other than a mortgagee not in possession) entitled to dispose of the fee simple of the place, whether in possession or in reversion, or(b) the housing provider is a person who holds or is entitled to the rents and profits of the place under a lease that (when granted) was for a term of not less then 3 years.Supplemental14 Requirements to consult etc(1) A person applying for an injunction under section 1 must before doing so—(a) consult the local youth offending team about the application, if the respondent will be aged under 18 when the application is made;(b) inform any other body or individual the applicant thinks appropriate of the application.This subsection does not apply to a without-notice application.(2) Where the court adjourns a without-notice application, before the date of the first on- notice hearing the applicant must—(a) consult the local youth offending team about the application, if the respondent will be aged under 18 on that date;(b) inform any other body or individual the applicant thinks appropriate of the application.(a) 
10	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 1 – InjunctionsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) A person applying for variation or discharge of an injunction under section 1 granted on that person's application must before doing so—(a) consult the local youth offending team about the application for variation or discharge, if the respondent will be aged under 18 when that application is made;(b) inform any other body or individual the applicant thinks appropriate of that application.(4) In this section—“local youth offending team” means—(a) the youth offending team in whose area it appears to the applicant that the respondent lives, or(b) if it appears to the applicant that the respondent lives in more than one such area, whichever one or more of the relevant youth offending teams the applicant thinks it appropriate to consult;  “on-notice hearing” means a hearing of which notice has been given to the applicant and the respondent in accordance with rules of court;  “without-notice application” means an application made without notice under section 6.15 Appeals against decisions of youth courts(1) An appeal lies to the Crown Court against a decision of a youth court made under this Part.(2) On an appeal under this section the Crown Court may make—(a) whatever orders are necessary to give effect to its determination of the appeal;(b) whatever incidental or consequential orders appear to it to be just.(3) An order of the Crown Court made on an appeal under this section (other than one directing that an application be re-heard by the youth court) is to be treated for the purposes of section 8 as an order of the youth court.16 Special measures for witnesses(1) Chapter 1 of Part 2 of the Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999 (special measures directions in the case of vulnerable and intimidated witnesses) applies to proceedings under this Part as it applies to criminal proceedings, but with—(a) the omission of the provisions of that Act mentioned in subsection (2) (which make provision appropriate only in the context of criminal proceedings), and(b) any other necessary modifications.(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	11PART 1 – InjunctionsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) The provisions are—(a) section 17(4) to (7);(b) section 21(4C)(e);(c) section 22A;(d) section 27(10);(e) section 32.(3) Rules of court made under or for the purposes of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of that Act apply to proceedings under this Part—(a) to the extent provided by rules of court, and(b) subject to any modifications provided by rules of court.(4) Section 47 of that Act (restrictions on reporting special measures directions etc) applies with any necessary modifications—(a) to a direction under section 19 of that Act as applied by this section;  (b) to a direction discharging or varying such a direction. Sections 49 and 51 of that Act (offences) apply accordingly.17 Children and young persons: disapplication of reporting restrictionsSection 49 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 (restrictions on reports of proceedings in which children and young persons are concerned) does not apply to proceedings under this Part.18 Rules of court(1) Rules of court may provide that an appeal from a decision of the High Court, the county court or a youth court—(a) to dismiss an application for an injunction under section 1 made without notice being given to the respondent, or(b) to refuse to grant an interim injunction when adjourning proceedings following such an application,may be made without notice being given to the respondent.(2) Rules of court may provide for a youth court to give permission for an application for an injunction under section 1 against a person aged 18 or over to be made to the youth court if—(a) an application to the youth court has been made, or is to be made, for an injunction under that section against a person aged under 18, and(a) 
12	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 1 – InjunctionsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) the youth court thinks that it would be in the interests of justice for the applications to be heard together.(3) In relation to a respondent attaining the age of 18 after proceedings under this Part have begun, rules of court may—(a) provide for the transfer of the proceedings from the youth court to the High Court or the county court;(b) prescribe circumstances in which the proceedings may or must remain in the youth court.19 Guidance(1) The Secretary of State may issue guidance to persons entitled to apply for injunctions under section 1 (see section 5) about the exercise of their functions under this Part.(2) The Secretary of State may revise any guidance issued under this section.(3) The Secretary of State must arrange for any guidance issued or revised under this section to be published.20 Interpretation etc(1) In this Part—“anti-social behaviour” has the meaning given by section 2;“harm” includes serious ill-treatment or abuse, whether physical or not; “housing accommodation” includes—(a) flats, lodging-houses and hostels;(b) any yard, garden, outhouses and appurtenances belonging to the accommodation or usually enjoyed with it;(c) any common areas used in connection with the accommodation; “housing provider” means—(a) a housing trust, within the meaning given by section 2 of the Housing Associations Act 1985, that is a charity;(b) a housing action trust established under section 62 of the Housing Act 1988;(c) in relation to England, a non-profit private registered provider of social housing;(d) in relation to Wales, a Welsh body registered as a social landlord under section 3 of the Housing Act 1996;(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	13PART 1 – InjunctionsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(e) any body (other than a local authority or a body within paragraphs (a) to (d)) that is a landlord under a secure tenancy within the meaning given by section 79 of the Housing Act 1985;“local authority” means—(a) in relation to England, a district council, a county council, a London borough council, the Common Council of the City of London or the Council of the Isles of Scilly;(b) in relation to Wales, a county council or a county borough council; “respondent” has the meaning given by section 1(1).(2) A person's age is treated for the purposes of this Part as being that which it appears to the court to be after considering any available evidence.21 Saving and transitional provision(1) In this section “existing order” means any of the following injunctions and orders—(a) an anti-social behaviour injunction under section 153A of the Housing Act 1996;(b) an injunction under section 153B of that Act (injunction against unlawful use of premises);(c) an injunction in which anything is included by virtue of section 153D(3) or(4) of that Act (power to include provision banning person from premises or area, or to include power of arrest, in injunction against breach of tenancy agreement);(d) an order under section 1 or 1B of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (anti- social behaviour orders etc);(e) an individual support order under section 1AA of that Act made in connection with an order under section 1 or 1B of that Act;(f) an intervention order under section 1G of that Act;(g) a drinking banning order under section 3 or 4 of the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006.(2) The repeal or amendment by this Act of provisions about any of the existing orders specified in subsection (1)(a) to (d), (f) and (g) does not apply in relation to—(a) an application made before the commencement day for an existing order;(b) an existing order (whether made before or after that day) applied for before that day;(c) anything done in connection with such an application or order.(3) The repeal or amendment by this Act of provisions about an order specified in subsection (1)(e) does not apply in relation to—(a) an individual support order made before the commencement day;(b) anything done in connection with such an order.(4) As from the commencement day there may be no variation of an existing order that extends the period of the order or of any of its provisions.(1) 
14	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 2 – Criminal behaviour ordersDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) At the end of the period of 5 years beginning with the commencement day—(a) in relation to any of the existing orders specified in subsection (1)(a), (b) and (d) to (g) that is still in force, this Part has effect, with any necessary modifications (and with any modifications specified in an order under section 185(7)), as if the provisions of the order were provisions of an injunction under section 1;(b) the provisions of this Part set out in subsection (6) apply to any injunction specified in subsection (1)(c) that is still in force as they apply to an injunction under section 1;(c) subsections (2) to (4) cease to have effect.(6) The provisions referred to in subsection (5)(b) are—(a) section 1(7);(b) sections 4(2) and 9 (if a power of arrest is attached);(c) sections 6 to 8;(d) section 10;(e) section 11 and Schedule 1;(f) section 12 and Schedule 2;(g) section 18(1).(7) In deciding whether to grant an injunction under section 1 a court may take account of conduct occurring up to 6 months before the commencement day.(8) In this section “commencement day” means the day on which this Part comes into force.PART 2CRIMINAL BEHAVIOUR ORDERSCriminal behaviour ordersF222	Power to make orders. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F223	Proceedings on an application for an order. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	15PART 2 – Criminal behaviour ordersDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF224	Requirements included in orders. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F225	Duration of order etc. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Interim ordersF226	Interim orders. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Variation and dischargeF227	Variation or discharge of orders. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 2 – Criminal behaviour ordersDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesReview of orders (under-18s)F228	Review of orders. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F229	Carrying out and participating in reviews. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Breach of ordersF230	Breach of order. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .SupplementalF231	Special measures for witnesses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F232	Guidance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	17PART 3 – Dispersal powersDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF233	Saving and transitional provision. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .PART 3DISPERSAL POWERS34	Authorisations to use powers under section 35(1) A police officer of at least the rank of inspector may authorise the use in a specified locality, during a specified period of not more than 48 hours, of the powers given by section 35.“Specified” means specified in the authorisation.(2) An officer may give such an authorisation only if satisfied on reasonable grounds that the use of those powers in the locality during that period may be necessary for the purpose of removing or reducing the likelihood of—(a) members of the public in the locality being harassed, alarmed or distressed, or(b) the occurrence in the locality of crime or disorder.(3) In deciding whether to give such an authorisation an officer must have particular regard to the rights of freedom of expression and freedom of assembly set out in articles 10 and 11 of the Convention.“Convention” has the meaning given by section 21(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998.(4) An authorisation under this section—(a) must be in writing,(b) must be signed by the officer giving it, and(c) must specify the grounds on which it is given.
18	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 3 – Dispersal powersDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes35	Directions excluding a person from an area(1) If the conditions in subsections (2) and (3) are met and an authorisation is in force under section 34, a constable in uniform may direct a person who is in a public place in the locality specified in the authorisation—(a) to leave the locality (or part of the locality), and(b) not to return to the locality (or part of the locality) for the period specified in the direction (“the exclusion period”).(2) The first condition is that the constable has reasonable grounds to suspect that the behaviour of the person in the locality has contributed or is likely to contribute to—(a) members of the public in the locality being harassed, alarmed or distressed, or(b) the occurrence in the locality of crime or disorder.(3) The second condition is that the constable considers that giving a direction to the person is necessary for the purpose of removing or reducing the likelihood of the events mentioned in subsection (2)(a) or (b).(4) The exclusion period may not exceed 48 hours.The period may expire after (as long as it begins during) the period specified in the authorisation under section 34.(5) A direction under this section—(a) must be given in writing, unless that is not reasonably practicable;(b) must specify the area to which it relates;(c) may impose requirements as to the time by which the person must leave the area and the manner in which the person must do so (including the route).(6) The constable must (unless it is not reasonably practicable) tell the person to whom the direction is given that failing without reasonable excuse to comply with the direction is an offence.(7) If the constable reasonably believes that the person to whom the direction is given is under the age of 16, the constable may remove the person to a place where the person lives or a place of safety.(8) Any constable may withdraw or vary a direction under this section; but a variation must not extend the duration of a direction beyond 48 hours from when it was first given.(9) Notice of a withdrawal or variation of a direction—(a) must be given to the person to whom the direction was given, unless that is not reasonably practicable, and(b) if given, must be given in writing unless that is not reasonably practicable.(10) In this section “public place” means a place to which at the material time the public or a section of the public has access, on payment or otherwise, as of right or by virtue of express or implied permission.(11) In this Part “exclusion period” has the meaning given by subsection (1)(b).(2) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	19PART 3 – Dispersal powersDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes36	Restrictions(1) A constable may not give a direction under section 35 to a person who appears to the constable to be under the age of 10.(2) A constable may not give a direction under section 35 that prevents the person to whom it is given having access to a place where the person lives.(3) A constable may not give a direction under section 35 that prevents the person to whom it is given attending at a place which the person is—(a) required to attend for the purposes of the person's employment, or a contract of services to which the person is a party,(b) required to attend by an obligation imposed by or under an enactment or by the order of a court or tribunal, or(c) expected to attend for the purposes of education or training or for the purposes of receiving medical treatment,at a time when the person is required or expected (as the case may be) to attend there.(4) A constable may not give a direction to a person under section 35 if the person is one of a group of persons who are—(a) engaged in conduct that is lawful under section 220 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 (peaceful picketing), or(b) taking part in a public procession of the kind mentioned in subsection (1) of section 11 of the Public Order Act 1986 in respect of which—(i) written notice has been given in accordance with that section, or(ii) written notice is not required to be given as provided by subsections(1) and (2) of that section.(5) In deciding whether to give a direction under section 35 a constable must have particular regard to the rights of freedom of expression and freedom of assembly set out in articles 10 and 11 of the Convention.“Convention” has the meaning given by section 21(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998.37	Surrender of property(1) A constable who gives a person a direction under section 35 may also direct the person to surrender to the constable any item in the person's possession or control that the constable reasonably believes has been used or is likely to be used in behaviour that harasses, alarms or distresses members of the public.(2) A direction under this section must be given in writing, unless that is not reasonably practicable.(1) 
20	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 3 – Dispersal powersDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) A constable who gives a person a direction under this section must (unless it is not reasonably practicable)—(a) tell the person that failing without reasonable excuse to comply with the direction is an offence, and(b) give the person information in writing about when and how the person may recover the surrendered item.(4) The surrendered item must not be returned to the person before the end of the exclusion period.(5) If after the end of that period the person asks for the item to be returned, it must be returned (unless there is power to retain it under another enactment).(6) But if it appears to a constable that the person is under the age of 16 and is not accompanied by a parent or other responsible adult, the item may be retained until the person is so accompanied.(7) If the person has not asked for the return of the item before the end of the period of 28 days beginning with the day on which the direction was given, the item may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of.38	Record-keeping(1) A constable who gives a direction under section 35 must make a record of—(a) the individual to whom the direction is given,(b) the time at which the direction is given, and(c) the terms of the direction (including in particular the area to which it relates and the exclusion period).(2) A constable who withdraws or varies a direction under section 35 must make a record of—(a) the time at which the direction is withdrawn or varied,(b) whether notice of the withdrawal or variation is given to the person to whom the direction was given and if it is, at what time, and(c) if the direction is varied, the terms of the variation.(3) A constable who gives a direction under section 37 must make a record of—(a) the individual to whom the direction is given,(b) the time at which the direction is given, and(c) the item to which the direction relates.
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	21PART 3 – Dispersal powersDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes39	Offences(1) A person given a direction under section 35 who fails without reasonable excuse to comply with it commits an offence.(2) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) is liable on summary conviction—(a) to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 3 months, or(b) to a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale,(3) A person given a direction under section 37 who fails without reasonable excuse to comply with it commits an offence.(4) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (3) is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 2 on the standard scale.F340	Powers of community support officers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .41 Guidance(1) The Secretary of State may issue guidance to chief officers of police about the exercise, by officers under their direction or control, of those officers' functions under this Part.(2) The Secretary of State may revise any guidance issued under this section.(3) The Secretary of State must arrange for any guidance issued or revised under this section to be published.42 Saving and transitional provision(1) The repeal by this Act of Part 4 of the Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003, and the repeal or amendment by this Act of provisions related to that Part, do not apply in relation to—(a) an authorisation given under section 30(2) of that Act before the commencement day, or(b) anything done in connection with such an authorisation.(a) 
22	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 1 – Community protection notices Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) The repeal by this Act of section 27 of the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006, and the repeal or amendment by this Act of provisions related to that section, do not apply in relation to—(a) a direction given under that section before the commencement day, or(b) anything done in connection with such a direction.(3) In this section “commencement day” means the day on which this Part comes into force.PART 4COMMUNITY PROTECTIONCHAPTER 1COMMUNITY PROTECTION NOTICESCommunity protection notices43 Power to issue notices(1) An authorised person may issue a community protection notice to an individual aged 16 or over, or a body, if satisfied on reasonable grounds that—(a) the conduct of the individual or body is having a detrimental effect, of a persistent or continuing nature, on the quality of life of those in the locality, and(b) the conduct is unreasonable.(2) In subsection (1) “authorised person” means a person on whom section 53 (or an enactment amended by that section) confers power to issue community protection notices.(3) A community protection notice is a notice that imposes any of the following requirements on the individual or body issued with it—(a) a requirement to stop doing specified things;(b) a requirement to do specified things;(c) a requirement to take reasonable steps to achieve specified results.(4) The only requirements that may be imposed are ones that are reasonable to impose in order—(a) to prevent the detrimental effect referred to in subsection (1) from continuing or recurring, or(b) to reduce that detrimental effect or to reduce the risk of its continuance or recurrence.(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	23PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 1 – Community protection notices Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) A person (A) may issue a community protection notice to an individual or body (B) only if—(a) B has been given a written warning that the notice will be issued unless B's conduct ceases to have the detrimental effect referred to in subsection (1), and(b) A is satisfied that, despite B having had enough time to deal with the matter, B's conduct is still having that effect.(6) A person issuing a community protection notice must before doing so inform any body or individual the person thinks appropriate.(7) A community protection notice must—(a) identify the conduct referred to in subsection (1);(b) explain the effect of sections 46 to 51.(8) A community protection notice may specify periods within which, or times by which, requirements within subsection (3)(b) or (c) are to be complied with.44 Occupiers of premises etc(1) Conduct on, or affecting, premises (other than premises within subsection (2)) that a particular person—(a) owns,(b) leases,(c) occupies,(d) controls,(e) operates, or(f) maintains,is treated for the purposes of section 43 as conduct of that person.(2) Conduct on, or affecting, premises occupied for the purposes of a government department is treated for the purposes of section 43 as conduct of the Minister in charge of that department.(3) This section does not treat an individual's conduct as that of another person if that person cannot reasonably be expected to control or affect it.45 Occupier or owner unascertainable(1) This section applies where—(a) an authorised person has power to issue a community protection notice,(b) the detrimental effect referred to in section 43(1) arises from the condition of premises or the use to which premises have been put, and(a) 
24	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 1 – Community protection notices Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) the authorised person has made reasonable enquiries to find out the name or proper address of the occupier of the premises (or, if the premises are unoccupied, the owner) but without success.(2) The authorised person may—(a) post the community protection notice on the premises;(b) enter the premises, or other premises, to the extent reasonably necessary for that purpose.(3) The community protection notice is treated as having been issued to the occupier of the premises (or, if the premises are unoccupied, the owner) at the time the notice is posted.(4) In this section “authorised person” has the same meaning as in section 43(1).46 Appeals against notices(1) A person issued with a community protection notice may appeal to a magistrates' court against the notice on any of the following grounds.(1) That the conduct specified in the community protection notice—(a) did not take place,(b) has not had a detrimental effect on the quality of life of those in the locality,(c) has not been of a persistent or continuing nature,(d) is not unreasonable, or(e) is conduct that the person cannot reasonably be expected to control or affect.(2) That any of the requirements in the notice, or any of the periods within which or times by which they are to be complied with, are unreasonable.(3) That there is a material defect or error in, or in connection with, the notice.(4) That the notice was issued to the wrong person.(2) An appeal must be made within the period of 21 days beginning with the day on which the person is issued with the notice.(3) While an appeal against a community protection notice is in progress—(a) a requirement imposed by the notice to stop doing specified things remains in effect, unless the court orders otherwise, but(b) any other requirement imposed by the notice is of no effect.For this purpose an appeal is “in progress” until it is finally determined or is withdrawn.(4) A magistrates' court hearing an appeal against a community protection notice must—(a) quash the notice,(b) modify the notice (for example by extending a period specified in it), or(c) dismiss the appeal.(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	25PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 1 – Community protection notices Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesFailure to comply with notice47 Remedial action by local authority(1) Where a person issued with a community protection notice (“the defaulter”) fails to comply with a requirement of the notice, the relevant local authority may take action under subsection (2) or subsection (3) (or both).(2) The relevant local authority may have work carried out to ensure that the failure is remedied, but only on land that is open to the air.(3) As regards premises other than land open to the air, if the relevant local authority issues the defaulter with a notice—(a) specifying work it intends to have carried out to ensure that the failure is remedied,(b) specifying the estimated cost of the work, and(c) inviting the defaulter to consent to the work being carried out,the authority may have the work carried out if the necessary consent is given.(4) In subsection (3) “the necessary consent” means the consent of—(a) the defaulter, and(b) the owner of the premises on which the work is to be carried out (if that is not the defaulter).Paragraph (b) does not apply where the relevant authority has made reasonable efforts to contact the owner of the premises but without success.(5) A person authorised by a local authority to carry out work under this section may enter any premises to the extent reasonably necessary for that purpose, except that a person who is only authorised to carry out work under subsection (2) may only enter land that is open to the air.(6) If work is carried out under subsection (2) or (3) and the relevant local authority issues a notice to the defaulter—(a) giving details of the work that was carried out, and(b) specifying an amount that is no more than the cost to the authority of having the work carried out,the defaulter is liable to the authority for that amount (subject to the outcome of any appeal under subsection (7)).(7) A person issued with a notice under subsection (6) may appeal to a magistrates' court, within the period of 21 days beginning with the day on which the notice was issued, on the ground that the amount specified under subsection (6)(b) is excessive.(8) A magistrates' court hearing an appeal under subsection (7) must—(a) confirm the amount, or(b) substitute a lower amount.(a) 
26	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 1 – Community protection notices Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(9) In this section “the relevant local authority” means—(a) the local authority that issued the community protection notice;(b) if the community protection notice was not issued by a local authority, the local authority (or, as the case may be, one of the local authorities) that could have issued it.48 Offence of failing to comply with notice(1) A person issued with a community protection notice who fails to comply with it commits an offence.(2) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable on summary conviction—(a) to a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale, in the case of an individual;(b) to [F4a fine], in the case of a body.(3) A person does not commit an offence under this section if—(a) the person took all reasonable steps to comply with the notice, or(b) there is some other reasonable excuse for the failure to comply with it.49 Remedial orders(1) A court before which a person is convicted of an offence under section 48 in respect of a community protection notice may make whatever order the court thinks appropriate for ensuring that what the notice requires to be done is done.(2) An order under this section may in particular require the defendant—(a) to carry out specified work, or(b) to allow specified work to be carried out by or on behalf of a specified local authority.(3) To be specified under subsection (2)(b) a local authority must be—(a) the local authority that issued the community protection notice;(b) if the community protection notice was not issued by a local authority, the local authority (or, as the case may be, one of the local authorities) that could have issued it.(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	27PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 1 – Community protection notices Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4) A requirement imposed under subsection (2)(b) does not authorise the person carrying out the work to enter the defendant's home without the defendant's consent.But this does not prevent a defendant who fails to give that consent from being in breach of the court's order.(5) In subsection (4) “the defendant's home” means the house, flat, vehicle or other accommodation where the defendant—(a) usually lives, or(b) is living at the time when the work is or would be carried out.(6) If work is carried out under subsection (2)(b) and the local authority specified under that subsection issues a notice to the defaulter—(a) giving details of the work that was carried out, and(b) specifying an amount that is no more than the cost to the authority of having the work carried out,the defaulter is liable to the authority for that amount (subject to the outcome of any appeal under subsection (7)).(7) A person issued with a notice under subsection (6) may appeal to a magistrates' court, within the period of 21 days beginning with the day on which the notice was issued, on the ground that the amount specified under subsection (6)(b) is excessive.(8) A magistrates' court hearing an appeal under subsection (7) must—(a) confirm the amount, or(b) substitute a lower amount.50 Forfeiture of item used in commission of offence(1) A court before which a person is convicted of an offence under section 48 may order the forfeiture of any item that was used in the commission of the offence.(2) An order under this section may require a person in possession of the item to hand it over as soon as reasonably practicable—(a) to a constable, or(b) to a person employed by a local authority or designated by a local authority under section 53(1)(c).(3) An order under this section may require the item—(a) to be destroyed, or(b) to be disposed of in whatever way the order specifies.(4) Where an item ordered to be forfeited under this section is kept by or handed over to a constable, the police force of which the constable is a member must ensure that arrangements are made for its destruction or disposal, either—(a) in accordance with the order, or(b) if no arrangements are specified in the order, in whatever way seems appropriate to the police force.(a) 
28	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 1 – Community protection notices Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) Where an item ordered to be forfeited under this section is kept by or handed over to a person within subsection (2)(b), the local authority by whom the person is employed or was designated must ensure that arrangements are made for its destruction or disposal, either—(a) in accordance with the order, or(b) if no arrangements are specified in the order, in whatever way seems appropriate to the local authority.51 Seizure of item used in commission of offence(1) If a justice of the peace is satisfied on information on oath that there are reasonable grounds for suspecting—(a) that an offence under section 48 has been committed, and(b) that there is an item used in the commission of the offence on premises specified in the information,the justice may issue a warrant authorising any constable or designated person to enter the premises within 14 days from the date of issue of the warrant to seize the item.(2) In this section “designated person” means a person designated by a local authority under section 53(1)(c).(3) A constable or designated person may use reasonable force, if necessary, in executing a warrant under this section.(4) A constable or designated person who has seized an item under a warrant under this section—(a) may retain the item until any relevant criminal proceedings have been finally determined, if such proceedings are started before the end of the period of 28 days following the day on which the item was seized;(b) otherwise, must before the end of that period return the item to the person from whom it was seized.(5) In subsection (4) “relevant criminal proceedings” means proceedings for an offence under section 48 in the commission of which the item is alleged to have been used.52 Fixed penalty notices(1) An authorised person may issue a fixed penalty notice to anyone who that person has reason to believe has committed an offence under section 48.(2) In subsection (1) “authorised person” means a person on whom section 53 (or an enactment amended by that section) confers power to issue fixed penalty notices under this section.(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	29PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 1 – Community protection notices Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) A fixed penalty notice is a notice offering the person to whom it is issued the opportunity of discharging any liability to conviction for the offence by payment of a fixed penalty to a local authority specified in the notice.(4) The local authority specified under subsection (3) must be—(a) the local authority that issued the community protection notice to which the fixed penalty notice relates;(b) if the community protection notice was not issued by a local authority, the local authority (or, as the case may be, one of the local authorities) that could have issued it.(5) Where a person is issued with a notice under this section in respect of an offence—(a) no proceedings may be taken for the offence before the end of the period of 14 days following the date of the notice;(b) the person may not be convicted of the offence if the person pays the fixed penalty before the end of that period.(6) A fixed penalty notice must—(a) give reasonably detailed particulars of the circumstances alleged to constitute the offence;(b) state the period during which (because of subsection (5)(a)) proceedings will not be taken for the offence;(c) specify the amount of the fixed penalty;(d) state the name and address of the person to whom the fixed penalty may be paid;(e) specify permissible methods of payment.(7) An amount specified under subsection (6)(c) must not be more than £100.(8) A fixed penalty notice may specify two amounts under subsection (6)(c) and specify that, if the lower of those amounts is paid within a specified period (of less than 14 days), that is the amount of the fixed penalty.(9) Whatever other method may be specified under subsection (6)(e), payment of a fixed penalty may be made by pre-paying and posting to the person whose name is stated under subsection (6)(d), at the stated address, a letter containing the amount of the penalty (in cash or otherwise).(10) Where a letter is sent as mentioned in subsection (9), payment is regarded as having been made at the time at which that letter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post.(11) In any proceedings, a certificate that—(a) purports to be signed by or on behalf of the chief finance officer of the local authority concerned, and(b) states that payment of a fixed penalty was, or was not, received by the dated specified in the certificate,is evidence of the facts stated.(12) In this section “chief finance officer”, in relation to a local authority, means the person with responsibility for the authority's financial affairs.(1) 
30	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 1 – Community protection notices Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesWho may issue notices53 Authorised persons(1) A community protection notice or a fixed penalty notice may be issued by—(a) a constable;(b) the relevant local authority (see subsections (2) and (3));(c) a person designated by the relevant local authority for the purposes of this section.(2) For a community protection notice, “the relevant local authority” means the local authority (or, as the case may be, any of the local authorities) within whose area the conduct specified in the notice has, according to the notice, been taking place.(3) For a fixed penalty notice, “the relevant local authority” means the local authority (or, as the case may be, any of the local authorities) within whose area the offence in question is alleged to have taken place.(4) Only a person of a description specified in an order made by the Secretary of State for the purposes of subsection (1)(c) may be designated under that subsection.F5(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F5(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Supplemental54 Exemption from liability(1) A local authority exercising or purporting to exercise a power under section 47(2) is not liable to an occupier or owner of land for damages or otherwise (whether at common law or otherwise) arising out of anything done or omitted to be done in the exercise or purported exercise of that power.(2) A person carrying out work under section 47(2), or a person by or on whose behalf work is carried out under section 49(2)(b), is not liable to an occupier or owner of land for damages or otherwise (whether at common law or otherwise) arising out of anything done or omitted to be done in carrying out that work.(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	31PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 1 – Community protection notices Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply—(a) to an act or omission shown to have been in bad faith, or(b) to liability arising out of a failure to exercise due care and attention.(4) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply so as to prevent an award of damages made in respect of an act or omission on the ground that the act or omission was unlawful by virtue of section 6(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998.(5) This section does not affect any other exemption from liability (whether at common law or otherwise).55 Issuing of notices(1) A notice under this Chapter may be issued to a person by—(a) handing it to the person,(b) leaving it at the person's proper address, or(c) sending it by post to the person at that address.(2) A notice under this Chapter to a body corporate may be issued to the secretary or clerk of that body.(3) A notice under this Chapter to a partnership may be issued to a partner or a person who has the control or management of the partnership business.(4) For the purposes of this section and of section 7 of the Interpretation Act 1978 (service of documents by post) in its application to this section, the proper address of a person is the person's last known address, except that—(a) in the case of a body corporate or its secretary or clerk, it is the address of the body's registered or principal office;(b) in the case of a partnership or person having the control or the management of the partnership business, it is the principal office of the partnership.(5) For the purposes of subsection (4) the principal office of a company registered outside the United Kingdom, or of a partnership carrying on business outside the United Kingdom, is its principal office within the United Kingdom.(6) If a person has specified an address in the United Kingdom, other than the person's proper address within the meaning of subsection (4), as the one at which the person or someone on the person's behalf will accept notices of the same description as a notice under this Chapter, that address is also treated for the purposes of this section and section 7 of the Interpretation Act 1978 as the person's proper address.
32	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 1 – Community protection notices Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes56 Guidance(1) The Secretary of State may issue—(a) guidance to chief officers of police about the exercise, by officers under their direction or control, of those officers' functions under this Chapter;(b) guidance to local authorities about the exercise of their functions under this Chapter and those of persons designated under section 53(1)(c).(2) The Secretary of State may revise any guidance issued under this section.(3) The Secretary of State must arrange for any guidance issued or revised under this section to be published.57 Interpretation of Chapter 1In this Chapter—“conduct” includes a failure to act; “local authority” means—(a) in relation to England, a district council, a county council for an area for which there is no district council, a London borough council, the Common Council of the City of London or the Council of the Isles of Scilly;(b) in relation to Wales, a county council or a county borough council; “owner”, in relation to premises, means—(a) a person (other than a mortgagee not in possession) entitled to dispose of the fee simple of the premises, whether in possession or in reversion;(b) a person who holds or is entitled to the rents and profits of the premises under a lease that (when granted) was for a term of not less then 3 years;“premises” includes any land.58 Saving and transitional provision(1) The repeal or amendment by this Act of provisions about any of the notices specified in subsection (2) does not apply in relation to—(a) a notice specified in that subsection served before the commencement day;(b) anything done in connection with such a notice.(2) The notices are—(a) a litter abatement notice under section 92 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990;(b) a litter clearing notice under section 92A of that Act;(c) a street litter control notice under section 93 of that Act;(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	33PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited orders Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(d) a defacement removal notice under section 48 of the Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003.(3) A community protection notice that contains no requirement that could not have been contained in one of the notices specified in subsection (2) may be issued in respect of conduct before the commencement day.(4) Subsection (3) applies only during the period of 3 months beginning with the commencement day.(5) In this section “commencement day” means the day on which this Chapter comes into force.CHAPTER 2PUBLIC SPACES PROTECTION ORDERS [F6AND EXPEDITED ORDERS]Public spaces protection orders [F7and expedited orders]59 Power to make [F8public spaces protection] orders(1) A local authority may make a public spaces protection order if satisfied on reasonable grounds that two conditions are met.(2) The first condition is that—(a) activities carried on in a public place within the authority's area have had a detrimental effect on the quality of life of those in the locality, or(b) it is likely that activities will be carried on in a public place within that area and that they will have such an effect.(3) The second condition is that the effect, or likely effect, of the activities—(a) is, or is likely to be, of a persistent or continuing nature,(b) is, or is likely to be, such as to make the activities unreasonable, and(c) justifies the restrictions imposed by the notice.(a) 
34	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited ordersDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4) A public spaces protection order is an order that identifies the public place referred to in subsection (2) (“the restricted area”) and—(a) prohibits specified things being done in the restricted area,(b) requires specified things to be done by persons carrying on specified activities in that area, or(c) does both of those things.(5) The only prohibitions or requirements that may be imposed are ones that are reasonable to impose in order—(a) to prevent the detrimental effect referred to in subsection (2) from continuing, occurring or recurring, or(b) to reduce that detrimental effect or to reduce the risk of its continuance, occurrence or recurrence.(6) A prohibition or requirement may be framed—(a) so as to apply to all persons, or only to persons in specified categories, or to all persons except those in specified categories;(b) so as to apply at all times, or only at specified times, or at all times except those specified;(c) so as to apply in all circumstances, or only in specified circumstances, or in all circumstances except those specified.(7) A public spaces protection order must—(a) identify the activities referred to in subsection (2);(b) explain the effect of section 63 (where it applies) and section 67;(c) specify the period for which the order has effect.(8) A public spaces protection order must be published in accordance with regulations made by the Secretary of State.[F959A  Power to make expedited public spaces protection orders(1) A local authority may make an expedited public spaces protection order (an “expedited order”) in relation to a public place within the local authority’s area if satisfied on reasonable grounds that three conditions are met.(2) The first condition is that the public place is in the vicinity of—(a) a school in the local authority’s area, or(b) a site in the local authority’s area where, or from which—(i) vaccines are provided to members of the public by, or pursuant to arrangements with, an NHS body, or(ii) test and trace services are provided.(i) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	35PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited orders Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesThe reference in paragraph (b)(i) to arrangements includes arrangements made by the NHS body in the exercise of functions of another person by virtue of any provision of the National Health Service Act 2006.(3) The second condition is that activities carried on, or likely to be carried on, in the public place by one or more individuals in the course of a protest or demonstration have had, or are likely to have, the effect of—(a) harassing or intimidating members of staff or volunteers at the school or site,(b) harassing or intimidating persons using the services of the school or site,(c) impeding the provision of services by staff or volunteers at the school or site, or(d) impeding access by persons seeking to use the services of the school or site.(4) The third condition is that the effect or likely effect mentioned in subsection (3)—(a) is, or is likely to be, of a persistent or continuing nature,(b) is, or is likely to be, such as to make the activities unreasonable, and(c) justifies the restrictions imposed by the order.(5) An expedited order is an order that identifies the public place referred to in subsection (1) (“the restricted area”) and—(a) prohibits specified things being done in the restricted area,(b) requires specified things to be done by persons carrying on specified activities in that area, or(c) does both of those things.(6) The only prohibitions or requirements that may be imposed are ones that are reasonable to impose in order—(a) to prevent the harassment, intimidation or impediment referred to in subsection (3) from continuing, occurring or recurring, or(b) to reduce that harassment, intimidation or impediment or to reduce the risk of its continuance, occurrence or recurrence.(7) A prohibition or requirement may be framed—(a) so as to apply to all persons, or only to persons in specified categories, or to all persons except those in specified categories;(b) so as to apply at all times, or only at specified times, or at all times except those specified;(c) so as to apply in all circumstances, or only in specified circumstances, or in all circumstances except those specified.(8) An expedited order must—(a) identify the activities referred to in subsection (3);(b) explain the effect of section 63 (where it applies) and section 67;(c) specify the period for which the order has effect.(9) An expedited order may not be made in relation to a public place if that place (or any part of it) is or has been the subject of an expedited order (“the earlier order”), unless the period specified in subsection (11) has expired.(10) In subsection (9) the second reference to “an expedited order” is to be read as including a reference to a public spaces protection order (made after the day on which this section(1) 
36	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited ordersDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changescomes into force) which neither prohibited nor required anything that could not have been prohibited or required by an expedited order.(11) The period specified in this subsection is the period of a year beginning with the day on which the earlier order ceased to have effect.(12) An expedited order must be published in accordance with regulations made by the Secretary of State.(13) For the purposes of subsection (2), a public place that is coextensive with, includes, or is wholly or partly within, a school or site is regarded as being “in the vicinity of” that school or site.(14) In this section references to a “school” are to be read as including a 16 to 19 Academy.(15) In this section “test and trace services” means—(a) in relation to England, services of the programme known as NHS Test and Trace;(b) in relation to Wales, services of the programme known as Test, Trace, Protect.]60 Duration of [F10public spaces protection] orders(1) A public spaces protection order may not have effect for a period of more than 3 years, unless extended under this section.(2) Before the time when a public spaces protection order is due to expire, the local authority that made the order may extend the period for which it has effect if satisfied on reasonable grounds that doing so is necessary to prevent—(a) occurrence or recurrence after that time of the activities identified in the order, or(b) an increase in the frequency or seriousness of those activities after that time.(3) An extension under this section—(a) may not be for a period of more than 3 years;(b) must be published in accordance with regulations made by the Secretary of State.(4) A public spaces protection order may be extended under this section more than once.
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	37PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited orders Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F1160A Duration of expedited orders(1) An expedited order may not have effect for a period of more than 6 months.(2) Subject to subsection (1), the local authority that made an expedited order may, before the time when the order is due to expire, extend the period for which the order has effect if satisfied on reasonable grounds that doing so is necessary to prevent—(a) occurrence or recurrence after that time of the activities identified in the order, or(b) an increase in the frequency or seriousness of those activities after that time.(3) Where a local authority has made an expedited order, the authority may, at any time before the order is due to expire, reduce the period for which the order is to have effect if satisfied on reasonable grounds that the reduced period will be sufficient having regard to the degree of risk of an occurrence, recurrence or increase such as is mentioned in subsection (2)(a) or (b).(4) An extension or reduction under this section of the period for which an order has effect must be published in accordance with regulations made by the Secretary of State.(5) An expedited order may be extended or reduced under this section more than once.]61 Variation and discharge of orders(1) Where a public spaces protection order [F12or expedited order] is in force, the local authority that made the order may vary it—(a) by increasing or reducing the restricted area;(b) by altering or removing a prohibition or requirement included in the order, or adding a new one.(2) A local authority may [F13under subsection (1)(a) make a variation to a public spaces protection order] that results in the order applying to an area to which it did not previously apply only if the conditions in section 59(2) and (3) are met as regards activities in that area.[F14(2A) A local authority may under subsection (1)(a) make a variation to an expedited order that results in the order applying to an area to which it did not previously apply only if the conditions in section 59A(2) to (4) are met as regards that area.](3) A local authority may make a variation under subsection (1)(b) that makes a prohibition or requirement more extensive, or adds a new one, only if the prohibitions and requirements imposed by the order as varied are ones that section 59(5) [F15or 59A(6) (as the case may be)] allows to be imposed.(4) A public spaces protection order [F16or expedited order] may be discharged by the local authority that made it.(5) Where an order is varied, the order as varied must be published in accordance with regulations made by the Secretary of State.(1) 
38	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited ordersDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(6) Where an order is discharged, a notice identifying the order and stating the date when it ceases to have effect must be published in accordance with regulations made by the Secretary of State.Prohibition on consuming alcohol62 Premises etc to which alcohol prohibition does not apply(1) A prohibition in a public spaces protection order [F17or expedited order] on consuming alcohol does not apply to—(a) premises (other than council-operated licensed premises) authorised by a premises licence to be used for the supply of alcohol;(b) premises authorised by a club premises certificate to be used by the club for the supply of alcohol;(c) a place within the curtilage of premises within paragraph (a) or (b);(d) premises which by virtue of Part 5 of the Licensing Act 2003 may at the relevant time be used for the supply of alcohol or which, by virtue of that Part, could have been so used within the 30 minutes before that time;(e) a place where facilities or activities relating to the sale or consumption of alcohol are at the relevant time permitted by virtue of a permission granted under section 115E of the Highways Act 1980 (highway-related uses) [F18or by virtue of a pavement licence under section 1 of the Business and Planning Act 2020].(2) A prohibition in a public spaces protection order [F19or an expedited order] on consuming alcohol does not apply to council-operated licensed premises—(a) when the premises are being used for the supply of alcohol, or(b) within 30 minutes after the end of a period during which the premises have been used for the supply of alcohol.(3) In this section—  “club premises certificate” has the meaning given by section 60 of the Licensing Act 2003;“premises licence” has the meaning given by section 11 of that Act;
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	39PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited orders Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“supply of alcohol” has the meaning given by section 14 of that Act.(4) For the purposes of this section, premises are “council-operated licensed premises” if they are authorised by a premises licence to be used for the supply of alcohol and—(a) the licence is held by a local authority in whose area the premises (or part of the premises) are situated, or(b) the licence is held by another person but the premises are occupied by a local authority or are managed by or on behalf of a local authority.63 Consumption of alcohol in breach of prohibition in order(1) This section applies where a constable or an authorised person reasonably believes that a person (P)—(a) is or has been consuming alcohol in breach of a prohibition in a public spaces protection order [F20or an expedited order], or(b) intends to consume alcohol in circumstances in which doing so would be a breach of such a prohibition.In this section “authorised person” means a person authorised for the purposes of this section by the local authority that made the F21... order (or authorised by virtue of section 69(1)).(2) The constable or authorised person may require P—(a) not to consume, in breach of the order, alcohol or anything which the constable or authorised person reasonably believes to be alcohol;(b) to surrender anything in P's possession which is, or which the constable or authorised person reasonably believes to be, alcohol or a container for alcohol.(3) A constable or an authorised person who imposes a requirement under subsection (2) must tell P that failing without reasonable excuse to comply with the requirement is an offence.(4) A requirement imposed by an authorised person under subsection (2) is not valid if the person—(a) is asked by P to show evidence of his or her authorisation, and(b) fails to do so.(5) A constable or an authorised person may dispose of anything surrendered under subsection (2)(b) in whatever way he or she thinks appropriate.(1) 
40	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited ordersDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(6) A person who fails without reasonable excuse to comply with a requirement imposed on him or her under subsection (2) commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 2 on the standard scale.Restrictions on public rights of way64 Orders restricting public right of way over highway(1) A local authority may not make a public spaces protection order [F22or expedited order] that restricts the public right of way over a highway without considering—(a) the likely effect of making the order on the occupiers of premises adjoining or adjacent to the highway;(b) the likely effect of making the order on other persons in the locality;(c) in a case where the highway constitutes a through route, the availability of a reasonably convenient alternative route.[F23(1A) Before making a public spaces protection order that restricts the public right of way over a highway, a local authority must take the prior consultation steps (see subsection (2)).(1B) A local authority may not make an expedited order that restricts the public right of way over a highway unless it—(a) takes the prior consultation steps before making the order, or(b) takes the subsequent consultation steps (see subsection (2A)) as soon as reasonably practicable after making the order.](2) [F24To take the “prior consultation steps” in relation to an order means to]—(a) notify potentially affected persons of the proposed order,(b) inform those persons how they can see a copy of the proposed order,(c) notify those persons of the period within which they may make representations about the proposed order, and(d) consider any representations made.(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	41PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited orders Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesIn this subsection “potentially affected persons” means occupiers of premises adjacent to or adjoining the highway, and any other persons in the locality who are likely to be affected by the proposed order.[F25(2A) To take the “subsequent consultation steps” in relation to an expedited order means to—(a) notify potentially affected persons of the order,(b) invite those persons to make representations within a specified period about the terms and effects of the order,(c) inform those persons how they can see a copy of the order, and(d) consider any representations made.The definition of “potentially affected persons” in subsection (2) applies to this subsection as if the reference there to “the proposed order” were to “the order”.](3) Before a local authority makes a public spaces protection order restricting the public right of way over a highway that is also within the area of another local authority, it must consult that other authority if it thinks it appropriate to do so.[F26(3B) Where a local authority proposes to make an expedited order restricting the public right of way over a highway that is also within the area of another local authority it must, if it thinks appropriate to do so, consult that other authority before, or as soon as reasonably practicable after, making the order.](4) A public spaces protection order [F27or expedited order] may not restrict the public right of way over a highway for the occupiers of premises adjoining or adjacent to the highway.(5) A public spaces protection order [F28or expedited order] may not restrict the public right of way over a highway that is the only or principal means of access to a dwelling.(6) In relation to a highway that is the only or principal means of access to premises used for business or recreational purposes, a public spaces protection order [F29or expedited order] may not restrict the public right of way over the highway during periods when the premises are normally used for those purposes.(7) A public spaces protection order [F30or expedited order] that restricts the public right of way over a highway may authorise the installation, operation and maintenance of a barrier or barriers for enforcing the restriction.(8) A local authority may install, operate and maintain barriers authorised under subsection (7).(9) A highway over which the public right of way is restricted by a public spaces protection order [F31or expedited order] does not cease to be regarded as a highway by reason of the restriction (or by reason of any barrier authorised under subsection (7)).(10) In this section—  “dwelling” means a building or part of a building occupied, or intended to be occupied, as a separate dwelling;  “highway” has the meaning given by section 328 of the Highways Act 1980.  
42	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited ordersDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes65 Categories of highway over which public right of way may not be restricted(1) A public spaces protection order [F32or an expedited order] may not restrict the public right of way over a highway that is—(a) a special road;(b) a trunk road;(c) a classified or principal road;(d) a strategic road;(e) a highway in England of a description prescribed by regulations made by the Secretary of State;(f) a highway in Wales of a description prescribed by regulations made by the Welsh Ministers.(2) In this section—“classified road”, “special road” and “trunk road” have the meaning given by section 329(1) of the Highways Act 1980;“highway” has the meaning given by section 328 of that Act;“principal road” has the meaning given by section 12 of that Act (and see section 13 of that Act);“strategic road” has the meaning given by section 60(4) of the Traffic Management Act 2004.
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	43PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited orders Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesValidity of orders66 Challenging the validity of orders(1) An interested person may apply to the High Court to question the validity of—(a) a public spaces protection order [F33or an expedited order], or(b) a variation of a public spaces protection order [F33or an expedited order].“Interested person” means an individual who lives in the restricted area or who regularly works in or visits that area.(2) The grounds on which an application under this section may be made are—(a) that the local authority did not have power to make the order or variation, or to include particular prohibitions or requirements imposed by the order (or by the order as varied);(b) that a requirement under this Chapter was not complied with in relation to the order or variation.(3) An application under this section must be made within the period of 6 weeks beginning with the date on which the order or variation is made.(4) On an application under this section the High Court may by order suspend the operation of the order or variation, or any of the prohibitions or requirements imposed by the order (or by the order as varied), until the final determination of the proceedings.(5) If on an application under this section the High Court is satisfied that—(a) the local authority did not have power to make the order or variation, or to include particular prohibitions or requirements imposed by the order (or by the order as varied), or(b) the interests of the applicant have been substantially prejudiced by a failure to comply with a requirement under this Chapter,the Court may quash the order or variation, or any of the prohibitions or requirements imposed by the order (or by the order as varied).(6) A public spaces protection order [F34or an expedited order], or any of the prohibitions or requirements imposed by the order (or by the order as varied), may be suspended under subsection (4) or quashed under subsection (5)—(a) generally, or(b) so far as necessary for the protection of the interests of the applicant.(7) An interested person may not challenge the validity of a public spaces protection order [F35or an expedited order], or of a variation of [F36such an] order, in any legal proceedings (either before or after it is made) except—(1) 
44	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited ordersDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) under this section, or(b) under subsection (3) of section 67 (where the interested person is charged with an offence under that section).Failure to comply with orders67 Offence of failing to comply with order(1) It is an offence for a person without reasonable excuse—(a) to do anything that the person is prohibited from doing by a public spaces protection order [F37or an expedited order], or(b) to fail to comply with a requirement to which the person is subject under a public spaces protection order [F37or an expedited order].(2) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.(3) A person does not commit an offence under this section by failing to comply with a prohibition or requirement that the local authority did not have power to include in the public spaces protection order [F38or expedited order].(4) Consuming alcohol in breach of a public spaces protection order [F39or an expedited order] is not an offence under this section (but see section 63).
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	45PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited orders Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes68 Fixed penalty notices(1) A constable or an authorised person may issue a fixed penalty notice to anyone he or she has reason to believe has committed an offence under section 63 or 67 in relation to a public spaces protection order [F40or an expedited order].(2) A fixed penalty notice is a notice offering the person to whom it is issued the opportunity of discharging any liability to conviction for the offence by payment of a fixed penalty to a local authority specified in the notice.(3) The local authority specified under subsection (2) must be the one that made the public spaces protection order [F41or expedited order].(4) Where a person is issued with a notice under this section in respect of an offence—(a) no proceedings may be taken for the offence before the end of the period of 14 days following the date of the notice;(b) the person may not be convicted of the offence if the person pays the fixed penalty before the end of that period.(5) A fixed penalty notice must—(a) give reasonably detailed particulars of the circumstances alleged to constitute the offence;(b) state the period during which (because of subsection (4)(a)) proceedings will not be taken for the offence;(c) specify the amount of the fixed penalty;(d) state the name and address of the person to whom the fixed penalty may be paid;(e) specify permissible methods of payment.(6) An amount specified under subsection (5)(c) must not be more than £100.(7) A fixed penalty notice may specify two amounts under subsection (5)(c) and specify that, if the lower of those amounts is paid within a specified period (of less than 14 days), that is the amount of the fixed penalty.(8) Whatever other method may be specified under subsection (5)(e), payment of a fixed penalty may be made by pre-paying and posting to the person whose name is stated under subsection (5)(d), at the stated address, a letter containing the amount of the penalty (in cash or otherwise).(9) Where a letter is sent as mentioned in subsection (8), payment is regarded as having been made at the time at which that letter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post.(10) In any proceedings, a certificate that—(a) purports to be signed by or on behalf of the chief finance officer of the local authority concerned, and(b) states that payment of a fixed penalty was, or was not, received by the dated specified in the certificate,is evidence of the facts stated.(11) In this section—  “authorised person” means a person authorised for the purposes of this section by the local authority that made the order (or authorised by virtue of section 69(2));  
46	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited ordersDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes  “chief finance officer”, in relation to a local authority, means the person with responsibility for the authority's financial affairs.SupplementalF4269	Powers of community support officers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .70 ByelawsA byelaw that prohibits, by the creation of an offence, an activity regulated by a public spaces protection order [F43or an expedited order] is of no effect in relation to the restricted area during the currency of the order.71 Bodies other than local authorities with statutory functions in relation to land(1) The Secretary of State may by order—(a) designate a person or body (other than a local authority) that has power to make byelaws in relation to particular land, and(b) specify land in England to which the power relates.(2) This Chapter has effect as if—(a) a person or body designated under subsection (1) (a “designated person”) were a local authority, and(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	47PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited orders Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) land specified under that subsection were within its area.But references in the rest of this section to a local authority are to a local authority that is not a designated person.(3) The only prohibitions or requirements that may be imposed in a public spaces protection order [F44or an expedited order] made by a designated person are ones that it has power to impose (or would, but for section 70, have power to impose) by making a byelaw in respect of the restricted area.(4) A public spaces protection order [F44or an expedited order] made by a designated person may not include provision regulating, in relation to a particular public space, an activity that is already regulated in relation to that space by a public spaces protection order [F44or an expedited order] made by a local authority.(5) Where a public spaces protection order [F44or an expedited order] made by a local authority regulates, in relation to a particular public space, an activity that a public spaces protection order [F44or an expedited order] made by a designated person already regulates, the order made by the designated person ceases to have that effect.(6) If a person or body that may be designated under subsection (1)(a) gives a notice in writing under this subsection, in respect of land in relation to which it has power to make byelaws, to a local authority in whose area the land is situated—(a) no part of the land may form, or fall within, the restricted area of any public spaces protection order [F45or expedited order] made by the local authority;(b) if any part of the land—(i) forms the restricted area of a public spaces protection order [F46, or an expedited order,] already made by the local authority, or(ii) falls within such an area,the order has ceases to have effect (where sub-paragraph (i) applies), or has effect as if the restricted area did not include the land in question (where sub- paragraph (ii) applies).72 [F47Public spaces protection orders:] Convention rights, consultation, publicity and notification(1) A local authority, in deciding—(a) whether to make a public spaces protection order (under section 59) and if so what it should include,(a) 
48	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited ordersDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) whether to extend the period for which a public spaces protection order has effect (under section 60) and if so for how long,(c) whether to vary a public spaces protection order (under section 61) and if so how, or(d) whether to discharge a public spaces protection order (under section 61),must have particular regard to the rights of freedom of expression and freedom of assembly set out in articles 10 and 11 of the Convention.(2) In subsection (1) “Convention” has the meaning given by section 21(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998.(3) A local authority must carry out the necessary consultation and the necessary publicity, and the necessary notification (if any), before—(a) making a public spaces protection order,(b) extending the period for which a public spaces protection order has effect, or(c) varying or discharging a public spaces protection order.(4) In subsection (3)—“the necessary consultation” means consulting with—(a) the chief officer of police, and the local policing body, for the police area that includes the restricted area;(b) whatever community representatives the local authority thinks it appropriate to consult;(c) the owner or occupier of land within the restricted area; “the necessary publicity” means—(a) in the case of a proposed order or variation, publishing the text of it;(b) in the case of a proposed extension or discharge, publicising the proposal;  “the necessary notification” means notifying the following authorities of the proposed order, extension, variation or discharge—(a) the parish council or community council (if any) for the area that includes the restricted area;(b) in the case of a public spaces protection order made or to be made by a district council in England, the county council (if any) for the area that includes the restricted area.(5) The requirement to consult with the owner or occupier of land within the restricted area—(a) does not apply to land that is owned and occupied by the local authority;(b) applies only if, or to the extent that, it is reasonably practicable to consult the owner or occupier of the land.(6) In the case of a person or body designated under section 71, the necessary consultation also includes consultation with the local authority which (ignoring subsection (2) of that section) is the authority for the area that includes the restricted area.(7) In relation to a variation of a public spaces protection order that would increase the restricted area, the restricted area for the purposes of this section is the increased area.(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	49PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited orders Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes[F4872A Expedited orders: Convention rights and consents(1) A local authority, in deciding—(a) whether to make an expedited order (under section 59A) and if so what it should include,(b) whether to extend or reduce the period for which an expedited order has effect (under section 60A) and if so by how much,(c) whether to vary an expedited order (under section 61) and if so how, or(d) whether to discharge an expedited order (under section 61),must have particular regard to the rights of freedom of expression and freedom of assembly set out in articles 10 and 11 of the Convention.(2) In subsection (1) “Convention” has the meaning given by section 21(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998.(3) A local authority must obtain the necessary consents before—(a) making an expedited order,(b) extending or reducing the period for which an expedited order has effect, or(c) varying or discharging an expedited order.(4) If the order referred to in subsection (3) was made, or is proposed to be made, in reliance on section 59A(2)(a), “the necessary consents” means the consent of—(a) the chief officer of police for the police area that includes the restricted area, and(b) a person authorised (whether in specific or general terms) by the appropriate authority for the school or 16 to 19 Academy.(5) If the order referred to in subsection (3) was made, or is proposed to be made, in reliance on section 59A(2)(b), “the necessary consents” means the consent of—(a) the chief officer of police for the police area that includes the restricted area, and(b) a person authorised by the appropriate NHS authority.(6) In this section—“appropriate authority” means—(a) in relation to a school maintained by a local authority, the governing body;(b) in relation to any other school or a 16 to 19 Academy, the proprietor; “appropriate NHS authority” means—(a) if the order was made, or is proposed to be made, in reliance on sub- paragraph (i) of section 59A(2)(b), the NHS body mentioned in that sub- paragraph;(a) 
50	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited ordersDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) if the order was made, or is proposed to be made, in reliance on sub- paragraph (ii) of section 59A(2)(b) and the site is in England, the UK Health Security Agency;(c) if the order was made, or is proposed to be made, in reliance on that sub- paragraph and the site is in Wales, the Local Health Board for the area in which the site is located.(7) In this section “proprietor”, in relation to a school or a 16 to 19 Academy, has the meaning given in section 579(1) of the Education Act 1996.72B	Consultation and notifications after making expedited order(1) A local authority must carry out the necessary consultation as soon as reasonably practicable after making an expedited order.(2) In subsection (1) “necessary consultation” means consulting with the following about the terms and effects of the order—(a) the chief officer of police, and the local policing body, for the police area that includes the restricted area;(b) whatever community representatives the local authority thinks it appropriate to consult;(c) the owner or occupier of land within the restricted area.(3) A local authority must carry out the necessary notification (if any) as soon as reasonably practicable after—(a) making an expedited order,(b) extending or reducing the period for which an expedited order has effect, or(c) varying or discharging an expedited order.(4) In subsection (3) “necessary notification” means notifying the following of the extension, reduction, variation or discharge—(a) the parish council or community council (if any) for the area that includes the restricted area;(b) in the case of an expedited order made by a district council in England, the county council (if any) for the area that includes the restricted area;(c) the owner or occupier of land within the restricted area.(5) The requirement to notify the owner or occupier of land within the restricted area—(a) does not apply to land that is owned or occupied by the local authority;(b) applies only if, and to the extent that, it is reasonably practicable to notify the owner or occupier of the land.](a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	51PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited orders Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes73 Guidance(1) The Secretary of State may issue—(a) guidance to local authorities about the exercise of their functions under this Chapter and those of persons authorised by local authorities under section 63 or 68;(b) guidance to chief officers of police about the exercise, by officers under their direction or control, of those officers' functions under this Part.(2) The Secretary of State may revise any guidance issued under this section.(3) The Secretary of State must arrange for any guidance issued or revised under this section to be published.74 Interpretation of Chapter 2(1) In this Chapter—  [F49“16 to 19 Academy” has the meaning given by section 1B of the Academies Act 2010;]  “alcohol” has the meaning given by section 191 of the Licensing Act 2003; “community representative”, in relation to a public spaces protection order that a local authority proposes to make or has made, means any individual orbody appearing to the authority to represent the views of people who live in, work in or visit the restricted area;[F49“expedited order” has the meaning given by section 59A(1);] “local authority” means—(a) in relation to England, a district council, a county council for an area for which there is no district council, a London borough council, the Common Council of the City of London (in its capacity as a local authority) or the Council of the Isles of Scilly;(b) in relation to Wales, a county council or a county borough council;  [F49“Local Health Board” means a Local Health Board established under section 11 of the National Health Service (Wales) Act 2006;]  [F49“NHS body” has the meaning given in section 275 of the National Health Service Act 2006;]  “public place” means any place to which the public or any section of the public has access, on payment or otherwise, as of right or by virtue of express or implied permission;[F50“restricted area”—
52	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 2 – Public spaces protection orders and expedited ordersDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) in relation to a public spaces protection order, has the meaning given by section 59(4);(b) in relation to an expedited order, has the meaning given by section 59A(5).][F49“school” has the meaning given by section 4 of the Education Act 1996.](2) For the purposes of this Chapter, a public spaces protection order “regulates” an activity if the activity is—(a) prohibited by virtue of section 59(4)(a), or  (b) subjected to requirements by virtue of section 59(4)(b), whether or not for all persons and at all times.[F51(3) For the purposes of this Chapter, an expedited order “regulates” an activity if the activity is—(a) prohibited by virtue of section 59A(5)(a), or  (b) subjected to requirements by virtue of section 59A(5)(b), whether or not for all persons and at all times.]75 Saving and transitional provision(1) The repeal or amendment by this Act of provisions about any of the orders specified in subsection (2) does not apply in relation to—(a) an order specified in that subsection made before the commencement day;(b) anything done in connection with such an order.(2) The orders are—(a) a gating order under Part 8A of the Highways Act 1980;(b) an order under section 13(2) of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (power of local authority to designate public place for restrictions on alcohol consumption);(c) a dog control order under Chapter 1 of Part 6 of the Clean Neighbourhoods and Environment Act 2005.(3) At the end of the period of 3 years beginning with the commencement day—(a) this Chapter has effect in relation to any order specified in subsection (2) that is still in force as if the provisions of the order were provisions of a public spaces protection order;(b) subsection (1) ceases to have effect.(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	53PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesThis Part, as it applies by virtue of paragraph (a), has effect with any necessary modifications (and with any modifications specified in an order under section 185(7)).(4) In this section “commencement day” means the day on which this Chapter comes into force.CHAPTER 3CLOSURE OF PREMISES ASSOCIATED WITH NUISANCE OR DISORDER ETCClosure notices76 Power to issue closure notices(1) A police officer of at least the rank of inspector, or the local authority, may issue a closure notice if satisfied on reasonable grounds—(a) that the use of particular premises has resulted, or (if the notice is not issued) is likely soon to result, in nuisance to members of the public, or(b) that there has been, or (if the notice is not issued) is likely soon to be, disorder near those premises associated with the use of those premises,and that the notice is necessary to prevent the nuisance or disorder from continuing, recurring or occurring.(2) A closure notice is a notice prohibiting access to the premises for a period specified in the notice.For the maximum period, see section 77.(3) A closure notice may prohibit access—(a) by all persons except those specified, or by all persons except those of a specified description;(b) at all times, or at all times except those specified;(c) in all circumstances, or in all circumstances except those specified.(4) A closure notice may not prohibit access by—(a) people who habitually live on the premises, or(b) the owner of the premises,and accordingly they must be specified under subsection (3)(a).(5) A closure notice must—(a) identify the premises;(b) explain the effect of the notice;(c) state that failure to comply with the notice is an offence;(d) state that an application will be made under section 80 for a closure order;(e) specify when and where the application will be heard;(a) 
54	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(f) explain the effect of a closure order;(g) give information about the names of, and means of contacting, persons and organisations in the area that provide advice about housing and legal matters.(6) A closure notice may be issued only if reasonable efforts have been made to inform—(a) people who live on the premises (whether habitually or not), and(b) any person who has control of or responsibility for the premises or who has an interest in them,that the notice is going to be issued.(7) Before issuing a closure notice the police officer or local authority must ensure that any body or individual the officer or authority thinks appropriate has been consulted.(8) The Secretary of State may by regulations specify premises or descriptions of premises in relation to which a closure notice may not be issued.77 Duration of closure notices(1) The maximum period that may be specified in a closure notice is 24 hours unless subsection (2) applies.(2) The maximum period is 48 hours—(a) if, in the case of a notice issued by a police officer, the officer is of at least the rank of superintendent, or(b) if, in the case of a notice issued by a local authority, the notice is signed by the chief executive officer of the authority or a person designated by him or her for the purposes of this subsection.(3) In calculating when the period of 48 hours ends, Christmas Day is to be disregarded.(4) The period specified in a closure notice to which subsection (2) does not apply may be extended by up to 24 hours—(a) if, in the case of a notice issued by a police officer, an extension notice is issued by an officer of at least the rank of superintendent, or(b) if, in the case of a notice issued by a local authority, the authority issues an extension notice signed by the chief executive officer of the authority or a person designated by the chief executive officer for the purposes of this subsection.(5) An extension notice is a notice which—(a) identifies the closure notice to which it relates, and(b) specifies the period of the extension.[F52(6) In this section “chief executive officer” means—(a) in relation to a local authority in England, the authority's head of paid service designated under section 4 of the Local Government and Housing Act 1989;(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	55PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) in relation to a local authority in Wales, the authority's chief executive appointed under section 54 of the Local Government and Elections (Wales) Act 2021.]78 Cancellation or variation of closure notices(1) This section applies where a closure notice is in force and the relevant officer or authority is no longer satisfied as mentioned in section 76(1), either—(a) as regards the premises as a whole, or(b) as regards a particular part of the premises.(2) In a case within subsection (1)(a) the relevant officer or authority must issue a cancellation notice.A cancellation notice is a notice cancelling the closure notice.(3) In a case within subsection (1)(b) the relevant officer or authority must issue a variation notice.A variation notice is a notice varying the closure notice so that it does not apply to the part of the premises referred to in subsection (1)(b).(4) A cancellation notice or a variation notice that relates to a closure notice which was—(a) issued by a local authority, and(b) signed as mentioned in section 77(2)(b),must be signed by the person who signed the closure notice (or, if that person is not available, by another person who could have signed as mentioned in section 77(2)(b)).(5) A cancellation notice or a variation notice that relates to a closure notice which was—(a) issued by a local authority, and(b) extended under section 77(4)(b),must be signed by the person who signed the extension notice (or, if that person is not available, by another person who could have signed the extension notice).(6) In this section “the relevant officer or authority” means—(a) in the case of a closure notice issued by a police officer and not extended under section 77(4)(a), that officer (or, if that officer is not available, another officer of the same or higher rank);(b) in the case of a closure notice issued by a police officer and extended under section 77(4)(a), the officer who issued the extension notice (or, if that officer is not available, another officer of the same or higher rank);(c) in the case of a closure notice issued by a local authority, that authority.(a) 
56	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes79 Service of notices(1) A closure notice, an extension notice, a cancellation notice or a variation notice must be served by—(a) a constable, in the case of a notice issued by a police officer;(b) a representative of the authority that issued the notice, in the case of a notice issued by a local authority.(2) The constable or local authority representative must if possible—(a) fix a copy of the notice to at least one prominent place on the premises,(b) fix a copy of the notice to each normal means of access to the premises,(c) fix a copy of the notice to any outbuildings that appear to the constable or representative to be used with or as part of the premises,(d) give a copy of the notice to at least one person who appears to the constable or representative to have control of or responsibility for the premises, and(e) give a copy of the notice to the people who live on the premises and to any person who does not live there but was informed (under section 76(6)) that the notice was going to be issued.(3) If the constable or local authority representative reasonably believes, at the time of serving the notice, that there are persons occupying another part of the building or other structure in which the premises are situated whose access to that part will be impeded if a closure order is made under section 80, the constable or representative must also if possible serve the notice on those persons.(4) The constable or local authority representative may enter any premises, using reasonable force if necessary, for the purposes of complying with subsection (2)(a).(5) In this section “representative”, in relation to a local authority, means—(a) an employee of the authority, or(b) a person, or employee or a person, acting on behalf of the authority.Closure orders80 Power of court to make closure orders(1) Whenever a closure notice is issued an application must be made to a magistrates' court for a closure order (unless the notice has been cancelled under section 78).(2) An application for a closure order must be made—(a) by a constable, if the closure notice was issued by a police officer;(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	57PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) by the authority that issued the closure notice, if the notice was issued by a local authority.(3) The application must be heard by the magistrates' court not later than 48 hours after service of the closure notice.(4) In calculating when the period of 48 hours ends, Christmas Day is to be disregarded.(5) The court may make a closure order if it is satisfied—(a) that a person has engaged, or (if the order is not made) is likely to engage, in disorderly, offensive or criminal behaviour on the premises, or(b) that the use of the premises has resulted, or (if the order is not made) is likely to result, in serious nuisance to members of the public, or(c) that there has been, or (if the order is not made) is likely to be, disorder near those premises associated with the use of those premises,and that the order is necessary to prevent the behaviour, nuisance or disorder from continuing, recurring or occurring.(6) A closure order is an order prohibiting access to the premises for a period specified in the order.The period may not exceed 3 months.(7) A closure order may prohibit access—(a) by all persons, or by all persons except those specified, or by all persons except those of a specified description;(b) at all times, or at all times except those specified;(c) in all circumstances, or in all circumstances except those specified.(8) A closure order—(a) may be made in respect of the whole or any part of the premises;(b) may include provision about access to a part of the building or structure of which the premises form part.(9) The court must notify the relevant licensing authority if it makes a closure order in relation to premises in respect of which a premises licence is in force.81 Temporary orders(1) This section applies where an application has been made to a magistrates' court under section 80 for a closure order.(2) If the court does not make a closure order it may nevertheless order that the closure notice continues in force for a specified further period of not more than 48 hours, if satisfied—(a) that the use of particular premises has resulted, or (if the notice is not continued) is likely soon to result, in nuisance to members of the public, or(b) that there has been, or (if the notice is not continued) is likely soon to be, disorder near those premises associated with the use of those premises,(a) 
58	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesand that the continuation of the notice is necessary to prevent the nuisance or disorder from continuing, recurring or occurring.(3) The court may adjourn the hearing of the application for a period of not more than 14 days to enable—(a) the occupier of the premises,(b) the person with control of or responsibility for the premises, or  (c) any other person with an interest in the premises, to show why a closure order should not be made.(4) If the court adjourns the hearing under subsection (3) it may order that the closure notice continues in force until the end of the period of the adjournment.82 Extension of closure orders(1) At any time before the expiry of a closure order, an application may be made to a justice of the peace, by complaint, for an extension (or further extension) of the period for which the order is in force.(2) Those entitled to make an application under this section are—(a) where the closure order was made on the application of a constable, a police officer of at least the rank of inspector;(b) where the closure order was made on the application of a local authority, that authority.(3) A police officer or local authority may make an application under this section only if satisfied on reasonable grounds that it is necessary for the period of the order to be extended to prevent the occurrence, recurrence or continuance of—(a) disorderly, offensive or criminal behaviour on the premises,(b) serious nuisance to members of the public resulting from the use of the premises, or(c) disorder near the premises associated with the use of the premises,and also satisfied that the appropriate consultee has been consulted about the intention to make the application.(4) In subsection (3) “the appropriate consultee” means—(a) the local authority, in the case of an application by a police officer;(b) the chief officer of police for the area in which the premises are situated, in the case of an application by a local authority.(5) Where an application is made under this section, the justice of the peace may issue a summons directed to—(a) any person on whom the closure notice was served under section 79, or(b) any other person who appears to the justice to have an interest in the premises but on whom the closure notice was not served,requiring the person to appear before the magistrates' court to respond to the application.
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	59PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(6) If a summons is issued under subsection (5), a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing of the application must be served on the persons to whom the summons is directed.(7) If the magistrates' court is satisfied as mentioned in subsection (3)(a), (b) or (c), it may make an order extending (or further extending) the period of the closure order by a period not exceeding 3 months.(8) The period of a closure order may not be extended so that the order lasts for more than 6 months.83 Discharge of closure orders(1) At any time before the expiry of a closure order, an application may be made to a justice of the peace, by complaint, for the order to be discharged.(2) Those entitled to make an application under this section are—(a) a constable, where the closure order was made on the application of a constable;(b) the authority that applied for the closure order, where the order was made on the application of a local authority;(c) a person on whom the closure notice was served under section 79;(d) anyone else who has an interest in the premises but on whom the closure notice was not served.(3) Where a person other than a constable makes an application under this section for the discharge of an order that was made on the application of a constable, the justice may issue a summons directed to a constable considered appropriate by the justice requiring him or her to appear before the magistrates' court to respond to the application.(4) If a summons is issued under subsection (3), a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing of the application must be served on—(a) the constable to whom the summons is directed;(b) the persons mentioned in subsection (2)(c) and (d) (other than the complainant).(5) Where—(a) the order in question was made on the application of a local authority, and(b) a person other than that authority makes an application under this section for the discharge of the order,the justice may issue a summons directed to that authority requiring it to appear before the magistrates' court to respond to the application.(6) If a summons is issued under subsection (5), a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing of the application must be served on—(a) the authority mentioned in that subsection;(b) the persons mentioned in subsection (2)(c) and (d) (other than the complainant).(a) 
60	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(7) The magistrates' court may not make an order discharging the closure order unless satisfied that the closure order is no longer necessary to prevent the occurrence, recurrence or continuance of—(a) disorderly, offensive or criminal behaviour on the premises,(b) serious nuisance to members of the public resulting from the use of the premises, or(c) disorder near the premises associated with the use of the premises.Appeals84 Appeals(1) An appeal against a decision to make or extend a closure order may be made by—(a) a person on whom the closure notice was served under section 79;(b) anyone else who has an interest in the premises but on whom the closure notice was not served.(2) A constable may appeal against—(a) a decision not to make a closure order applied for by a constable;(b) a decision not to extend a closure order made on the application of a constable;(c) a decision (under section 81) not to order the continuation in force of a closure notice issued by a constable.(3) A local authority may appeal against—(a) a decision not to make a closure order applied for by that authority;(b) a decision not to extend a closure order made on the application of that authority;(c) a decision (under section 81) not to order the continuation in force of a closure notice issued by that authority.(4) An appeal under this section is to the Crown Court.(5) An appeal under this section must be made within the period of 21 days beginning with the date of the decision to which it relates.(6) On an appeal under this section the Crown Court may make whatever order it thinks appropriate.(7) The Crown Court must notify the relevant licensing authority if it makes a closure order in relation to premises in respect of which a premises licence is in force.
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	61PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesEnforcement85 Enforcement of closure orders(1) An authorised person may—(a) enter premises in respect of which a closure order is in force;(b) do anything necessary to secure the premises against entry.(2) In this section “authorised person”—(a) in relation to a closure order made on the application of a constable, means a constable or a person authorised by the chief officer of police for the area in which the premises are situated;(b) in relation to a closure order made on the application of a local authority, means a person authorised by that authority.(3) A person acting under subsection (1) may use reasonable force.(4) A person seeking to enter premises under subsection (1) must, if required to do so by or on behalf of the owner, occupier or other person in charge of the premises, produce evidence of his or her identity and authority before entering the premises.(5) An authorised person may also enter premises in respect of which a closure order is in force to carry out essential maintenance or repairs to the premises.86 Offences(1) A person who without reasonable excuse remains on or enters premises in contravention of a closure notice (including a notice continued in force under section 81) commits an offence.(2) A person who without reasonable excuse remains on or enters premises in contravention of a closure order commits an offence.(3) A person who without reasonable excuse obstructs a person acting under section 79 or 85(1) commits an offence.(4) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) or (3) is liable on summary conviction—(a) to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 3 months, or  (b) to a fine, or to both.(5) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (2) is liable on summary conviction—(a) to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 51 weeks, or  (b) to a fine, or to both.  (a) 
62	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(6) In relation to an offence committed before the commencement of section 281(5) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003, the reference in subsection (5)(a) to 51 weeks is to be read as a reference to 6 months.Supplemental87 Access to other premises(1) Where—(a) access to premises is prohibited or restricted by, or as a result of, an order under section 80, 81, 82 or 84,(b) those premises are part of a building or structure, and(c) there is another part of that building or structure that is not subject to the prohibition or restriction,an occupier or owner of that other part may apply to the appropriate court for an order under this section.(2) The appropriate court is—(a) the magistrates' court, in the case of an order under section 80, 81 or 82;(b) the Crown Court, in the case of an order under section 84.(3) Notice of an application under this section must be given to—(a) whatever constable the court thinks appropriate;(b) the local authority;(c) a person on whom the closure notice was served under section 79;(d) anyone else who has an interest in the premises but on whom the closure notice was not served.(4) On an application under this section the court may make whatever order it thinks appropriate in relation to access to any part of the building or structure mentioned in subsection (1).It does not matter whether provision has been made under section 80(8)(b).88 Reimbursement of costs(1) A local policing body or a local authority that incurs expenditure for the purpose of clearing, securing or maintaining premises in respect of which a closure order is in force may apply to the court that made the order for an order under this section.(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	63PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) On an application under this section the court may make whatever order it thinks appropriate for the reimbursement (in full or in part) by the owner or occupier of the premises of the expenditure mentioned in subsection (1).(3) An application for an order under this section may not be heard unless it is made before the end of the period of 3 months starting with the day on which the closure order ceases to have effect.(4) An order under this section may be made only against a person who has been served with the application for the order.(5) An application under this section must also be served on—(a) the local policing body for the area in which the premises are situated, if the application is made by a local authority;(b) the local authority, if the application is made by a local policing body.89 Exemption from liability(1) A police officer, or the chief officer of police under whose direction or control he or she acts, is not liable for damages in proceedings for—(a) judicial review, or(b) the tort of negligence or misfeasance in public office,arising out of anything done or omitted to be done by the police officer in the exercise or purported exercise of a power under this Chapter.(2) A local authority is not liable for damages in proceedings for—(a) judicial review, or(b) the tort of negligence or misfeasance in public office,arising out of anything done or omitted to be done by the authority in the exercise or purported exercise of a power under this Chapter.(3) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply to an act or omission shown to have been in bad faith.(4) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply so as to prevent an award of damages made in respect of an act or omission on the ground that the act or omission was unlawful by virtue of section 6(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998.(5) This section does not affect any other exemption from liability (whether at common law or otherwise).
64	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes90 Compensation(1) A person who claims to have incurred financial loss in consequence of a closure notice or a closure order may apply to the appropriate court for compensation.(2) The appropriate court is—(a) the magistrates' court that considered the application for a closure order (except where paragraph (b) applies);(b) the Crown Court, in the case of a closure order that was made or extended by an order of that Court on an appeal under section 84.(3) An application under this section may not be heard unless it is made before the end of the period of 3 months starting with whichever of the following is applicable—(a) the day on which the closure notice was cancelled under section 78;(b) the day on which a closure order was refused;(c) the day on which the closure order ceased to have effect.(4) For the purposes of subsection (3)(b) the day on which a closure order was refused is—(a) the day on which the magistrates' court decided not to make a closure order (except where paragraph (b) applies);(b) the day on which the Crown Court dismissed an appeal against a decision not to make a closure order.(5) On an application under this section the court may order the payment of compensation out of central funds if it is satisfied—(a) that the applicant is not associated with the use of the premises, or the behaviour on the premises, on the basis of which the closure notice was issued or the closure order made,(b) if the applicant is the owner or occupier of the premises, that the applicant took reasonable steps to prevent that use or behaviour,(c) that the applicant has incurred financial loss in consequence of the notice or order, and(d) that having regard to all the circumstances it is appropriate to order payment of compensation in respect of that loss.(6) In this section “central funds” has the same meaning as in enactments providing for the payment of costs.91 Guidance(1) The Secretary of State may issue—(a) guidance to chief officers of police about the exercise, by officers under their direction or control, of those officers' functions under this Chapter;(b) guidance to local authorities about the exercise of their functions under this Chapter and those of their representatives (within the meaning of section 79).(2) The Secretary of State may revise any guidance issued under this section.(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	65PART 4 – Community protectionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) The Secretary of State must arrange for any guidance issued or revised under this section to be published.92 Interpretation of Chapter 3(1) In this Chapter—“cancellation notice” has the meaning given by section 78(2);“criminal behaviour” means behaviour that constitutes a criminal offence; “extension notice” has the meaning given by section 77(5);“local authority” means—(a) in relation to England, a district council, a county council for an area for which there is no district council, a London borough council, the Common Council of the City of London or the Council of the Isles of Scilly;(b) in relation to Wales, a county council or a county borough council; “offensive behaviour” means behaviour by a person that causes or is likelyto cause harassment, alarm or distress to one or more other persons not of thesame household as that person;“owner”, in relation to premises, means—(a) a person (other than a mortgagee not in possession) entitled to dispose of the fee simple of the premises, whether in possession or in reversion;(b) a person who holds or is entitled to the rents and profits of the premises under a lease that (when granted) was for a term of not less then 3 years;“premises” includes—(a) any land or other place (whether enclosed or not);(b) any outbuildings that are, or are used as, part of premises;  “premises licence” has the meaning given by section 11 of the Licensing Act 2003;  “relevant licensing authority” has the meaning given by section 12 of that Act;“variation notice” has the meaning given by section 78(3).(2) A reference in this Chapter to “the local authority”, in relation to any premises or a notice or order relating to any premises, is a reference to the local authority (or, as the case may be, any of the local authorities) within whose area the premises are situated.(3) A reference in this Chapter to “the premises”, in relation to a closure notice or a closure order, is a reference to the premises to which the notice or order relates.
66	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 5 – Recovery of possession of dwelling-houses: anti-social behaviour groundsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes93 Saving and transitional provision(1) The repeal or amendment by this Act of provisions about any of the notices specified in subsection (2) or orders specified in subsection (3) does not apply in relation to—(a) any such notice issued or order made before the commencement day;(b) anything done in connection with any such notice or order.(2) The notices are—(a) a notice issued under section 1 of the Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003;(b) a notice issued under section 11A of that Act.(3) The orders are—(a) an order made under section 2 of the Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003;(b) an order made under section 11B of that Act;(c) an order made under section 40 of that Act;(d) an order made under section 161 of the Licensing Act 2003;(e) an order made under section 165(2)(b), (c) or (d) of that Act.(4) A person deciding whether to issue a closure notice may take into account things that—(a) happened before the commencement day, and(b) would have given rise to the power to issue one of the notices specified in subsection (2) or to make an order specified in subsection (3)(c) or (d).(5) A court deciding whether to make a closure order may take into account things that—(a) happened before the commencement day, and(b) would have given rise to the power to make an order specified in subsection (3) (a), (b) or (e).(6) Subsections (4) and (5) apply only during the period of 3 months beginning with the commencement day.(7) In this section “commencement day” means the day on which this Chapter comes into force.PART 5RECOVERY OF POSSESSION OF DWELLING-HOUSES: ANTI-SOCIAL BEHAVIOUR GROUNDSAbsolute ground for possession: secure tenancies94 New ground for serious offences or breach of prohibitions etc(1) After section 84 of the Housing Act 1985 (secure tenancies: grounds and orders for possession) there is inserted—(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	67PART 5 – Recovery of possession of dwelling-houses: anti-social behaviour groundsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“84A Absolute ground for possession for anti-social behaviour(1) If the court is satisfied that any of the following conditions is met, it must make an order for the possession of a dwelling-house let under a secure tenancy.This is subject to subsection (2) (and to any available defence based on the tenant's Convention rights, within the meaning of the Human Rights Act 1998).(2) Subsection (1) applies only where the landlord has complied with any obligations it has under section 85ZA (review of decision to seek possession).(3) Condition 1 is that—(a) the tenant, or a person residing in or visiting the dwelling-house, has been convicted of a serious offence, and(b) the serious offence—(i) was committed (wholly or partly) in, or in the locality of, the dwelling-house,(ii) was committed elsewhere against a person with a right (of whatever description) to reside in, or occupy housing accommodation in the locality of, the dwelling-house, or(iii) was committed elsewhere against the landlord of the dwelling-house, or a person employed (whether or not by the landlord) in connection with the exercise of the landlord's housing management functions, and directly or indirectly related to or affected those functions.(4) Condition 2 is that a court has found in relevant proceedings that the tenant, or a person residing in or visiting the dwelling-house, has breached a provision of an injunction under section 1 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014, other than a provision requiring a person to participate in a particular activity, and—(a) the breach occurred in, or in the locality of, the dwelling-house, or(b) the breach occurred elsewhere and the provision breached was a provision intended to prevent—(i) conduct that is capable of causing nuisance or annoyance to a person with a right (of whatever description) to reside in, or occupy housing accommodation in the locality of, the dwelling-house, or(ii) conduct that is capable of causing nuisance or annoyance to the landlord of the dwelling-house, or a person employed (whether or not by the landlord) in connection with the exercise of the landlord's housing management functions, and that is directly or indirectly related to or affects those functions.(5) Condition 3 is that the tenant, or a person residing in or visiting the dwelling- house, has been convicted of an offence under section 30 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 consisting of a breach of a provision of a criminal behaviour order prohibiting a person from doing anything described in the order, and the offence involved—(a) a breach that occurred in, or in the locality of, the dwelling-house, or(a) 
68	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 5 – Recovery of possession of dwelling-houses: anti-social behaviour groundsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) a breach that occurred elsewhere of a provision intended to prevent—(i) behaviour that causes or is likely to cause harassment, alarm or distress to a person with a right (of whatever description) to reside in, or occupy housing accommodation in the locality of, the dwelling-house, or(ii) behaviour that causes or is likely to cause harassment, alarm or distress to the landlord of the dwelling-house, or a person employed (whether or not by the landlord) in connection with the exercise of the landlord's housing management functions, and that is directly or indirectly related to or affects those functions.(6) Condition 4 is that—(a) the dwelling-house is or has been subject to a closure order under section 80 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014, and(b) access to the dwelling-house has been prohibited (under the closure order or under a closure notice issued under section 76 of that Act) for a continuous period of more than 48 hours.(7) Condition 5 is that—(a) the tenant, or a person residing in or visiting the dwelling-house, has been convicted of an offence under—(i) section 80(4) of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 (breach of abatement notice in relation to statutory nuisance), or(ii) section 82(8) of that Act (breach of court order to abate statutory nuisance etc.), and(b) the nuisance concerned was noise emitted from the dwelling-house which was a statutory nuisance for the purposes of Part 3 of that Act by virtue of section 79(1)(g) of that Act (noise emitted from premises so as to be prejudicial to health or a nuisance).(8) Condition 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 is not met if—(a) there is an appeal against the conviction, finding or order concerned which has not been finally determined, abandoned or withdrawn, or(b) the final determination of the appeal results in the conviction, finding or order being overturned.(9) In this section—  “relevant proceedings” means proceedings for contempt of court or proceedings under Schedule 2 to the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014;“serious offence” means an offence which—(a) was committed on or after the day on which subsection (3) comes into force,(b) is specified, or falls within a description specified, in Schedule 2A at the time the offence was committed and at the time the court is considering the matter, and(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	69PART 5 – Recovery of possession of dwelling-houses: anti-social behaviour groundsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) is not an offence that is triable only summarily by virtue of section 22 of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 (either-way offences where value involved is small).(10) The Secretary of State may by order amend Schedule 2A as it applies in relation to dwelling-houses in England by—(a) adding an indictable offence;(b) removing an offence.(11) The Welsh Ministers may by order amend Schedule 2A as it applies in relation to dwelling-houses in Wales by—(a) adding an indictable offence;(b) removing an offence.(12) An order under subsection (10) or (11)—(a) is to be made by statutory instrument;(b) may make different provision for different purposes;(c) may include incidental, supplementary, consequential, transitional or saving provision.(13) A statutory instrument containing an order under subsection (10) or (11) may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before and approved by a resolution of—(a) each House of Parliament (in the case of an order of the Secretary of State), or(b) the National Assembly for Wales (in the case of an order of the Welsh Ministers).”(2) After Schedule 2 to that Act there is inserted the Schedule set out in Schedule 3 to this Act.95 Notice requirements for new groundAfter section 83 of the Housing Act 1985 (proceedings for possession or termination: notice requirements) there is inserted—“83ZA Notice requirements in relation to proceedings for possession on absolute ground for anti-social behaviour(1) This section applies in relation to proceedings for possession of a dwelling- house under section 84A (absolute ground for possession for anti-social behaviour), including proceedings where possession is also sought on one or more of the grounds set out in Schedule 2.(2) The court must not entertain the proceedings unless the landlord has served on the tenant a notice under this section.(1) 
70	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 5 – Recovery of possession of dwelling-houses: anti-social behaviour groundsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) The notice must—(a) state that the court will be asked to make an order under section 84A for the possession of the dwelling-house,(b) set out the reasons for the landlord's decision to apply for the order (including the condition or conditions in section 84A on which the landlord proposes to rely), and(c) inform the tenant of any right that the tenant may have under section 85ZA to request a review of the landlord's decision and of the time within which the request must be made.(4) In a case where possession is also sought on one or more of the grounds set out in Schedule 2, the notice must also—(a) specify the ground on which the court will be asked to make the order, and(b) give particulars of that ground.(5) A notice which states that the landlord proposes to rely upon condition 1, 3 or 5 in section 84A—(a) must also state the conviction on which the landlord proposes to rely, and(b) must be served on the tenant within—(i) the period of 12 months beginning with the day of the conviction, or(ii) if there is an appeal against the conviction, the period of 12 months beginning with the day on which the appeal is finally determined or abandoned.(6) A notice which states that the landlord proposes to rely upon condition 2 in section 84A—(a) must also state the finding on which the landlord proposes to rely, and(b) must be served on the tenant within—(i) the period of 12 months beginning with the day on which the court has made the finding, or(ii) if there is an appeal against the finding, the period of 12 months beginning with the day on which the appeal is finally determined, abandoned or withdrawn.(7) A notice which states that the landlord proposes to rely upon condition 4 in section 84A—(a) must also state the closure order concerned, and(b) must be served on the tenant within—(i) the period of 3 months beginning with the day on which the closure order was made, or(ii) if there is an appeal against the making of the order, the period of 3 months beginning with the day on which the appeal is finally determined, abandoned or withdrawn.(8) A notice under this section must also inform the tenant that, if the tenant needs help or advice about the notice and what to do about it, the tenant should take it immediately to a Citizens' Advice Bureau, a housing aid centre, a law centre or a solicitor.(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	71PART 5 – Recovery of possession of dwelling-houses: anti-social behaviour groundsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(9) The notice—(a) must also specify the date after which proceedings for the possession of the dwelling-house may be begun, and(b) ceases to be in force 12 months after the date so specified.(10) The date specified in accordance with subsection (9)(a) must not be earlier than—(a) in the case of a periodic tenancy, the date on which the tenancy could, apart from this Part, be brought to an end by notice to quit given by the landlord on the same day as the notice under this section;(b) in the case of a secure tenancy for a term certain, one month after the date of the service of the notice.(11) Where a notice under this section is served with respect to a secure tenancy for a term certain, it has effect also with respect to any periodic tenancy arising on the termination of that tenancy by virtue of section 86; and subsection (10)(a) does not apply to the notice.”96 Review requirements for new groundAfter section 85 of the Housing Act 1985 (extended discretion of court in certain proceedings for possession) there is inserted—“85ZA Review of decision to seek possession on absolute ground for anti- social behaviour(1) A tenant may request a review of a landlord's decision to seek an order for possession of a dwelling-house under section 84A if the interest of the landlord belongs to—(a) a local housing authority, or(b) a housing action trust.(2) Such a request must be made in writing before the end of the period of 7 days beginning with the day on which the notice under section 83ZA is served.(3) On a request being duly made to it, the landlord must review its decision.(4) The landlord must notify the tenant in writing of the decision on the review.(5) If the decision is to confirm the original decision, the landlord must also notify the tenant of the reasons for the decision.(6) The review must be carried out, and the tenant notified, before the day specified in the notice under section 83ZA as the day after which proceedings for the possession of the dwelling-house may be begun.(1) 
72	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 5 – Recovery of possession of dwelling-houses: anti-social behaviour groundsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(7) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision about the procedure to be followed in connection with a review under this section that relates to an order for possession of a dwelling-house in England.(8) The Welsh Ministers may by regulations make provision about the procedure to be followed in connection with a review under this section that relates to an order for possession of a dwelling-house in Wales.(9) Regulations under subsections (7) and (8) may, in particular, make provision—(a) requiring the decision on review to be made by a person of appropriate seniority who was not involved in the original decision, and(b) as to the circumstances in which the person concerned is entitled to an oral hearing, and whether and by whom the person may be represented at such a hearing.(10) Regulations under this section—(a) may contain transitional or saving provision;(b) are to be made by statutory instrument which—(i) in the case of regulations made by the Secretary of State, is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament;(ii) in the case of regulations made by the Welsh Ministers, is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of the National Assembly for Wales.”Commencement InformationI84S. 96 in force at 17.9.2014 for specified purposes by S.I. 2014/2454, art. 2I85S. 96 in force at 20.10.2014 for E. in so far as not already in force by S.I. 2014/2590, art. 2(c)I86S. 96 in force at 21.10.2014 for W. by S.I. 2014/2830, art. 2(c)Absolute ground for possession: assured tenancies97Corresponding new ground and notice requirements for assured tenancies(1) In Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the Housing Act 1988 (assured tenancies: grounds on which court must order possession), after ground 7 there is inserted—“Ground 7AAny of the following conditions is met. Condition 1 is that—(a) the tenant, or a person residing in or visiting the dwelling-house, has been convicted of a serious offence, and(b) the serious offence—(i) was committed (wholly or partly) in, or in the locality of, the dwelling-house,(ii) was committed elsewhere against a person with a right (of whatever description) to reside in, or occupy housing accommodation in the locality of, the dwelling-house, or(i) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	73PART 5 – Recovery of possession of dwelling-houses: anti-social behaviour groundsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(iii) was committed elsewhere against the landlord of the dwelling-house, or a person employed (whether or not by the landlord) in connection with the exercise of the landlord's housing management functions, and directly or indirectly related to or affected those functions.Condition 2 is that a court has found in relevant proceedings that the tenant, or a person residing in or visiting the dwelling-house, has breached a provision of an injunction under section 1 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014, other than a provision requiring a person to participate in a particular activity, and—(a) the breach occurred in, or in the locality of, the dwelling-house, or(b) the breach occurred elsewhere and the provision breached was a provision intended to prevent—(i) conduct that is capable of causing nuisance or annoyance to a person with a right (of whatever description) to reside in, or occupy housing accommodation in the locality of, the dwelling-house, or(ii) conduct that is capable of causing nuisance or annoyance to the landlord of the dwelling-house, or a person employed (whether or not by the landlord) in connection with the exercise of the landlord's housing management functions, and that is directly or indirectly related to or affects those functions.Condition 3 is that the tenant, or a person residing in or visiting the dwelling- house, has been convicted of an offence under section 30 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 consisting of a breach of a provision of a criminal behaviour order prohibiting a person from doing anything described in the order, and the offence involved—(a) a breach that occurred in, or in the locality of, the dwelling-house, or(b) a breach that occurred elsewhere of a provision intended to prevent—(i) behaviour that causes or is likely to cause harassment, alarm or distress to a person with a right (of whatever description) to reside in, or occupy housing accommodation in the locality of, the dwelling-house, or(ii) behaviour that causes or is likely to cause harassment, alarm or distress to the landlord of the dwelling-house, or a person employed (whether or not by the landlord) in connection with the exercise of the landlord's housing management functions, and that is directly or indirectly related to or affects those functions.Condition 4 is that—(a) the dwelling-house is or has been subject to a closure order under section 80 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014, and(b) access to the dwelling-house has been prohibited (under the closure order or under a closure notice issued under section 76 of that Act) for a continuous period of more than 48 hours.Condition 5 is that—(a) the tenant, or a person residing in or visiting the dwelling-house, has been convicted of an offence under—(a) 
74	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 5 – Recovery of possession of dwelling-houses: anti-social behaviour groundsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(i) section 80(4) of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 (breach of abatement notice in relation to statutory nuisance), or(ii) section 82(8) of that Act (breach of court order to abate statutory nuisance etc.), and(b) the nuisance concerned was noise emitted from the dwelling-house which was a statutory nuisance for the purposes of Part 3 of that Act by virtue of section 79(1)(g) of that Act (noise emitted from premises so as to be prejudicial to health or a nuisance).Condition 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 is not met if—(a) there is an appeal against the conviction, finding or order concerned which has not been finally determined, abandoned or withdrawn, or(b) the final determination of the appeal results in the conviction, finding or order being overturned.In this ground—  “relevant proceedings” means proceedings for contempt of court or proceedings under Schedule 2 to the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014;“serious offence” means an offence which—(a) was committed on or after the day on which this ground comes into force,(b) is specified, or falls within a description specified, in Schedule 2A to the Housing Act 1985 at the time the offence was committed and at the time the court is considering the matter, and(c) is not an offence that is triable only summarily by virtue of section 22 of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 (either-way offences where value involved is small).”(2) In section 8 of that Act (notice of proceedings for possession)—(a) in subsection (3)(b), for “subsections (4)” there is substituted “ subsections (3A) ”;(b) after subsection (3) there is inserted—“(3A) If a notice under this section specifies in accordance with subsection (3)(a) Ground 7A in Schedule 2 to this Act (whether with or without other grounds), the date specified in the notice as mentioned in subsection (3)(b) is not to be earlier than—(a) in the case of a periodic tenancy, the earliest date on which, apart from section 5(1), the tenancy could be brought to an end by a notice to quit given by the landlord on the same date as the date of service of the notice under this section;(b) in the case of a fixed term tenancy, one month after the date on which the notice was served.”;(c) in subsection (4), for “(whether with or without other grounds)” there is substituted “ (whether without other grounds or with any ground other than Ground 7A) ”;(d) in subsection (4A), after “other than Ground” there is inserted “ 7A or ”;(e) after subsection (4B) there is inserted—(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	75PART 5 – Recovery of possession of dwelling-houses: anti-social behaviour groundsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(4C) A notice under this section that specifies in accordance with subsection (3)(a) Ground 7A in Schedule 2 to this Act (whether with or without other grounds) must be served on the tenant within the time period specified in subsection (4D), (4E) or (4F).(4D) Where the landlord proposes to rely on condition 1, 3 or 5 in Ground 7A, the notice must be served on the tenant within—(a) the period of 12 months beginning with the day of the conviction, or(b) if there is an appeal against the conviction, the period of 12 months beginning with the day on which the appeal is finally determined or abandoned.(4E) Where the landlord proposes to rely on condition 2 in Ground 7A, the notice must be served on the tenant within—(a) the period of 12 months beginning with the day on which the court has made the finding, or(b) if there is an appeal against the finding, the period of 12 months beginning with the day on which the appeal is finally determined, abandoned or withdrawn.(4F) Where the landlord proposes to rely on condition 4 in Ground 7A, the notice must be served on the tenant within—(a) the period of 3 months beginning with the day on which the closure order was made, or(b) if there is an appeal against the making of the order, the period of 3 months beginning with the day on which the appeal is finally determined, abandoned or withdrawn.”;(f) in subsection (5), after “Ground” there is inserted “ 7A or ”.Discretionary grounds: secure and assured tenancies98 Conduct causing nuisance to landlord etc(1) In Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the Housing Act 1985 (grounds on which court may order possession in relation to secure tenancies if it considers it reasonable), in Ground 2, at the end of paragraph (a) (but before the “or”) there is inserted—“(aa)  has been guilty of conduct causing or likely to cause a nuisance or annoyance to the landlord of the dwelling-house, or a person employed (whether or not by the landlord) in connection with the exercise of the landlord's housing management functions, and that is directly or indirectly related to or affects those functions,”.(2) In Part 2 of Schedule 2 to the Housing Act 1988 (grounds on which court may order possession in relation to assured tenancies if it considers it reasonable), in Ground 14, at the end of paragraph (a) (but before the “or”) there is inserted—(1) 
76	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 5 – Recovery of possession of dwelling-houses: anti-social behaviour groundsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(aa)  has been guilty of conduct causing or likely to cause a nuisance or annoyance to the landlord of the dwelling-house, or a person employed (whether or not by the landlord) in connection with the exercise of the landlord's housing management functions, and that is directly or indirectly related to or affects those functions,”.99 Offences connected with riot(1) In Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the Housing Act 1985 (grounds on which court may order possession in relation to secure tenancies if it considers it reasonable), after Ground 2 there is inserted—“Ground 2ZAThe tenant or an adult residing in the dwelling-house has been convicted of an indictable offence which took place during, and at the scene of, a riot in the United Kingdom.In this Ground—“adult” means a person aged 18 or over;  “indictable offence” does not include an offence that is triable only summarily by virtue of section 22 of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 (either way offences where value involved is small);  “riot” is to be construed in accordance with section 1 of the Public Order Act 1986.This Ground applies only in relation to dwelling-houses in England.”(2) In Part 2 of Schedule 2 to the Housing Act 1988 (grounds on which court may order possession in relation to assured tenancies if it considers it reasonable), after Ground 14 there is inserted—“Ground 14ZAThe tenant or an adult residing in the dwelling-house has been convicted of an indictable offence which took place during, and at the scene of, a riot in the United Kingdom.In this Ground—“adult” means a person aged 18 or over;  “indictable offence” does not include an offence that is triable only summarily by virtue of section 22 of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 (either way offences where value involved is small);  “riot” is to be construed in accordance with section 1 of the Public Order Act 1986.This Ground applies only in relation to dwelling-houses in England.”
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	77PART 5 – Recovery of possession of dwelling-houses: anti-social behaviour groundsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesSupplemental100 Restrictions where new possession proceedings in progress etc(1) In section 138 of the Housing Act 1985 (right to buy: suspension of duty of landlord to convey freehold or grant lease)—(a) in subsection (2A)(a), for “or Ground 2 possession order” there is substituted “ , Ground 2 or 2ZA possession order or section 84A possession order ”;(b) in subsection (2B)(a), for “or an operative Ground 2 possession order” there is substituted “ , an operative Ground 2 or 2ZA possession order or an operative section 84A possession order ”;(c) in subsection (2C), for the definition of “Ground 2 possession order” there is substituted—““Ground 2 or 2ZA possession order” means an order for possession under Ground 2 or Ground 2ZA in Schedule 2;”;(d) for the definition of “operative Ground 2 possession order” there is substituted—“ “operative Ground 2 or 2ZA possession order” means an order made under Ground 2 or Ground 2ZA in Schedule 2 which requires possession of the dwelling-house to be given up on a date specified in the order;”;(e) after that definition there is inserted—““operative section 84A possession order” means an order under section 84A which requires possession of the dwelling-house to be given up on a date specified in the order;“section 84A possession order” means an order for possession under section 84A;”.(2) In Schedule 3 to that Act (grounds for withholding consent to assignment of secure tenancy by way of exchange), after Ground 2 there is inserted—“Ground 2ZAProceedings have been begun for possession of the dwelling-house, of which the tenant or the proposed assignee is the secure tenant, under section 84A (absolute ground for possession for anti-social behaviour), or there has been served on the tenant or the proposed assignee a notice under section 83ZA (notice requirements in relation to proceedings for possession on absolute ground for anti-social behaviour) which is still in force.”(3) In Schedule 14 to the Localism Act 2011 (grounds on which landlord may refuse to surrender and grant tenancies in pursuance of a request under section 158 of that Act)—(a) after Ground 4 there is inserted—(a) 
78	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 5 – Recovery of possession of dwelling-houses: anti-social behaviour groundsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes4A	“Ground 4A(1) This ground is that either of the following conditions is met.(2) The first condition is that—(a) proceedings have begun for possession of a dwelling-house let on an existing tenancy which is a secure tenancy, and(b) possession is sought under section 84A of the Housing Act 1985 (absolute ground for possession for anti-social behaviour).(3) The second condition is that—(a) a notice has been served on a relevant tenant under section 83ZA of that Act (notice requirements in relation to proceedings for possession on absolute ground for anti-social behaviour), and(b) the notice is still in force.”;(b) after Ground 5 there is inserted—5A	“Ground 5A(1) This ground is that either of the following conditions is met.(2) The first condition is that—(a) proceedings have begun for possession of a dwelling-house let on an existing tenancy which is an assured tenancy, and(b) possession is sought on ground 7A in Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the Housing Act 1988 (absolute ground for possession for anti-social behaviour).(3) The second condition is that—(a) a notice has been served on a relevant tenant under section 8 of that Act (notice of proceedings for possession), and(b) the notice specifies ground 7A and is still in force.”
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	79PART 6 – Local involvement and accountabilityCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 6LOCAL INVOLVEMENT AND ACCOUNTABILITYCommunity remedies101 The community remedy document(1) Each local policing body must prepare a community remedy document for its area, and may revise it at any time.(2) A community remedy document is a list of actions any of which might, in the opinion of the local policing body, be appropriate in a particular case to be carried out by a person who—(a) has engaged in anti-social behaviour or has committed an offence, and(b) is to be dealt with for that behaviour or offence without court proceedings.(3) For the purposes of subsection (2), an action is appropriate to be carried out by a person only if it has one or more of the following objects—(a) assisting in the person's rehabilitation;(b) ensuring that the person makes reparation for the behaviour or offence in question;(c) punishing the person.(4) In preparing or revising the community remedy document for its area a local policing body must—(a) have regard to the need to promote public confidence in the out-of-court disposal process;(b) have regard to any guidance issued by the Secretary of State about how local policing bodies are to discharge their functions under this section;(c) carry out the necessary consultation and take account of all views expressed by those consulted.(5) In subsection (4)(c) “the necessary consultation” means—(a) consultation with the chief officer of police for the area,(b) consultation with the local authority for any part of the area,(c) consultation with whatever community representatives the local policing body thinks it appropriate to consult, and(d) whatever other public consultation the local policing body thinks appropriate.(6) A local policing body must agree the community remedy document for its area, and any revised document, with the chief officer of police for the area.(7) Once the community remedy document, or a revised document, has been agreed with the chief officer of police, the local policing body must publish it in whatever way it thinks appropriate.(8) The Secretary of State must publish any guidance issued under subsection (4)(b).(9) In this section—  “anti-social behaviour” has the meaning given by section 2 (ignoring subsection (2) of that section);  
80	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 6 – Local involvement and accountabilityCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes  “community representative”, in relation to a police area, means any individual or body appearing to the local policing body to represent the views of people who live in, work in or visit the area;“local authority” means—(a) in relation to England, a district council, a county council for an area for which there is no district council, a London borough council, the Common Council of the City of London or the Council of the Isles of Scilly;(b) in relation to Wales, a county council or a county borough council;  ‘ “out-of-court disposal process” means the process by which a person is dealt with under section 102 or by means of a conditional caution or youth conditional caution.102 Anti-social behaviour etc: out-of-court disposals(1) This section applies where—(a) a person (P) within subsection (2) has evidence that an individual (A) has engaged in anti-social behaviour or committed an offence,(b) A admits to P that he or she has done so,(c) P thinks that the evidence is enough for taking proceedings against A for an injunction under section 1, or taking other court proceedings, but decides that it would be appropriate for A to carry out action of some sort instead, and(d) if the evidence is that A has committed an offence, P does not think that it would be more appropriate for A to be given a caution or a fixed penalty notice.(2) The persons within this subsection are—(a) a constable;(b) an investigating officer;(c) a person authorised by a relevant prosecutor for the purposes of section 22 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (conditional cautions) or section 66A of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (youth conditional cautions).(3) Before deciding what action to invite A to carry out, P must make reasonable efforts to obtain the views of the victim (if any) of the anti-social behaviour or the offence, and in particular the victim's views as to whether A should carry out any of the actions listed in the community remedy document.(4) If the victim expresses the view that A should carry out a particular action listed in the community remedy document, P must invite A to carry out that action unless it seems to P that it would be inappropriate to do so.(5) Where—(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	81PART 6 – Local involvement and accountabilityCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) there is more than one victim and they express different views, or(b) for any other reason subsection (4) does not apply,P must nevertheless take account of any views expressed by the victim (or victims) in deciding what action to invite A to carry out.(6) In this section—  “action” includes the making of a payment to the victim (but does not include the payment of a fixed penalty);  “anti-social behaviour” has the meaning given by section 2 (ignoring subsection (2) of that section);  “community remedy document” means the community remedy document (as revised from time to time) published under section 101 for the police area in which A's anti-social behaviour or offence took place;“caution”—(a) in the case of a person aged 18 or over, includes a conditional caution within the meaning of Part 3 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003;(b) in the case of a person under that age, means a youth caution or youth conditional caution within the meaning of Chapter 1 of Part 4 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998;  “investigating officer” and “relevant prosecutor” have the same meaning as in Part 3 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (see section 27 of that Act);  “victim” means the particular person who seems to P to have been affected, or principally affected, by A's anti-social behaviour or offence.103 Criminal behaviour: conditional cautions(1) In Part 3 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (conditional cautions), after section 23 there is inserted—“23ZA Duty to consult victims(1) Before deciding what conditions to attach to a conditional caution, a relevant prosecutor or the authorised person must make reasonable efforts to obtain the views of the victim (if any) of the offence, and in particular the victim's views as to whether the offender should carry out any of the actions listed in the community remedy document.(2) If the victim expresses the view that the offender should carry out a particular action listed in the community remedy document, the prosecutor or authorised person must attach that as a condition unless it seems to the prosecutor or authorised person that it would be inappropriate to do so.(3) Where—(a) there is more than one victim and they express different views, or(b) for any other reason subsection (2) does not apply,(a) 
82	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 6 – Local involvement and accountabilityCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesthe prosecutor or authorised person must nevertheless take account of any views expressed by the victim (or victims) in deciding what conditions to attach to the conditional caution.(4) In this section—  “community remedy document” means the community remedy document (as revised from time to time) published under section 101 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 for the police area in which the offence was committed;  “victim” means the particular person who seems to the relevant prosecutor or authorised person to have been affected, or principally affected, by the offence.”(2) After section 66B of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (requirements for youth conditional cautions) there is inserted—“66BA Duty to consult victims(1) Before deciding what conditions to attach to a youth conditional caution, a relevant prosecutor or the authorised person must make reasonable efforts to obtain the views of the victim (if any) of the offence, and in particular the victim's views as to whether the offender should carry out any of the actions listed in the community remedy document.(2) If the victim expresses the view that the offender should carry out a particular action listed in the community remedy document, the prosecutor or authorised person must attach that as a condition unless it seems to the prosecutor or authorised person that it would be inappropriate to do so.(3) Where—(a) there is more than one victim and they express different views, or(b) for any other reason subsection (2) does not apply,the prosecutor or authorised person must nevertheless take account of any views expressed by the victim (or victims) in deciding what conditions to attach to the conditional caution.(4) In this section—  “community remedy document” means the community remedy document (as revised from time to time) published under section 101 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 for the police area in which the offence was committed;  “victim” means the particular person who seems to the relevant prosecutor or authorised person to have been affected, or principally affected, by the offence.”
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	83PART 6 – Local involvement and accountabilityCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesResponse to complaints about anti-social behaviour104 Review of response to complaints(1) In a case where a person has made a complaint about anti-social behaviour in a particular local government area, the relevant bodies in that area must carry out a review of the response to that behaviour (an “ASB case review)” if—(a) that person, or any other person, makes an application for such a review, and(b) the relevant bodies decide that the threshold for a review is met.(2) The relevant bodies in each local government area must—(a) make arrangements about the carrying out of ASB case reviews by those bodies (“review procedures”), and(b) ensure that the current review procedures are published.(3) The review procedures must include provision about the making of applications for ASB case reviews; and, in particular, must—(a) specify the point of contact for making applications, and(b) ensure that applications made to that point of contact are passed on to all the relevant bodies in the local government area.(4) In a situation where—(a) an application for an ASB case review is made, and(b) at least three (or, if a different number is specified in the review procedures, at least that number of) qualifying complaints have been made about the anti- social behaviour to which the application relates,the relevant bodies must decide that the threshold for a review is met.(5) In any other situation where an application for an ASB case review is made, the question whether the threshold for a review is met must be decided by the relevant bodies in accordance with the review procedures; and the procedures may, in particular, include provision for this purpose which is framed by reference to any of these matters—(a) the persistence of the anti-social behaviour about which the original complaint was made;(b) the harm caused, or the potential for harm to be caused, by that behaviour;(c) the adequacy of the response to that behaviour.(6) After the relevant bodies have decided whether or not the threshold for a review is met, they must inform the applicant of their decision.(7) The relevant bodies who carry out an ASB case review may make recommendations to a person who exercises public functions (including recommendations to a relevant body) in respect of any matters arising from the review; and the person must have regard to the recommendations in exercising public functions.(8) The relevant bodies who carry out an ASB case review must inform the applicant of—(a) the outcome of the review, and(b) any recommendations made in accordance with subsection (7).(9) As soon as practicable after the end of a reporting period, the relevant bodies in a local government area must publish information about the following matters which relates to that period—(1) 
84	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 6 – Local involvement and accountabilityCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) the number of applications for ASB case reviews made to those bodies;(b) the number of times those bodies decided that the threshold for a review was not met;(c) the number of ASB case reviews those bodies have carried out;(d) the number of ASB case reviews carried out by those bodies that have resulted in recommendations being made.(10) The question whether a complaint made about anti-social behaviour is a “qualifying complaint” for the purposes of subsection (4) is to be determined in accordance with subsections (11) and (12).(11) A complaint about anti-social behaviour is a qualifying complaint if—(a) the complaint is made within the period of one month (or, if a different period is specified in the review procedures, that period) beginning with the date on which the behaviour is alleged to have occurred; and(b) the application for the ASB case review is made within the period of six months (or, if a different period is specified in the review procedures, that period) beginning with the date on which the complaint is made.(12) But where a person makes two or more complaints about anti-social behaviour which meet the requirements in subsection (11), the question of which complaint is, or which complaints are, qualifying complaints is to be decided by the relevant bodies in accordance with the review procedures.The procedures may, in particular, include provision for this purpose which is framed by reference to whether different complaints relate to different aspects of particular anti-social behaviour (including different incidents comprised in particular anti-social behaviour).(13) Schedule 4 (ASB case reviews: supplementary provision) has effect.105 ASB case reviews: interpretation(1) This section applies for the purposes of section 104, this section and Schedule 4.(2) In relation to England—“local government area” means an area for which there is—(a) a relevant district council, or(b) a unitary authority;(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	85PART 6 – Local involvement and accountabilityCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes  “relevant district council” means the council of a district so far as it is not a unitary authority;“unitary authority” means—(a) the council of a county so far as it is the council for an area for which there are no district councils,(b) the council of any district comprised in an area for which there is no county council,(c) a London borough council,(d) the Common Council of the City of London in its capacity as a local authority, or(e) the Council of the Isles of Scilly;and, in relation to a local government area in England—  “local provider of social housing” means a private registered provider of social housing that—(a) grants tenancies of dwelling-houses in that area, or(b) manages any house or other property in that area; “relevant bodies” means—(a) the relevant district council or the unitary authority,(b) the chief officer of police for the police area which that local government area is within,(c) [F53each integrated care board established under section 14Z25 of the National Health Service Act 2006 whose area is wholly or partly within that local government area,] and(d) any local providers of social housing who are among the relevant bodies by virtue of the co-option arrangements made in relation to that local government area.(3) In relation to Wales—“local government area” means—(a) a county, or(b) a county borough;and, in relation to a local government area in Wales—  “local provider of social housing” means a body registered as a social landlord under section 3 of the Housing Act 1996 that—(a) grants tenancies of dwelling-houses in that area, or(b) manages any house or other property in that area; “relevant bodies” means—(a) the council for the area,(b) the chief officer of police for the police area which that local government area is within,(c) each Local Health Board whose area is wholly or partly within that local government area, and(d) any local providers of social housing who are among the relevant bodies by virtue of the co-option arrangements made in relation to that local government area.(4) These expressions have the meanings given—(1) 
86	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 7 – Dangerous dogsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes  “anti-social behaviour” means behaviour causing harassment, alarm or distress to members or any member of the public;  “applicant” means a person who makes an application for an ASB case review;“ASB case review” has the meaning given in section 104(1); “dwelling-house” has the same meaning as in the Housing Act 1985;  “co-option arrangements” has the meaning given in paragraph 5 of Schedule 4;  “reporting period”, in relation to the publication of information by the relevant bodies in a local government area, means a period, not exceeding 12 months, determined by those bodies.PART 7DANGEROUS DOGS106 Keeping dogs under proper control(1) The Dangerous Dogs Act 1991 is amended as follows.(2) In section 3 (keeping dogs under proper control)—(a) in subsection (1)—(i) for “a public place” there is substituted “ any place in England or Wales (whether or not a public place) ”;(ii) after “injures any person” there is inserted “ or assistance dog ”;(b) after subsection (1) there is inserted—“(1A) A person (“D”) is not guilty of an offence under subsection (1) in a case which is a householder case.(1B) For the purposes of subsection (1A) “a householder case” is a case where—(a) the dog is dangerously out of control while in or partly in a building, or part of a building, that is a dwelling or is forces accommodation (or is both), and(b) at that time—(i) the person in relation to whom the dog is dangerously out of control (“V”) is in, or is entering, the building or part as a trespasser, or(ii) D (if present at that time) believed V to be in, or entering, the building or part as a trespasser.(i) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	87PART 7 – Dangerous dogsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesSection 76(8B) to (8F) of the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (use of force at place of residence) apply for the purposes of this subsection as they apply for the purposes of subsection (8A) of that section (and for those purposes the reference in section 76(8D) to subsection (8A)(d) is to be read as if it were a reference to paragraph (b)(ii) of this subsection).”;(c) subsection (3) is repealed;(d) in subsection (4)—(i) the words “or (3)” are omitted;(ii) for “either of those subsections” there is substituted “ that subsection ”;(iii) in paragraph (b), for “two years” there is substituted “ the relevant maximum specified in subsection (4A) ”;(e) after subsection (4) there is inserted—“(4A) For the purposes of subsection (4)(b), the relevant maximum is—(a) 14 years if a person dies as a result of being injured;(b) 5 years in any other case where a person is injured;(c) 3 years in any case where an assistance dog is injured (whether or not it dies).”(3) In section 4 (destruction and disqualification orders), the words “or (3)” are omitted in both places where they occur in subsection (1).(4) In section 4A (contingent destruction orders)—(a) in subsection (1)(a) the words “or (3)” are omitted;(b) in subsection (4) the words “or (3)” are omitted.(5) In section 5 (seizure, entry of premises and evidence)—(a) in subsection (1)(c), for “one” there is substituted “ a dog ”;(b) after subsection (1) there is inserted—“(1A) A constable or an officer of a local authority authorised by it to exercise the powers conferred by this subsection may seize any dog in a place in England or Wales which is not a public place, if the dog appears to the constable or officer to be dangerously out of control.”(6) In section 10 (interpretation)—(a) in subsection (2), after the definition of “advertisement” there is inserted—““assistance dog” has the meaning given by section 173(1) of the Equality Act 2010;”;(b) in subsection (3)—(i) after “injure any person” there is inserted “ or assistance dog ”;(ii) after “injuring a person” there is inserted “ or assistance dog ”.
88	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 8 – FirearmsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes107 Whether a dog is a danger to public safety(1) The Dangerous Dogs Act 1991 is amended as follows.(2) In section 1 (dogs bred for fighting) after subsection (6) there is inserted—“(6A) A scheme under subsection (3) or (5) may in particular include provision requiring a court to consider whether a person is a fit and proper person to be in charge of a dog.”(3) In section 4 (destruction and disqualification orders) after subsection (1A) there is inserted—“(1B) For the purposes of subsection (1A)(a), when deciding whether a dog would constitute a danger to public safety, the court—(a) must consider—(i) the temperament of the dog and its past behaviour, and(ii) whether the owner of the dog, or the person for the time being in charge of it, is a fit and proper person to be in charge of the dog, and(b) may consider any other relevant circumstances.”(4) Section 4B (destruction orders otherwise than on a conviction) is amended as follows—(a) in subsection (1), after “section 5(1) or (2) below” there is inserted “ or in exercise of a power of seizure conferred by any other enactment ”;(b) after subsection (2) there is inserted—“(2A) For the purposes of subsection (2)(a), when deciding whether a dog would constitute a danger to public safety, the justice or sheriff—(a) must consider—(i) the temperament of the dog and its past behaviour, and(ii) whether the owner of the dog, or the person for the time being in charge of it, is a fit and proper person to be in charge of the dog, and(b) may consider any other relevant circumstances.”PART 8FIREARMS108 Offence of possessing firearm for supply etc(1) The Firearms Act 1968 is amended as set out in subsections (2) to (8).(2) In section 5 (which includes, in subsections (1) and (1A), offences of unauthorised possession etc of prohibited weapons and ammunition)—(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	89PART 8 – FirearmsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) in subsection (1) the words “, or manufactures, sells or transfers” are omitted;(b) in subsection (1A) the words “or sells or transfers” are omitted.(3) After subsection (2) of that section there is inserted— “(2A) A person commits an offence if without authority—(a) he	manufactures	any	weapon	or	ammunition	specified	in subsection (1) of this section,(b) he sells or transfers any prohibited weapon or prohibited ammunition,(c) he has in his possession for sale or transfer any prohibited weapon or prohibited ammunition, or(d) he purchases or acquires for sale or transfer any prohibited weapon or prohibited ammunition.”(4) For subsection (3) of that section there is substituted—“(3) In this section “authority” means an authority given in writing by—(a) the Secretary of State (in or as regards England and Wales), or(b) the Scottish Ministers (in or as regards Scotland).”(5) In section 5A (exemptions from requirement of authority under section 5)—(a) in subsections (1), (3), (4), (5), (6) and (7), the words “subsection (1A) of” are omitted;(b) in subsections (1) and (3), for “any prohibited weapon or ammunition” there is substituted “ any weapon, ammunition or missile specified in subsection (1A) of that section ”.[F54(6) In section 51A (minimum sentences for certain offences), in subsection (1A), before paragraph (a) there is inserted—“(za)	section 5(2A) (manufacture, sale or transfer of firearm, or possession etc for sale or transfer);”.](7) In Schedule 6 (prosecution and punishment of offences), in Part 1 (table of punishments) the words “or distributing” are omitted in the entries for—(a) section 5(1)(a), (ab), (aba), (ac), (ad), (ae), (af) or (c),(b) section 5(1)(b),(c) section 5(1A)(a), and(d) section 5(1A)(b), (c), (d), (e), (f) or (g).(8) In Part 1 of that Schedule, after the entry for section 5(1A)(b), (c), (d), (e), (f) or (g) there is inserted—
“Section 5(2A) Manufacturing	ordistributing,	orpossessing		for distribution, prohibited	weapons or ammunition
On indictment	Imprisonmentfor life.”
(9) In section 1 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1997 (extension of section 5 of the 1968 Act to prohibit certain small firearms etc), after subsection (7) there is inserted—(7) 
90	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 8 – FirearmsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(7A) In sections 2 to 7 below any reference to subsection (1)(aba) of section 5 of the 1968 Act shall include a reference to subsection (2A) of that section as it applies in relation to a firearm specified in subsection (1)(aba) of that section.(7B) In section 8 below the reference to subsection (1)(aba), (b) or (c) of section 5 of the 1968 Act shall include a reference to subsection (2A) of that section as it applies in relation to any weapon or ammunition specified in subsection (1) (aba), (b) or (c) of that section.”109 Functions of Scottish Ministers under Firearms Acts(1) In section 5 of the Firearms Act 1968 (weapons subject to general prohibition)—(a) in subsections (1) and (1A), for the words between “commits an offence if,” and “, he has in his possession” there is substituted “ without authority ”;(b) in subsection (4), for the words from the beginning to “the Scottish Ministers” there is substituted “ An authority shall be subject to conditions specified in it, including such as the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers (as appropriate) ”;(c) in subsection (6), for the words before “revoke an authority” there is substituted “ The Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers (as appropriate) may at any time, if they think fit, ”.(2) In section 5A of that Act (exemptions from requirement of authority under section 5)—(a) in subsections (1), (2)(a), (2)(b), (3), (4), (5), (6) and (7), for “or the Scottish Ministers (by virtue of provision made under section 63 of the Scotland Act 1998)” there is substituted “ or the Scottish Ministers ”;(b) in subsection (6), for the words after “without the authority of the Secretary of State” there is substituted “ or the Scottish Ministers (as appropriate) ”.(3) In the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1997—(a) in sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7(1) and 8 (exemptions from prohibition on small firearms etc), for “The authority of the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers (by virtue of provision made under section 63 of the Scotland Act 1998)” there is substituted “ The authority of the Secretary of State or the Scottish Ministers ”;(b) in section 7(3), for the words “or the Scottish Ministers (by virtue of provision made under section 63 of the Scotland Act 1998)”, in the first place where they occur, there is substituted “ or the Scottish Ministers ”.(4) In the Scotland Act 1998 (Transfer of Functions to the Scottish Ministers etc.) Order 1999 (S.I. 1999/1750)—(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	91PART 8 – FirearmsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) in Schedule 1, in the entry for the Firearms Act 1968, the words “5 and” are omitted;(b) in Schedule 5, paragraph 3 and paragraph 18(2) to (6), (7)(a) and (8) are omitted.110 Possession of firearms by persons previously convicted of crime(1) In section 21 of the Firearms Act 1968 (possession of firearms by persons previously convicted of crime), before subsection (3) there is inserted—“(2C) Where—(a) a person has been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of three months or more, and(b) the sentence is suspended under section 189 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003,the person shall not have a firearm or ammunition in his possession at any time during the period of five years beginning with the second day after the date on which the sentence is passed.”(2) In section 58(2) of that Act (saving for antique firearms), for “Nothing in this Act” there is substituted“Apart from—(a) section 21 and Schedule 3, and(b) any other provision of this Act so far as it applies in relation to an offence under section 21,nothing in this Act”.(3) Where—(a) a person is in possession of a firearm or ammunition immediately before the day on which subsection (1) comes into force,(b) by reason of a sentence imposed before that day, subsection (1) would (but for this subsection) make the person's possession of the firearm or ammunition subject to a prohibition under section 21 of the Firearms Act 1968, and(c) the person's possession of the firearm or ammunition immediately before that day is authorised by a certificate within the meaning given in section 57(4) of that Act,the prohibition does not apply while the certificate remains in force.111 Increased penalty for improper importation of firearms etc(1) The Customs and Excise Management Act 1979 is amended as follows.(1) 
92	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 8 – FirearmsCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) In section 50 (penalty for improper importation of goods), in subsection (5A) (firearms and counterfeit currency etc), for the words after “shall have effect” there is substituted “as if for the words “imprisonment for a term not exceeding 7 years” there were substituted the words “ imprisonment for life ””.(3) In that section—(a) in subsection (4), after “(5A),” there is inserted “ (5AA), ”;(b) at the end of paragraph (a) of subsection (5A) there is inserted “or”;(c) paragraph (c) of that subsection and the word “or” before it are omitted;(d) after that subsection there is inserted—“(5AA) In the case of an offence under subsection (2) or (3) above committed in connection with the prohibition contained in section 20 of the Forgery and Counterfeiting Act 1981, subsection (4)(b) above shall have effect as if for the words “7 years” there were substituted the words “ 10 years ”.”(4) In section 170 (penalty for fraudulent evasion of duty or prohibition, etc), in subsection (4A) (firearms and counterfeit currency etc)—(a) in paragraph (a), for “subsection (2) or (3)” there is substituted “ subsection (1) or (2) ”;(b) for the words after “shall have effect” there is substituted “as if for the words “imprisonment for a term not exceeding 7 years” there were substituted the words “ imprisonment for life ””.(5) In that section—(a) in subsection (3), after “(4A),” there is inserted “ (4AA), ”;(b) at the end of paragraph (a) of subsection (4A) there is inserted “or”;(c) paragraph (c) of that subsection and the word “or” before it are omitted;(d) after that subsection there is inserted—“(4AA) In the case of an offence under subsection (1) or (2) above committed in connection with the prohibitions contained in sections 20 and 21 of the Forgery and Counterfeiting Act 1981, subsection (3)(b) above shall have effect as if for the words “7 years” there were substituted the words “ 10 years ”.”(6) In section 68 (offences in relation to exportation of prohibited or restricted goods), in subsection (4A) (firearms and counterfeit currency etc)—(a) in paragraph (a) the words “or (3)” are omitted”;(b) for the words after “shall have effect” there is substituted “as if for the words “imprisonment for a term not exceeding 7 years” there were substituted the words “ imprisonment for life ””.(7) In that section—(a) in subsection (3), after “(4A)” there is inserted “ , (4AA) ”;(b) at the end of paragraph (a) of subsection (4A) there is inserted “or”;(c) paragraph (c) of that subsection and the word “or” before it are omitted;(d) after that subsection there is inserted—“(4AA) In the case of an offence under subsection (2) above committed in connection with the prohibition contained in section 21 of the Forgery
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	93PART 9 – Protection from sexual harm and violenceCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesand Counterfeiting Act 1981, subsection (3)(b) above shall have effect as if for the words “7 years” there were substituted the words “ 10 years ”.”112 British Transport Police: Crown status under Firearms Act 1968(1) In section 54 of the Firearms Act 1968 (application to Crown servants), in subsection (3), at the end of paragraph (d) there is inserted “, or(e) a member of the British Transport Police Force, or(f) a person employed by the British Transport Police Authority who is under the direction and control of the Chief Constable of the British Transport Police Force.”(2) The following are repealed—(a) subsections (3A) and (3B) of section 54 of the Firearms Act 1968, and(b) paragraph 9 of Schedule 7 to the Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001 (which inserted those subsections).PART 9PROTECTION FROM SEXUAL HARM AND VIOLENCEProtection from sexual harm113 Sexual harm prevention orders and sexual risk orders, etc(1) Schedule 5 (amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003) has effect.(2) In section 142 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (extent etc)—(a) in subsection (2) (provisions that extend to Northern Ireland, as well as England and Wales), for paragraph (c) there is substituted—“(c)	sections 80 to 85, 86 to 88, 89 to 91, 92 to 96, 96B to 103, 122F and 130 to 136ZD;(ca)	Part 2A;”;(b) after that subsection there is inserted—“(2A) Sections 85A, 96A, 96AA, 110, 117A, 119 and 123 to 129 andSchedule 3A extend only to Northern Ireland.”(c) In subsection (3) (provisions that extend to Scotland, as well as England and Wales) for paragraph (a) there is substituted—(a) 
94	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 9 – Protection from sexual harm and violenceCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(a)	sections 80 to 85, 86 to 88, 89 to 91, 92, 94 to 96, 97 to 103,122F, 130 to 132 and 133 to 136ZB;”;(d) after that subsection there is inserted—“(3A) Sections 88A to 88I, 96A, 111A, 117B, 120 and 121 extend only to Scotland.(3B) Sections 104 to 109, 111, 112 to 117, 118 and 122 extend to Northern Ireland and Scotland but not to England and Wales.(3C) The references to section 96A in subsections (2A) and (3A) are references respectively to—(a) the section 96A inserted by the Criminal Justice Act (Northern Ireland) 2013, and(b) the section 96A inserted by the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006.”114 Saving and transitional provision(1) In this section—“the 2003 Act” means the Sexual Offences Act 2003; “existing order” means—(a) a sexual offences prevention order under section 104 of the 2003 Act;(b) a foreign travel order under section 114 of that Act;(c) a risk of sexual harm order under section 123 of that Act; “new order” means—(a) a sexual harm prevention order (made under section 103A of the 2003 Act, inserted by Schedule 5);(b) a sexual risk order (made under section 122A of that Act, inserted by that Schedule);“old order” means—(a) a restraining order under section 5A of the Sex Offenders Act 1997;(b) a sex offender order under section 2 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998.(2) The repeal or amendment by this Act of sections 104 to 122 or sections 123 to 129 of the 2003 Act does not apply in relation to—(a) an application made before the commencement day for an existing order;(b) an existing order (whether made before or after that day) applied for before that day;(c) anything done in connection with such an application or order.(3) The following sections of the 2003 Act inserted by Schedule 5 apply (as appropriate) to an old order as they apply to a new order—(a) section 103E (variation, renewal and discharge of sexual harm prevention order);(b) section 103I (offence of breach of sexual harm prevention order);(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	95PART 9 – Protection from sexual harm and violenceCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) section 122D (variation, renewal and discharge of sexual risk order);(d) section 122H (offence of breach of sexual risk order).(4) As from the commencement day there may be no variation of an existing order or an old order that extends the period of the order or of any of its provisions.(5) At the end of the period of 5 years beginning with the commencement day—(a) in relation to any existing order or old order that is still in force, sections 103E and 103I of the 2003 Act or sections 122D and 122H of that Act (as appropriate) have effect, with any necessary modifications (and with any modifications specified in an order under section 185(7) of this Act), as if the provisions of the order were provisions of a new order;(b) subsections (2) and (3) cease to have effect.(6) In this section “commencement day” means the day on which this section comes into force.115 Use of premises for child sex offences(1) Schedule 6 (amendments of Part 2A of the Sexual Offences Act 2003) has effect.(2) For the purposes of sections 136BA and 136D(7A) of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (inserted by that Schedule), it does not matter whether the offence or offences in question were committed before, or on or after, the date on which this section comes into force.Child sexual exploitation at hotels116 Information about guests at hotels believed to be used for child sexual exploitation(1) A police officer of at least the rank of inspector may issue a notice under this section to the owner, operator or manager of a hotel that the officer reasonably believes has been or will be used for the purposes of—(a) child sexual exploitation, or(b) conduct that is preparatory to, or otherwise connected with, child sexual exploitation.(2) A notice under this section must be in writing and must—(a) specify the hotel to which it relates;(b) specify the date on which it comes into effect and the date on which it expires;(c) explain the effect of subsections (4) and (5) and sections 117 and 118.(a) 
96	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 9 – Protection from sexual harm and violenceCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) The date on which the notice expires must not be more than 6 months after the date on which it comes into effect.(4) A constable may require a person issued with a notice under this section to provide the constable with information about guests at the hotel.(5) The only information that a constable may require under subsection (4) is—(a) guests' names and addresses;(b) other information about guests that—(i) is specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State, and(ii) can be readily obtained from one or more of the guests themselves.(6) A requirement under subsection (4)—(a) must be in writing;(b) must specify the period to which the requirement relates;(c) must specify the date or dates on or by which the required information is to be provided.The period specified under paragraph (b) must begin no earlier than the time when the requirement is imposed and must end no later than the expiry of the notice under this section.(7) In this section—  “child sexual exploitation” means conduct that constitutes an offence listed in subsection (8)(a) or (b), or an offence listed in subsection (8)(c) [F55or (d)] against a person under 18;  “guest” means a person who, for a charge payable by that person or another, has the use of a guest room at the hotel in question;  “hotel” includes any guest house or other establishment of a similar kind at which accommodation is provided for a charge.(8) The offences are—(a) an offence under any of the following sections of the Sexual Offences Act 2003—sections 5 to 8 (rape and other offences against children under 13); sections 9 to 13 (child sex offences);sections 16 to 19 (abuse of position of trust); sections 25 and 26 (familial child sex offences);sections 47 to 50 (abuse of children through [F56sexual exploitation]);(b) an offence under section 1 of the Protection of Children Act 1978 (indecent photographs of children);(c) an offence under any of the following sections of the Sexual Offences Act 2003—sections 1 to 4 (rape, assault and causing sexual activity without consent);sections 30 to 41 (persons with a mental disorder impeding choice, inducements etc to persons with a mental disorder, and care workers for persons with a mental disorder);section 59A (trafficking people for sexual exploitation); section 61 (administering a substance with intent);
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	97PART 9 – Protection from sexual harm and violenceCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changessections 66 [F57, 66A, 66B(2) and (3)] and 67 (exposure [F58, sending etc photograph or film of genitals, sharing intimate photograph or film with intent to cause alarm, distress or humiliation or for purpose of obtaining sexual gratification] and voyeurism).[F59(d) an offence under section 2 of the Modern Slavery Act 2015 (human trafficking) committed with a view to exploitation that consists of or includes behaviour within section 3(3) of that Act (sexual exploitation).]117 Appeals against notices under section 116(1) A person issued with a notice under section 116 may appeal against it to a magistrates' court.(2) An appeal must be made within the period of 21 days beginning with the day on which the person is issued with the notice.(3) Where there is an appeal against a notice under section 116, then until the appeal is finally determined or withdrawn—(a) no requirement may be imposed under subsection (4) of that section in relation to the premises in question;(b) any such requirement already imposed is of no effect.(4) A magistrates' court hearing an appeal against a notice under section 116 must—(a) quash the notice,(b) modify the notice, or(c) dismiss the appeal.118 Offences(1) An offence is committed by a person who fails without reasonable excuse to comply with a requirement imposed on the person under section 116(4).(1) 
98	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 10 – Forced marriageCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) An offence is committed by a person who, in response to a requirement imposed on the person under section 116(4), provides incorrect information which the person—(a) did not take reasonable steps to verify or to have verified, or(b) knows to be incorrect.(3) A person does not commit an offence under subsection (2)(a) if there were no steps that the person could reasonably have taken to verify the information or to have it verified.(4) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale.Violent offending119 Violent offender orders(1) In section 98 of the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (violent offender orders), after subsection (5) there is inserted—“(6) The Secretary of State may by order—(a) amend subsection (3);(b) make consequential amendments to subsection (4).”(2) In section 147(5) of that Act (orders etc subject to affirmative resolution procedure), after paragraph (d) there is inserted—“(da)	an order under section 98(6),”.(3) In section 99 of that Act (qualifying offenders), in paragraph (b) of subsection (5) (meaning of “relevant offence”) after “a specified offence” there is inserted “ , or the offence of murder, ”.PART 10FORCED MARRIAGE120 Offence of breaching forced marriage protection order(1) The Family Law Act 1996 is amended as follows.(2) After section 63C there is inserted—(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)	99PART 10 – Forced marriageCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have beenmade appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“63CA Offence of breaching order(1) A person who without reasonable excuse does anything that the person is prohibited from doing by a forced marriage protection order is guilty of an offence.(2) In the case of a forced marriage protection order made by virtue of section 63D(1), a person can be guilty of an offence under this section only in respect of conduct engaged in at a time when the person was aware of the existence of the order.(3) Where a person is convicted of an offence under this section in respect of any conduct, that conduct is not punishable as a contempt of court.(4) A person cannot be convicted of an offence under this section in respect of any conduct which has been punished as a contempt of court.(5) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable—(a) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or a fine, or both;(b) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months, or a fine, or both.(6) A reference in any enactment to proceedings under this Part, or to an order under this Part, does not include a reference to proceedings for an offence under this section or to an order made in proceedings for such an offence.(7) “Enactment” includes an enactment contained in subordinate legislation within the meaning of the Interpretation Act 1978.”(3) For subsections (1) to (3) of section 63E there is substituted—“(1) In any case where the court has power to make a forced marriage protection order, the court may accept an undertaking from the respondent instead of making the order.(2) But a court may not accept an undertaking under subsection (1) if it appears to the court—(a) that the respondent has used or threatened violence against the person to be protected, and(b) that, for the person's protection, it is necessary to make a forced marriage protection order so that any breach of it by the respondent may be punishable under section 63CA.”(4) In section 63J(2), for “the order” there is substituted “ a forced marriage protection order ”.(5) The following are repealed—(a) section 63G(6) and (7);(b) section 63H;(c) section 63I;(d) section 63J(1);(e) in section 63K(1) the words “under section 63I(3) or”;(f) section 63L(4)(a).(a) 
100	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 10 – Forced marriageCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(6) This section applies only in relation to conduct occurring on or after the day on which it comes into force.(7) In relation to an offence committed before [F602 May 2022], the reference to 12 months in section 63CA(5)(b) of the Family Law Act 1996 (inserted by subsection (2) above) is to be read as a reference to six months.121 Offence of forced marriage: England and Wales(1) A person commits an offence under the law of England and Wales if he or she—(a) uses violence, threats or any other form of coercion for the purpose of causing another person to enter into a marriage, and(b) believes, or ought reasonably to believe, that the conduct may cause the other person to enter into the marriage without free and full consent.(2) In relation to a victim who lacks capacity to consent to marriage, the offence under subsection (1) is capable of being committed by any conduct carried out for the purpose of causing the victim to enter into a marriage (whether or not the conduct amounts to violence, threats or any other form coercion).(3) A person commits an offence under the law of England and Wales if he or she—(a) practises any form of deception with the intention of causing another person to leave the United Kingdom, and(b) intends the other person to be subjected to conduct outside the United Kingdom that is an offence under subsection (1) or would be an offence under that subsection if the victim were in England or Wales.[F61(3A) A person commits an offence under the law of England and Wales if he or she carries out any conduct for the purpose of causing a child to enter into a marriage before the child’s eighteenth birthday (whether or not the conduct amounts to violence, threats, any other form of coercion or deception, and whether or not it is carried out in England and Wales).](4) “Marriage” means any religious or civil ceremony of marriage (whether or not legally binding).(5) “Lacks capacity” means lacks capacity within the meaning of the Mental Capacity Act 2005.[F62(5A) “Child” means a person under the age of 18 years.](6) It is irrelevant whether the conduct mentioned in paragraph (a) of subsection (1) [F63or subsection (3A)] is directed at the victim of the offence under [F64either of those subsections] or another person.(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 10 – Forced marriageCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
101
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(7) A person commits an offence under subsection (1) or (3) only if, at the time of the conduct or deception—(a) the person or the victim or both of them are in England or Wales,(b) neither the person nor the victim is in England or Wales but at least one of them is habitually resident in England and Wales, or(c) neither the person nor the victim is in the United Kingdom but at least one of them is a UK national.[F65(7A) A person commits an offence under subsection (3A) only if—(a) the conduct is for the purpose of causing the child to enter into a marriage in England or Wales,(b) at the time of the conduct, the person or child is habitually resident in England and Wales, or(c) at the time of the conduct, the child is a United Kingdom national who—(i) has been habitually resident in England and Wales, and(ii) is not habitually resident or domiciled in Scotland or Northern Ireland.](8) “UK national” means an individual who is—(a) a British citizen, a British overseas territories citizen, a British National (Overseas) or a British Overseas citizen;(b) a person who under the British Nationality Act 1981 is a British subject; or(c) a British protected person within the meaning of that Act.(9) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable—(a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding [F66the general limit in a magistrates’ court] or to a fine or both;(b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 7 years.(10) In relation to an offence committed before [F672 May 2022], the reference to [F68the general limit in a magistrates’ court] in subsection (9)(a) is to be read as a reference to six months.
102	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 10 – Forced marriageCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes122 [F69Offence of forced marriage or forced civil partnership: Scotland](1) A person commits an offence under the law of Scotland if he or she—(a) uses violence, threats or any other form of coercion for the purpose of causing another person to enter into a marriage [F70or civil partnership], and(b) believes, or ought reasonably to believe, that the conduct may cause the other person to enter into the marriage [F70or civil partnership] without free and full consent.(2) In relation to a victim who is incapable of consenting to marriage [F71or civil partnership] by reason of mental disorder, the offence under subsection (1) is capable of being committed by any conduct carried out for the purpose of causing the victim to enter into a marriage [F71or civil partnership] (whether or not the conduct amounts to violence, threats or any other form coercion).(3) A person commits an offence under the law of Scotland if he or she—(a) practises any form of deception with the intention of causing another person to leave the United Kingdom, and(b) intends the other person to be subjected to conduct outside the United Kingdom that is an offence under subsection (1) or would be an offence under that subsection if the victim were in Scotland.(4) “Marriage” means any religious or civil ceremony of marriage (whether or not legally binding).[F72(4A) “Civil partnership” includes—(a) a civil partnership which exists by virtue of the Civil Partnership Act 2004, and(b) a purported civil partnership.](5) “Mental disorder” has the meaning given by section 328 of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003.(6) It is irrelevant whether the conduct mentioned in paragraph (a) of subsection (1) is directed at the victim of the offence under that subsection or another person.(7) A person commits an offence under subsection (1) or (3) only if, at the time of the conduct or deception—(a) the person or the victim or both of them are in Scotland,(b) neither the person nor the victim is in Scotland but at least one of them is habitually resident in Scotland, or(c) neither the person nor the victim is in the United Kingdom but at least one of them is a UK national.(8) “UK national” means an individual who is—(a) a British citizen, a British overseas territories citizen, a British National (Overseas) or a British Overseas citizen;(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 11 – Policing etcCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
103
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) a person who under the British Nationality Act 1981 is a British subject; or(c) a British protected person within the meaning of that Act.(9) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable—(a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months or to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum or both;(b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 7 years or to a fine or both.[F73122AAnonymity of victims of forced marriage: England and WalesSchedule 6A (anonymity of victims of forced marriage) has effect.]PART 11POLICING ETCCollege of Policing123 Regulations to be prepared or approved by the College(1) In section 50 of the Police Act 1996 (regulations for police forces), after subsection (2ZA) there is inserted—“(2ZB) If the College of Policing submits to the Secretary of State draft regulations with respect to any of the matters mentioned in subsection (2)(a), (b), (c) or (g), the Secretary of State shall make regulations in terms of the draft unless the Secretary of State considers that—(a) doing so would impair the efficiency or effectiveness of the police, or(b) it would be unlawful to do so, or(a) 
104	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 11 – Policing etcCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) it would for some other reason be wrong to do so.(2ZC) The Secretary of State may not make regulations with respect to any of the matters mentioned in subsection (2)(a), (b), (c) or (g) unless the text of the regulations has been prepared or approved by the College of Policing.”(2) In section 51 of that Act (regulations for special constables), after subsection (2ZA) there is inserted—“(2ZB) If the College of Policing submits to the Secretary of State draft regulations with respect to—(a) the ranks to be held by special constables,(b) the qualifications for appointment and promotion of special constables,(c) periods of service on probation, or  (d) maintenance of personal records of special constables, the Secretary of State shall make regulations in terms of the draft.(2ZC) The duty in subsection (2ZB) does not apply if the Secretary of State considers that—(a) making regulations in terms of the draft would impair the efficiency or effectiveness of the police, or(b) it would be unlawful to make regulations in those terms, or(c) it would for some other reason be wrong to make regulations in those terms.(2ZD) The Secretary of State may not make regulations with respect to the matters mentioned in subsection (2ZB) unless the text of the regulations has been prepared or approved by the College of Policing.”(3) In section 53A of that Act (regulation of procedures and practices)—(a) after subsection (1) there is inserted—“(1A) If the College of Policing, having consulted the National Crime Agency, submits to the Secretary of State a draft of regulations under this section, the Secretary of State shall make regulations in terms of the draft unless the Secretary of State considers that—(a) doing so would impair the efficiency or effectiveness of the police, or(b) it would be unlawful to do so, or(c) it would for some other reason be wrong to do so.(1B) The Secretary of State may not make regulations under this section unless the text of the regulations has been prepared or approved by the College of Policing.”;(b) subsections (2), (3), (4), (6), (7) and (10) are repealed;(c) in subsection (9), for “the first regulations to be made” there is substituted “ regulations ”.(4) In section 63 of that Act (Police Advisory Board for England and Wales, etc), in subsection (3)(a), before “with respect to” there is inserted “to which section 50(2ZC) applies or regulations”.(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 11 – Policing etcCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
105
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) In section 97 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (regulations about police training etc)—(a) after subsection (1) there is inserted—“(1A) If the College of Policing submits to the Secretary of State a draft of regulations under this section, the Secretary of State shall make regulations in terms of the draft unless the Secretary of State considers that—(a) doing so would impair the efficiency or effectiveness of the police, or(b) it would be unlawful to do so, or(c) it would for some other reason be wrong to do so.(1B) The Secretary of State may not make regulations under this section unless the text of the regulations has been prepared or approved by the College of Policing.”;(b) subsection (4) is repealed.124 Codes of practice issued by the College(1) Section 39A of the Police Act 1996 (codes of practice for chief officers) is amended as follows.(2) For subsection (1) there is substituted—“(1) The College of Policing may, with the approval of the Secretary of State, issue codes of practice relating to the discharge of their functions by chief officers of police if the College considers that—(a) it is necessary to do so in order to promote the efficiency and effectiveness of police forces generally,(b) it is necessary to do so in order to facilitate the carrying out by members of any two or more police forces of joint or co-ordinated operations, or(c) it is for any other reason in the national interest to do so.”(3) In subsection (2), for “The Secretary of State may” there is substituted “ The College of Policing may, with the approval of the Secretary of State, ”.(4) For subsection (4) there is substituted—“(4) The College of Policing shall consult with the National Crime Agency before issuing or revising a code of practice under this section.”(5) In subsection (5), for “him” there is substituted “ the College of Policing ”.
106	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 11 – Policing etcCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes125 Guidance by the College about employment of civilian staffAfter section 53D of the Police Act 1996 there is inserted—“Civilian staff53E Guidance about civilian staff employed by local policing bodies and chief officers(1) In this section “relevant civilian staff” means individuals, other than constables, who—(a) are employed by a local policing body or a chief officer of police, or(b) provide services to a local policing body or a chief officer of police, in pursuance of contractual arrangements but without being employed by the body or officer, and can be expected to have frequent contact with members of the public in the course of doing so.(2) The College of Policing may issue guidance to local policing bodies and chief officers of police with regard to—(a) the experience or qualifications to be expected of relevant civilian staff;(b) the training to be undertaken by such staff.(3) The College may from time to time revise the whole or any part of any guidance issued under this section.(4) The College shall publish any guidance issued under this section and any revision of it.(5) In discharging any function to which guidance under this section relates, a local policing body or chief officer of police shall have regard to the guidance.”126 Power to give directions to the CollegeAfter section 40B of the Police Act 1996 there is inserted—“40C Power to give directions to College of Policing(1) The Secretary of State may give a direction to the College of Policing requiring it to exercise any particular function that is conferred on the College by this Act or any other enactment.(2) The College of Policing shall carry out such other duties for the purpose of furthering the efficiency, effectiveness or integrity of the police as the Secretary of State may from time to time direct.”(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 11 – Policing etcCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
107
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes127 Charging of fees by the CollegeAfter section 95 of the Police Act 1996 there is inserted—“95A Charging of fees by College of Policing(1) The College of Policing may charge fees for providing services of a public nature only if—(a) the services are of a specified description and are provided with a view to promoting the efficiency, effectiveness or professionalism of the police, and(b) the fees are of a specified amount or are determined in a specified manner.(2) In this section “specified” means specified in an order made by the Secretary of State.(3) A statutory instrument containing an order under this section shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”128 Appointment of senior police officers as staff of the CollegeAfter section 100 of the Police Act 1996 there is inserted—“100A Appointment of senior police officers as staff of College of Policing(1) This section applies where a person who—(a) holds the office of constable with a rank above that of chief superintendent, or(b) hold that office and is eligible to be appointed to a rank above that of chief superintendent,is appointed as a member of the staff of the College of Policing.(2) The person continues to hold the office of constable while a member of the staff of the College.(3) On appointment—(a) a person within subsection (1)(a) holds that office with the same rank that the person held immediately before appointment, or with whatever higher rank the College decides;(b) a person within subsection (1)(b) holds that office with whatever rank, above that of chief superintendent, the College decides.”(a) 
108	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 11 – Policing etcCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes129 Disclosure of information to the CollegeAfter section 100A of the Police Act 1996 (inserted by section 128 above) there is inserted—“100B Disclosure of information to College of PolicingA person who, apart from this section, would not have power to disclose information to the College of Policing has power to do so where the disclosure is made for the purposes of the exercise by the College of any of its functions.”130 The College and the IPCCIn Part 2 of the Police Reform Act 2002 (complaints and misconduct), before section 26C (inserted by section 11 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013) there is inserted—“26BA College of Policing(1) The Commission and the College of Policing must enter into an agreement for the establishment, in relation to members of the College's staff, of procedures corresponding or similar to those provided for by or under this Part.(2) An agreement under this section—(a) must not be made or varied except with the approval of the Secretary of State; and(b) must not be terminated unless—(i) it is replaced by another such agreement, and(ii) the Secretary of State approves.(3) An agreement under this section may contain provision for enabling the Commission to bring and conduct, or otherwise participate or intervene in, any proceedings that are identified by the agreement as disciplinary hearings in relation to members of the College's staff.(4) Procedures established in accordance with an agreement under this section shall have no effect in relation to anything done outside England and Wales by any member of the College's staff.”
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
109
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesReview bodies for police remuneration etc131 Abolition of Police Negotiating Board for the United Kingdom(1) The Police Negotiating Board for the United Kingdom is abolished.(2) Sections 61 and 62 of the Police Act 1996 (the Police Negotiating Board for the United Kingdom, and its functions with respect to regulations) are repealed.(3) The Secretary of State may secure the reimbursement of payments made under section 61(5) or (7) of the Police Act 1996 (payment by Scottish Ministers or Department of Justice in Northern Ireland towards expenses incurred by the Police Negotiating Board for the United Kingdom) to the extent that, by reason of the abolition of the Board, the payments are not needed.132 Establishment of Police Remuneration Review Body(1) After Part 3 of the Police Act 1996 there is inserted—“PART 3ATHE POLICE REMUNERATION REVIEW BODY64A	The Police Remuneration Review Body(1) There shall be a body called the Police Remuneration Review Body.(2) It shall consist of—(a) a chair appointed by the Prime Minister, and(b) five or more other members appointed by the Secretary of State, one of whom the Secretary of State may appoint as deputy chair.(3) Before making an appointment, the Prime Minister or the Secretary of State shall consult the Department of Justice in Northern Ireland.(4) The Secretary of State may by order—(a) change the name of the body established by this section, and(b) make consequential amendments to any provision contained in or made under this or any other Act.(5) A statutory instrument containing an order under subsection (4) shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.(6) Schedule 4B shall have effect in relation to the Police Remuneration Review Body.(1) 
110	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes64B	Reports by the Police Remuneration Review Body(1) The Police Remuneration Review Body shall consider and report on any matter referred to it by the Secretary of State that relates to—(a) hours of duty,(b) leave,(c) pay and allowances, or(d) the issue, use and return of police clothing, personal equipment and accoutrements,as regards members of police forces of or below the rank of chief superintendent or police cadets appointed under section 28.(2) A report under subsection (1) shall be submitted to—(a) the Secretary of State, and(b) the Prime Minister,and the Secretary of State shall arrange for it to be published.(3) The Police Remuneration Review Body shall also consider and report on any matter referred to it by the Department of Justice in Northern Ireland that relates to—(a) hours of duty,(b) leave,(c) pay and allowances, or(d) the issue, use and return of equipment,as regards members of the Police Service of Northern Ireland of or below the rank of chief superintendent, police trainees appointed under section 39 of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 2000 or police cadets appointed under section 42 of that Act.(4) A report under subsection (3) shall be submitted to the Department of Justice, and that Department shall arrange for it to be published.(5) When referring a matter to the Police Remuneration Review Body, the Secretary of State or Department of Justice may give directions to that body about—(a) the time within which it must report;(b) considerations to which it must have particular regard;(c) the evidence that it must obtain;(d) matters on which it is to make recommendations.(6) The Police Remuneration Review Body may include in a report under this section any recommendations it considers appropriate arising out of matters referred to it under this section (whether or not it is required to do so by a direction under subsection (5)).(7) A reference or direction under this section may be varied or revoked.”(2) After Schedule 4A to that Act there is inserted the Schedule set out in Schedule 7 to this Act.(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
111
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) An order under section 185(7) may include provision requiring the first members of the Police Remuneration Review Body to be, or to include, persons of a particular description.133 Consultation about regulations: England and Wales(1) After section 52 of the Police Act 1996 there is inserted—“52A Regulations about hours, leave or pay: consultation etc(1) This section applies where the Secretary of State is proposing to make regulations under section 50 or 52 on a matter that relates to—(a) hours of duty,(b) leave,(c) pay and allowances, or(d) the issue, use and return of police clothing, personal equipment and accoutrements.(2) In the case of regulations under section 50 concerning members of police forces of or below the rank of chief superintendent, or regulations under section 52, before making the regulations the Secretary of State shall (subject to subsection (5))—(a) refer the matter to the Police Remuneration Review Body under section 64B(1), and(b) consider that body's report on the matter.(3) In the case of regulations under section 50 concerning members of police forces above the rank of chief superintendent, before making the regulations the Secretary of State shall (subject to subsection (5))—(a) consider advice on the matter from the Senior Salaries Review Body, or(b) where subsection (4) applies, refer the matter to the Police Remuneration Review Body under section 64B(1) and consider that body's report on the matter.(4) This subsection applies where—(a) the regulations would affect members of police forces who are not above the rank of chief superintendent as well as those who are, and(b) the Secretary of State thinks that it would be preferable for the matter to be considered by the same body.(5) The duty to consider advice from the Senior Salaries Review Body or to refer the matter to the Police Remuneration Review Body does not apply if the Secretary of State considers that—(a) there is not enough time to do so because the need to make the regulations is so urgent, or(a) 
112	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) it is unnecessary to do so by reason of the nature of the proposed regulations.(6) In all cases, before making the regulations the Secretary of State shall supply a draft of them to, and consider any representations made by, persons whom the Secretary of State considers to represent the interests of—(a) the persons and bodies who between them maintain police forces;(b) chief officers of police;(c) members of police forces;(d) police cadets appointed under section 28.(7) The Secretary of State may by order amend this section in consequence of a change in the name or functions of the body for the time being specified in subsection (3)(a).(8) A statutory instrument containing an order under subsection (7) shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”(2) In section 63 of that Act (Police Advisory Board for England and Wales, etc), in subsection (3)(a), for “regulations with respect to any of the matters mentioned in section 61(1)” there is substituted “ regulations of a kind referred to in section 52A(1) ”.(3) In section 1 of the Police Pensions Act 1976 (police pensions regulations)—(a) in subsection (1), for “the Police Negotiating Board for the United Kingdom” there is substituted “ the appropriate advisory or negotiating body ”;(b) after that subsection there is inserted—“(1ZA) In subsection (1) above, “the appropriate advisory or negotiating body” means—(a) as regards England and Wales, the Police Advisory Board for England and Wales;(b) as regards Scotland, the Police Negotiating Board for Scotland.(1ZB) When carrying out consultation under subsection (1) above as regards England and Wales, the Secretary of State shall also invite the views of the Northern Ireland Policing Board and the Police Association for Northern Ireland.”(4) In section 52 of the Police Act 1996 (regulations for police cadets), at the end there is inserted—“(3) Before making regulations under this section relating to pensions the Secretary of State shall consult with the Police Advisory Board for England and Wales and shall also invite the views of the Northern Ireland Policing Board and the Police Association for Northern Ireland.”(5) In Schedule 3 to the Police and Justice Act 2006 (power to merge police pension schemes), in paragraph 3, for sub-paragraph (3) there is substituted—“(3) The Secretary of State shall—(a) consult with the Police Advisory Board for England and Wales before exercising the power as regards England and Wales;(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
113
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) consult with the Police Negotiating Board for Scotland before exercising the power as regards Scotland;(c) consult with the Northern Ireland Policing Board and the Police Association for Northern Ireland before exercising the power as regards Northern Ireland.”134 Consultation about regulations: Northern Ireland(1) In section 25 of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (regulations for the Police Service of Northern Ireland)—(a) in subsection (8), the words “, other than regulations made by virtue of subsection (2)(j), (k) or (l)” are omitted;(b) after that subsection there is inserted—“(9) Subsection (8) does not apply to—(a) regulations made by virtue of subsection (2)(k), as to which the Department of Justice shall invite the views of the Police Advisory Board for England and Wales, or(b) regulations made by virtue of subsection (2)(j) or (l), as to which section 25A applies.”(2) After that section there is inserted—“25A Regulations about hours, leave, pay or equipment: consultation etc(1) This section applies where the Department of Justice is proposing to make regulations under section 25 by virtue of subsection (2)(j) or (l) of that section.(2) In the case of regulations concerning officers of or below the rank of chief superintendent, before making the regulations the Department of Justice shall (subject to subsection (5))—(a) refer the matter to the Police Remuneration Review Body under section 64B(3) of the Police Act 1996, and(b) consider that body's report on the matter.(3) In the case of regulations concerning officers above the rank of chief superintendent, before making the regulations the Department of Justice shall (subject to subsection (5))—(a) consider advice on the matter from the Senior Salaries Review Body, or(b) where subsection (4) applies, refer the matter to the Police Remuneration Review Body under section 64B(3) of the Police Act 1996 and consider that body's report on the matter.(4) This subsection applies where—(2) 
114	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) the regulations would affect officers who are not above the rank of chief superintendent as well as those who are, and(b) the Department of Justice thinks that it would be preferable for the matter to be considered by the same body.(5) The duty to consider advice from the Senior Salaries Review Body or to refer the matter to the Police Remuneration Review Body does not apply if Department of Justice considers that—(a) there is not enough time to do so because the need to make the regulations is so urgent, or(b) it is unnecessary to do so by reason of the nature of the proposed regulations.(6) In all cases, before making the regulations the Department of Justice shall supply a draft of them to, and consider any representations made by—(a) the Board,(b) the Police Association, and(c) the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland.(7) The Department of Justice may by order amend this section in consequence of a change in the name or functions of the body for the time being specified in subsection (3)(a).”(3) In section 41 of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 2000 (police trainees and police reserve trainees)—(a) at the end of subsection (6) there is inserted “, other than regulations to which subsection (8) applies”;(b) after that subsection there is inserted—“(7) Subsection (8) applies to regulations under subsection (3), concerning police trainees, on a matter that relates to—(a) hours of duty,(b) leave,(c) pay and allowances, or(d) the issue, use and return of equipment.(8) Before making any such regulations the Department of Justice shall—(a) (subject to subsection (9)) refer the matter to the Police Remuneration Review Body under section 64B(3) of the Police Act 1996 and consider that body's report on the matter, and(b) supply a draft of the regulations to, and consider any representations made by—(i) the Board,(ii) the Police Association, and(iii) the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland.(9) The duty in subsection (8)(a) does not apply if the Department of Justice considers that—(2) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
115
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) there is not enough time to refer to the matter to the Police Remuneration Review Body because the need to make the regulations is so urgent, or(b) it is unnecessary to do so by reason of the nature of the proposed regulations.”Independent Police Complaints Commission135 Application of IPCC provisions to contractorsIn section 12 of the Police Reform Act 2002 (complaints, matters and persons to which Part 2 applies), at the end there is inserted—“(8) The Secretary of State may make regulations providing that, for the purposes of this Part and of any regulations made under this Part—(a) a contractor,(b) a sub-contractor of a contractor, or  (c) an employee of a contractor or a sub-contractor, is to be treated as a person serving with the police.(9) Regulations under subsection (8) may make modifications to this Part, and to any regulations made under this Part, in its application to those persons.(10) In subsection (8) “contractor” means a person who has entered into a contract with a local policing body or a chief officer to provide services to a chief officer.”136 Application to IPCC of provisions about investigation of offences(1) In Schedule 3 to the Police Reform Act 2002 (handling of complaints and conduct matters etc), paragraph 19 (investigations by the Independent Police Complaints Commission itself) is amended as follows.(2) In sub-paragraph (6), for the words from “provide that such provisions” to “shall apply” there is substituted “provide that—(a) such provisions of the 1984 Act relating to investigations of offences conducted by police officers as may be specified in the order, and(b) such provisions of a code of practice under section 60, 60A or 66 of that Act as may be so specified,shall apply ”.(3) After sub-paragraph (6) there is inserted—(1) 
116	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(6A) An order under sub-paragraph (6) may, in particular, provide that where a provision applied by the order allows a power to be exercised only if an authorisation is given by a police officer of or above a particular rank, the authorisation may be given by a member of the Commission's staff of or above a specified grade.”137 Provision of information to IPCCAfter paragraph 19 of Schedule 3 to the Police Reform Act 2002 there is inserted—“Investigations by the Commission: power to serve information notice19ZA (1) The Commission may serve upon any person an information notice requiring the person to provide it with information that it reasonably requires for the purposes of an investigation in accordance with paragraph 19.(2) But an information notice must not require a person—(a) to provide information that might incriminate the person;(b) to provide an item subject to legal privilege within the meaning of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (see section 10 of that Act);(c) to make a disclosure that would be prohibited by Part 1 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000;(d) to provide information that was provided to the person by, or by an agency of, the government of a country or territory outside the United Kingdom where that government does not consent to the disclosure of the information.(3) Neither must an information notice require a postal or telecommunications operator (within the meaning of Chapter 2 of Part 1 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000) to provide communications data (within the meaning of that Chapter).(4) An information notice must—(a) specify or describe the information that is required by the Commission and the form in which it must be provided;(b) specify the period within which the information must be provided;(c) give details of the right of appeal against the information notice under paragraph 19ZC.(5) The period specified under sub-paragraph (4)(b) must not end before the end of the period within which an appeal can be brought against the notice and, if such an appeal is brought, the information need not be provided pending the determination or withdrawal of the appeal.(6) The Commission may cancel an information notice by written notice to the person on whom it was served.(2) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
117
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesFailure to comply with information notice19ZB (1) If a person who has received an information notice—(a) fails or refuses to provide the information required by the notice, or(b) knowingly or recklessly provides information in response to the notice that is false in a material respect,the Commission may certify in writing to the High Court that the person has failed to comply with the information notice.(2) The High Court may then inquire into the matter and, after hearing any witness who may be produced against or on behalf of the person, and after hearing any statement offered in defence, deal with the person as if the person had committed a contempt of court.Appeals against information notices19ZC (1) A person on whom an information notice is served may appeal against the notice to the First-tier Tribunal on the ground that the notice is not in accordance with the law.(2) If the Tribunal considers that the notice is not in accordance with the law—(a) it must quash the notice, and(b) it may give directions to the Commission in relation to the service of a further information notice.Sensitive information: restriction on further disclosure19ZD (1) Where the Commission receives information within sub-paragraph (2) under an information notice, it must not disclose (whether under section 11, 20 or 21 or otherwise) the information, or the fact that it has received it, unless the relevant authority consents to the disclosure.(2) The information is—(a) intelligence service information,(b) intercept information, or(c) information obtained (directly or indirectly) from a government department which, at the time it is provided to the Commission, is identified by the department as information the disclosure of which may, in the opinion of the relevant authority, cause damage to—(i) national security or international relations, or(ii) the economic interests of the United Kingdom or any part of the United Kingdom.(3) Where the Commission discloses to another person information within sub- paragraph (2), or the fact that it has received it, that person must not disclose that information or that fact unless the relevant authority consents to the disclosure.(4) In this paragraph—  “government department” means a department of Her Majesty's Government but does not include—  
118	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) the Security Service,(b) the Secret Intelligence Service, or (c) the Government Communications Headquarters (“GCHQ”); “intelligence service information” means information which was obtained (directly or indirectly) from an intelligence serviceor which relates to an intelligence service;“intelligence service” means—(a) the Security Service,(b) the Secret Intelligence Service,(c) GCHQ, or(d) any part of Her Majesty's forces (within the meaning of the Armed Forces Act 2006), or of the Ministry of Defence, which engages in intelligence activities;  “intercept information” means information relating to any of the matters mentioned in section 19(3) of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000;“Minister of the Crown” includes the Treasury; “relevant authority” means—(a) in the case of intelligence service information obtained from the Security Service, the Director-General of the Security Service;(b) in the case of intelligence service information obtained from the Secret Intelligence Service, the Chief of the Secret Intelligence Service;(c) in the case of intelligence service information obtained from GCHQ, the Director of GCHQ;(d) in the case of intelligence service information obtained from Her Majesty's forces or the Ministry of Defence, the Secretary of State;(e) in the case of intercept information, the person to whom the relevant interception warrant is or was addressed;(f) in the case of information within sub-paragraph (2)(c)—(i) the Secretary of State, or(ii) the Minister of the Crown in charge of the government department from which the information was obtained (if that Minister is not a Secretary of State);  “relevant interception warrant” means the interception warrant issued under section 5 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 that relates to the intercept information.”  
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
119
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes138 Unsatisfactory performance procedures following investigation of death or serious injury matter(1) In paragraph 24C of Schedule 3 to the Police Reform Act 2002 (cases of death or serious injury where Independent Police Complaints Commission determines that disciplinary proceedings not justified), at the end there is inserted—“(3) The Commission may notify the appropriate authority that it must, in accordance with regulations under section 50 or 51 of the 1996 Act, determine—(a) whether or not the performance of a person serving with the police is unsatisfactory, and(b) what action (if any) the authority will take in respect of any such person's performance.(4) On receipt of a notification under sub-paragraph (3) the appropriate authority shall make those determinations and submit a memorandum to the Commission setting out the determinations the authority has made.(5) On receipt of a memorandum under sub-paragraph (4), the Commission shall—(a) consider the memorandum and whether the appropriate authority has made the determinations under sub-paragraph (4) that the Commission considers appropriate;(b) determine whether or not to make recommendations under paragraph 27;(c) make such recommendations (if any) under that paragraph as it thinks fit.”(2) Paragraph 27 of that Schedule (duties with respect to disciplinary proceedings) is amended as follows.(3) In sub-paragraph (1), at the end there is inserted “; or(c) has submitted, or is required to submit, a memorandum to the Commission under paragraph 24C(4).”(4) After sub-paragraph (3) there is inserted—“(3A) Where this paragraph applies by virtue of sub-paragraph (1)(c), the Commission may make a recommendation to the appropriate authority—(a) that the performance of a person serving with the police is, or is not, satisfactory;(b) that action of the form specified in the recommendation is taken in respect of the person's performance;and it shall be the duty of the appropriate authority to notify the Commission whether it accepts the recommendation and (if it does) to set out in the notification the steps that it is proposing to take to give effect to it.”
120	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes139 Recommendations by IPCC and requirement to respondAfter paragraph 28 of Schedule 3 to the Police Reform Act 2002 there is inserted—“Recommendations by the Commission28A (1) This paragraph applies where the Commission has received a report under—(a) paragraph 22(3) (report on completion of investigation of complaint or conduct matter supervised or managed by Commission),(b) paragraph 22(5) (report on completion of investigation of complaint or conduct matter by Commission itself ), or(c) paragraph 24A(2) (report on completion of investigation of DSI matter that is not also conduct matter).(2) This paragraph also applies where the Commission has made a determination on an appeal under—(a) paragraph 8A (appeal relating to complaint dealt with other than by investigation), or(b) paragraph 25 (appeal with respect to an investigation).(3) The Commission may make a recommendation in relation to a matter dealt with in the report or appeal.(4) A recommendation under this paragraph may be made to any person if it is made—(a) following the receipt of a report relating to—(i) a DSI matter,(ii) a conduct matter of a type specified in regulations, or(iii) a complaint of a type specified in regulations; or(b) following a determination on an appeal relating to a complaint of a type specified in regulations.(5) In any other case, a recommendation under this paragraph may be made only to—(a) a person serving with the police, or(b) a local policing body.(6) Where the Commission makes a recommendation under this paragraph, it must also—(a) publish the recommendation, and(b) send a copy of it—(i) in a case where the recommendation is made to a local policing body, to the chief officer of the police force maintained by that body;(ii) in a case where the recommendation is made to a chief officer of a police force, to the local policing body that maintains the police force;(iii) in a case where the recommendation is made to a contractor (within the meaning of section 12(10)), to the chief officer of a police force to whom the contractor(i) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
121
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesis providing services, and the local policing body that maintains the police force;(iv) in a case where the recommendation is made to a sub- contractor or an employee of a contractor, to the contractor and the persons to whom a copy must be sent under paragraph (iii);(v) in a case where the recommendation is made to an employee of a sub-contractor, to the sub-contractor, the contractor and the persons to whom a copy must be sent under sub-paragraph (iii);(vi) in any other case, to any person to whom the Commission thinks a copy should be sent.(7) Nothing in this paragraph affects the power of the Commission to make recommendations or give advice under section 10(1)(e) (whether arising under this Schedule or otherwise).Response to recommendation28B	(1) A person to whom a recommendation under paragraph 28A is made must provide to the Commission a response in writing stating—(a) what action the person has taken or proposes to take in response to the recommendation, or(b) why the person has not taken, or does not propose to take, any action in response.(2) The person must provide the response to the Commission before the end of the period of 56 days beginning with the day on which the recommendation was made, unless sub-paragraph (3) applies.(3) The Commission may extend the period of 56 days following an application received before the end of the period; and if the Commission grants an extension, the person must provide the response before the end of the extended period.(4) But if proceedings for judicial review of the Commission's decision to make a recommendation are started during the period allowed by sub- paragraph (2) or (3), that period is extended by however many days the proceedings are in progress.(5) On receiving a response, the Commission must, within the period of 21 days beginning with the day on which the Commission received it—(a) publish the response, and(b) send a copy of it to any person who was sent a copy of the recommendation under paragraph 28A(6)(b),unless the person giving the response has made representations under sub- paragraph (6).(6) The person giving the response may, at the time of providing it to the Commission, make representations to the Commission asserting that the requirements of publication and disclosure under sub-paragraph (5) should not apply to the response, or to particular parts of it.(7) On receiving such representations, the Commission may decide—(2) 
122	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) that the response should not be published, or that only parts of it should be published;(b) that the response should not be disclosed, or that only parts of the response should be disclosed.(8) Where, following a decision on representations, the Commission decides to publish or disclose a response (in whole or in part), it must do so only after the person giving the response has been informed of the Commission's decision, and—(a) in a case where the Commission has decided to accept all of the representations, it must do so within the period of 21 days beginning with the day on which it received the response;(b) in a case where the Commission has decided to reject any of the representations, it must do so—(i) within the period of 21 days beginning with the day on which the person was informed of the Commission's decision on the representations, but(ii) not before the end of the period of 7 days beginning with that day.(9) But if proceedings for judicial review of the Commission's decision to reject a representation are started during the period of 7 days referred to in sub-paragraph (8)(b)(ii)—(a) the Commission must not publish or disclose the response while the proceedings are in progress;(b) if the court upholds the Commission's decision to reject a representation, the Commission must publish and disclose the response (in whole or in part, as appropriate) before the end of the period of 7 days beginning with the day on which the proceedings are no longer in progress.(10) Where a local policing body or a chief officer makes a response under this paragraph, the body or officer must, at the time the Commission publishes the response, also publish the response (to the same extent as published by the Commission) and the recommendation under paragraph 28A.(11) For the purposes of this paragraph—(a) “disclosing” a response means sending a copy of it as mentioned in sub-paragraph (5)(b);(b) the period during which judicial review proceedings are in progress includes any day on which an appeal is in progress or may be brought.”
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
123
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesChief officers of police and local policing bodies140 Appointment of chief officers of police(1) Paragraph 2 of Schedule 8 to the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (appointment of chief constables) is amended as follows.(2) In sub-paragraph (1)(a), for “is, or has been, a constable in any part of the United Kingdom” there is substituted “ is eligible for appointment ”.(3) After sub-paragraph (1) there is inserted—“(1A) A person is eligible for appointment if the person is or has been—(a) a constable in any part of the United Kingdom, or(b) a police officer in an approved overseas police force, of at least the approved rank.(1B) An “approved overseas police force” is a police force which—(a) is in a country or territory outside the United Kingdom designated by regulations made by the Secretary of State, and(b) is designated in relation to that country or territory by the regulations.(1C) The “approved rank” for an approved overseas police force is the rank which is designated as the approved rank for that police force by the regulations.(1D) The College of Policing must recommend to the Secretary of State matters to be designated under this paragraph.(1E) The Secretary of State may make regulations under this paragraph only if they give effect to a recommendation under sub-paragraph (1D).”(4) Section 42 of that Act (appointment of Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis) is amended as follows.(5) In subsection (3), for “is, or has been, a constable in any part of the United Kingdom” there is substituted “ is eligible for appointment ”.(6) After subsection (3) there is inserted—“(3A) A person is eligible for appointment if the person is or has been—(a) a constable in any part of the United Kingdom, or(b) a police officer in an approved overseas police force, of at least the approved rank.(3B) An “approved overseas police force” is a police force which—(a) is in a country or territory outside the United Kingdom designated by regulations made by the Secretary of State, and(b) is designated in relation to that country or territory by the regulations.(3C) The “approved rank” for an approved overseas police force is the rank which is designated as the approved rank for that police force by the regulations.(3D) The College of Policing must recommend to the Secretary of State matters to be designated under this section.
124	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3E) The Secretary of State may make regulations under this section only if they give effect to a recommendation under subsection (3D).”141 Financial arrangements etc for chief officers of police(1) In Schedule 2 to the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (chief constables), after paragraph 7 there is inserted—“Financial arrangements etc7A  (1) A chief constable may, by way of temporary loan or overdraft from a bank or otherwise, borrow sums temporarily required by the chief constable, but only—(a) for the purpose of meeting expenses pending the receipt of revenues receivable by the chief constable in respect of the period of account in which the expenses are chargeable,(b) in sterling, and(c) with the consent of the relevant police and crime commissioner.(2) A chief constable—(a) may not borrow money except as permitted by sub-paragraph (1);(b) may not enter into a credit arrangement.(3) A chief constable may invest—(a) for any purpose relevant to the chief constable's functions under any enactment, or(b) for the purpose of the prudent management of the chief constable's financial affairs,but only with the consent of the relevant police and crime commissioner.(4) The following provisions of Part 1 of the Local Government Act 2003 (capital finance etc and accounts) apply in relation to a chief constable as they apply in relation to a local authority—(a) section 6 (protection of lenders);(b) section 7 (meaning of “credit arrangements”);(c) sections 9 to 11 (capital receipts), except for section 11(2)(b) and(3) to (6);(d) section 13 (security for money borrowed etc);(e) section 14 (information);(f) section 15 (guidance);(g) section 16 (meaning of “capital expenditure”);(h) section 17 (external funds);(i) section 18 (companies etc), ignoring any reference to a Passenger Transport Executive;(j) section 20 (directions);(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
125
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(k) sections 21 and 22 (accounts);(l) section 24(1) and (2)(b) (application to Wales).(5) Regulations made by the Secretary of State under any of the provisions listed in sub-paragraph (4) apply in relation to the chief constable of a police force in England as they apply in relation to a local authority in England.(6) Regulations made by the Welsh Ministers under any of those provisions apply in relation to the chief constable of a police force in Wales as they apply in relation to a local authority in Wales.(7) Any of those provisions, or regulations made under them, that apply for the purposes of Chapter 1 of Part 1 of the Local Government Act 2003 apply also (so far as relevant) for the purposes of sub-paragraphs (1) to (3).(8) An order under section 217 or 218 of the Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 2007, as it has effect for the purposes of section 18(2)(b) of the Local Government Act 2003 as applied by sub- paragraph (4)(i), applies—(a) with the substitution of a reference to a chief constable for a reference to a local authority, and(b) with any other necessary modifications.”(2) In Schedule 4 to that Act (Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis), after paragraph 4 there is inserted—“Financial arrangements etc4A  (1) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis may, by way of temporary loan or overdraft from a bank or otherwise, borrow sums temporarily required by the Commissioner, but only—(a) for the purpose of meeting expenses pending the receipt of revenues receivable by the Commissioner in respect of the period of account in which the expenses are chargeable,(b) in sterling, and(c) with the consent of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.(2) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis—(a) may not borrow money except as permitted by sub-paragraph (1);(b) may not enter into a credit arrangement.(3) The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis may invest—(a) for any purpose relevant to the Commissioner's functions under any enactment, or(b) for the purpose of the prudent management of the Commissioner's financial affairs,but only with the consent of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime.(4) The following provisions of Part 1 of the Local Government Act 2003 (capital finance etc and accounts), and any regulations made under them by the Secretary of State, apply in relation to the Commissioner of(2) 
126	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPolice of the Metropolis as they apply in relation to a local authority in England—(a) section 6 (protection of lenders);(b) section 7 (meaning of “credit arrangements”);(c) sections 9 to 11 (capital receipts), except for section 11(2)(b) and(3) to (6);(d) section 13 (security for money borrowed etc);(e) section 14 (information);(f) section 15 (guidance);(g) section 16 (meaning of “capital expenditure”);(h) section 17 (external funds);(i) section 18 (companies etc), ignoring any reference to a Passenger Transport Executive;(j) section 20 (directions);(k) sections 21 and 22 (accounts).(5) Any of those provisions, or regulations made under them by the Secretary of State, that apply for the purposes of Chapter 1 of Part 1 of the Local Government Act 2003 apply also (so far as relevant) for the purposes of sub-paragraphs (1) to (3).(6) An order under section 217 of the Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 2007, as it has effect for the purposes of section 18(2)(b) of the Local Government Act 2003 as applied by sub- paragraph (4)(i), applies—(a) with the substitution of a reference to the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis for a reference to a local authority, and(b) with any other necessary modifications.”142 Grants to local policing bodies(1) In section 46 of the Police Act 1996 (police grant), in subsection (1), for the words from “for each financial year” to the end of paragraph (b) there is substituted “for each financial year—(a) make grants to police and crime commissioners for the purposes of their functions,(b) make grants to the Common Council for the purposes of its functions as police authority, and(c) make grants to the Greater London Authority for the purposes of the functions of the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime;”.(2) The words “for police purposes” are omitted—(a) in subsection (1) of section 47 of the Police Act 1996 (grants for capital expenditure);(b) in subsection (2) of section 92 of that Act (grants by local authorities).(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
127
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes143 Powers of local policing bodies to provide or commission services(1) A local policing body may provide or arrange for the provision of—(a) services that in the opinion of the local policing body will secure, or contribute to securing, crime and disorder reduction in the body's area;(b) services that are intended by the local policing body to help victims or witnesses of, or other persons affected by, offences and anti-social behaviour;(c) services of a description specified in an order made by the Secretary of State.(2) An order under subsection (1)(c) may make different provision for different areas.(3) A local policing body arranging for the provision of services under this section may make grants in connection with the arrangements.A grant may be subject to any conditions (including conditions as to repayment) that the local policing body thinks appropriate.(4) In this section—  “anti-social behaviour” means behaviour by a person that causes or is likely to cause harassment, alarm or distress to one or more other persons not of the same household as that person;“crime and disorder reduction” means reduction in levels of—(a) crime and disorder (including anti-social behaviour and other behaviour adversely affecting the local environment),(b) the misuse of drugs, alcohol and other substances, and(c) re-offending.Personal samples and DNA profiles144 Power to take further fingerprints or non-intimate samples(1) In section 61 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (fingerprinting)—(a) in subsections (5A) and (5B), for the words after “investigation” in paragraph (b) there is substituted “but(i) subsection (3A)(a) or (b) above applies, or(ii) subsection (5C) below applies.”;(b) after subsection (5B) there is inserted—“(5C) This subsection applies where—(a) the	investigation	was	discontinued	but	subsequently resumed, and(a) 
128	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) before the resumption of the investigation the fingerprints were destroyed pursuant to section 63D(3) below.”(2) In section 63 of that Act (non-intimate samples)—(a) at the end of subsection (3ZA)(b) there is inserted “, or“(iii) subsection (3AA) below applies.”;(b) in subsection (3A)(b), for “insufficient; or” there is substituted “insufficient, or(iii) subsection (3AA) below applies; or”;(c) after subsection (3A) there is inserted—“(3AA) This subsection applies where the investigation was discontinued but subsequently resumed, and before the resumption of the investigation—(a) any DNA profile derived from the sample was destroyed pursuant to section 63D(3) below, and(b) the sample itself was destroyed pursuant to section 63R(4),(5) or (12) below.”145 Power to retain fingerprints or DNA profile in connection with different offence(1) For section 63P of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (section 63D material obtained for one purpose and used for another) there is substituted—“63P Retention of 63D material in connection with different offence(1) Subsection (2) applies if—(a) section 63D material is taken (or, in the case of a DNA profile, derived from a sample taken) from a person in connection with the investigation of an offence, and(b) the person is subsequently arrested for or charged with a different offence, or convicted of or given a penalty notice for a different offence.(2) Sections 63E to 63O and sections 63Q and 63T have effect in relation to the material as if the material were also taken (or, in the case of a DNA profile, derived from a sample taken)—(a) in connection with the investigation of the offence mentioned in subsection (1)(b),(b) on the date on which the person was arrested for that offence (or charged with it or given a penalty notice for it, if the person was not arrested).”(2) The amendment made by subsection (1) applies even where the event referred to in subsection (1)(b) of the substituted section 63P occurs before the day on which this section comes into force.
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
129
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes146 Retention of personal samples that are or may be disclosable(1) In section 63U of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (fingerprints and samples etc: exclusions from destruction rules)—(a) in subsection (5) (material that is or may become disclosable to the defence), for “Sections 63D to 63Q, 63S and 63T” there is substituted “ Sections 63D to 63T ”;(b) after that subsection there is inserted—“(5A) A sample that—(a) falls within subsection (5), and(b) but for that subsection would be required to be destroyed under section 63R,must not be used other than for the purposes of any proceedings for the offence in connection with which the sample was taken.(5B) A sample that once fell within subsection (5) but no longer does, and so becomes a sample to which section 63R applies, must be destroyed immediately if the time specified for its destruction under that section has already passed.”(2) In Schedule 8 to the Terrorism Act 2000 (detention of terrorist suspects etc), in paragraph 20I (substituted by paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 to the Protection of Freedoms Act 2012) (fingerprints and samples etc: exclusion from destruction rules of material that is or may become disclosable to the defence)—(a) for “Paragraphs 20A to 20F and 20H do not apply to paragraph 20A material” there is substituted “ Paragraphs 20A to 20H do not apply to material ”;(b) at the end of that paragraph (which becomes sub-paragraph (1)) there is inserted—“(2) A sample that—(a) falls within sub-paragraph (1), and(b) but for that sub-paragraph would be required to be destroyed under paragraph 20G,must not be used other than for the purposes of any proceedings for the offence in connection with which the sample was taken.(3) A sample that once fell within sub-paragraph (1) but no longer does, and so becomes a sample to which paragraph 20G applies, must be destroyed immediately if the time specified for its destruction under that paragraph has already passed.”
130	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesMiscellaneous147 Powers to seize invalid passports etcSchedule 8 (powers to seize invalid passports etc) has effect.148 Port and border controlsSchedule 9 (amendments of or relating to Schedules 7 and 8 to the Terrorism Act 2000) has effect.149 Inspection of Serious Fraud Office(1) In section 2 of the Crown Prosecution Service Inspectorate Act 2000 (functions of the Chief Inspector of the Crown Prosecution Service), after subsection (3) there is inserted—“(3A) This section applies to the Serious Fraud Office as it applies to the Crown Prosecution Service.”(2) In section 3 of the Criminal Justice Act 1987 (disclosure of information by Serious Fraud Office)—(a) the word “and” before paragraph (c) of subsection (1) is omitted;(b) after that paragraph there is inserted “; and(d) in order to comply with a requirement imposed under paragraph 7 of the Schedule to the Crown Prosecution Service Inspectorate Act 2000,”;(c) in subsection (3), for the words from “by a member of the Serious Fraud Office” to “or elsewhere and” there is substituted “by a member of the Serious Fraud Office—(a) for the purposes of any prosecution in England and Wales,Northern Ireland or elsewhere, or(b) in order to comply with a requirement imposed under paragraph 7 of the Schedule to the Crown Prosecution Service Inspectorate Act 2000,(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
131
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesand ”.F74150 Jurisdiction of Investigatory Powers Tribunal over Surveillance Commissioners. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .151	Fees for criminal record certificates etcIn Part 5 of the Police Act 1997 (criminal record certificates etc), in section 125 (regulations), after subsection (1) there is inserted—“(1A) In prescribing the amount of a fee that—(a) is payable in relation to applications under a particular provision of this Part, but(b) is not payable in relation to applications made by volunteers,the Secretary of State may take into account not only the costs associated with applications in relation to which the fee is payable but also the costs associated with applications under that provision made by volunteers.”F75152. Powers of community support officers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .153 Use of amplified noise equipment in vicinity of the Palace of Westminster(1) The Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 is amended as follows.(2) After section 142 there is inserted—“142A Other controlled areas in vicinity of the Palace of Westminster(1) For the purposes of this Part, the “Palace of Westminster controlled area” means the area of land in the City of Westminster that is comprised in—(1) 
132	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) the highways in the postal district SW1 known as—(i) Bridge Street,(ii) St Margaret's Street, and(iii) Abingdon Street,(b) so much of the highway in the postal district SW1 known as Great College Street as immediately adjoins Abingdon Street Garden,(c) Old Palace Yard,(d) Abingdon Street Garden (and its pathways), and(e) Victoria Tower Gardens.(2) In subsection (1)—  “Abingdon Street Garden” means the garden constructed on the sites of properties formerly known as 18 to 28 (both inclusive) Abingdon Street, London, SW1, together with the garden surrounding the adjoining Jewel Tower and the lawn surrounding the King George V Memorial;  “highway” has the same meaning as in the Highways Act 1980 (see section 328 of that Act);“Old Palace Yard” includes the King George V Memorial.”(3) In section 143 (prohibited activities in controlled area of Parliament Square)—(a) in the heading, at the end there is inserted “or in Palace of Westminster controlled area”;(b) in subsection (2)(a), after “Parliament Square” there is inserted “ or in the Palace of Westminster controlled area ”.(4) In section 144 (directions under section 143: further provision), in subsection (5), after “Parliament Square” there is inserted “ , or the Palace of Westminster controlled area, ”.(5) In section 145 (power to seize property)—(a) in subsection (1), at the end there is inserted “in that area”;(b) after that subsection there is inserted—“(1A) A constable or authorised officer may seize and retain a prohibited item that is on any land in the Palace of Westminster controlled area if it appears to that constable or officer that the item is being, or has been, used in connection with the commission of an offence under section 143 in that area.”;(c) in subsection (2), at the end there is inserted “in that area”;(d) after that subsection there is inserted—“(2A) A constable may seize and retain a prohibited item that is on any land outside of the Palace of Westminster controlled area if it appears to the constable that the item has been used in connection with the commission of an offence under section 143 in that area.”;(e) in subsection (8), for “subsections (1) and (2)” there is substituted “ this section ”.(6) In section 146 (power of court on conviction)—(a) in subsection (1)(b), for “the controlled area of Parliament Square” there is substituted “ a relevant area ”;(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
133
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) in subsection (2), for “the controlled area of Parliament Square” there is substituted “ a relevant area ”;(c) after that subsection there is inserted—“(2A) In this section “relevant area” means an area consisting of either or both of the following areas—(a) the controlled area of Parliament Square, and(b) the Palace of Westminster controlled area.”(7) In section 147 (authorisation for operation of amplified noise equipment), in subsection (1)—(a) after “Parliament Square” there is inserted “ or the Palace of Westminster controlled area ”;(b) after “that land” there is inserted “ (or any part of it) ”.(8) In section 148 (meaning of “authorised officer” and “responsible authority”)—(a) in subsection (2), after “Parliament Square” there is inserted “ , or in relation to any land in the Palace of Westminster controlled area other than Royal Park land, ”;(b) after subsection (3) there is inserted—“(4) Responsible authority”, in relation to any land in the Palace of Westminster controlled area, means—(a) the Secretary of State, for any land comprised in Royal Park land;(b) Westminster City Council, for any other land.(5) In this section “Royal Park land” means any land of a description specified in Schedule 1 to the Royal Parks and Other Open Spaces Regulations 1997 (S.I. 1997/1639), as that Schedule has effect on the day on which the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is passed.”(9) In section 149 (effect of Part on byelaws), in subsection (3), after “Parliament Square” there is inserted “ or the Palace of Westminster controlled area ”.(10) In the italic cross-heading before section 142, for “Garden and adjoining pavements” there is substituted “ etc ”.(11) In the heading of Part 3, for “GARDEN AND SURROUNDING AREA” there is substituted “ ETC ”.154 Littering from vehicles(1) The Environmental Protection Act 1990 is amended as follows.(2) After section 88 (fixed penalty notices for leaving litter) there is inserted—(1) 
134	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“88A Littering from vehicles: civil penalty regime(1) The Secretary of State may make regulations under which the keeper of a vehicle may be required to pay a fixed penalty to a litter authority where there is reason to believe that a littering offence in England has been committed in respect of the vehicle.(2) A littering offence is committed in respect of a vehicle if an offence under section 87(1) occurs as a result of litter being thrown, dropped or otherwise deposited from the vehicle (whether or not by the vehicle's keeper).(3) Regulations under this section must make provision—(a) setting the amount of fixed penalties or specifying how the amount is to be determined;(b) about the period within which fixed penalties must be paid;(c) for payment within that period of a fixed penalty imposed for a littering offence committed in respect of a vehicle to discharge any liability for conviction for the offence (whether on the part of the keeper or anybody else);(d) for a fixed penalty to be payable by the keeper of a vehicle only if a written notice is given to the keeper (“a penalty notice”);(e) about the persons authorised to give penalty notices;(f) about the procedure to be followed in giving penalty notices;(g) about the form and content of penalty notices;(h) conferring rights to make representations about, and to bring appeals against, penalty notices.(4) Provision under subsection (3)(e) may authorise a person to give a penalty notice for a littering offence committed in respect of a vehicle only if—(a) the person is under a duty under section 89(1) in respect of the land where the offence is committed (and that person is a “litter authority” in relation to a fixed penalty payable under the regulations), or(b) the person is an authorised officer of a litter authority,and regulations under this section may include provision about the meaning of “authorised officer”.(5) Regulations under this section may include provision—(a) for the enforcement of penalty notices (and such provision may in particular authorise an unpaid fixed penalty to be recovered summarily as a civil debt or as if payable under an order of a court if the court so orders);(b) about the application of sums paid under penalty notices (and such provision may in particular authorise sums paid to a litter authority to be applied for the purposes of such functions of the authority as the regulations may specify);(c) about the application of the regulations to keepers of vehicles in the public service of the Crown.(6) Regulations under this section may, in consequence of any provision contained in the regulations, amend—(a) this Part, or(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 3A – The Police Remuneration Review BodyCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
135
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) Part 2 of the London Local Authorities Act 2007.(7) Regulations under this section may—(a) make provision corresponding or similar to any provision made by or under section 88;(b) make provision subject to exceptions;(c) include	saving,	transitional,	transitory,	supplementary	or consequential provision.(8) Provision of the kind mentioned in subsection (7)(a) may include provision—(a) conferring a discretion on a litter authority, subject to such constraints or limitations as the regulations may specify (whether or not of a corresponding or similar kind to those mentioned in section 97A(2));(b) creating an offence of the kind mentioned in section 88(8B) and (8C),but may not include provision conferring power on a person to make orders or regulations.(9) In this section—  “keeper”, in relation to a vehicle, means the person by whom the vehicle is kept at the time when the littering offence in question occurs, which in the case of a registered vehicle is to be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, to be the registered keeper;“litter authority” has the meaning given in subsection (4)(a); “registered keeper”, in relation to a registered vehicle, means theperson in whose name the vehicle is registered;  “registered vehicle” means a vehicle which is for the time being registered under the Vehicle Excise and Registration Act 1994;  “vehicle” means a mechanically-propelled vehicle or a vehicle designed or adapted for towing by a mechanically-propelled vehicle.”(3) In section 161 (regulations, orders and directions), after subsection (2ZA) there is inserted—“(2ZB) Subsection (2) does not apply to a statutory instrument containing regulations under section 88A if the regulations—(a) are the first set of regulations to be made under that section, or(b) include provision falling within subsection (3)(a) or (6) of that section.(2ZC) A statutory instrument to which subsection (2) does not apply by virtue of subsection (2ZB) may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.”
136	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 12EXTRADITIONAmendments of the Extradition Act 2003155 Date of extradition hearingIn section 8 of the Extradition Act 2003 (date of extradition hearing etc: extradition to category 1 territory) after subsection (4) there is inserted—“(4A) But if proceedings in respect of the extradition are adjourned under section 8A or 8B, the permitted period is extended by the number of days for which the proceedings are so adjourned.”156 Extradition barred if no prosecution decision in requesting territory(1) In section 11 of the Extradition Act 2003 (bars to extradition), after paragraph (a) of subsection (1) there is inserted—“(aa)	absence of prosecution decision;”.(2) After section 12 of that Act there is inserted—“12A Absence of prosecution decision(1) A person's extradition to a category 1 territory is barred by reason of absence of prosecution decision if (and only if)—(a) it appears to the appropriate judge that there are reasonable grounds for believing that—(i) the competent authorities in the category 1 territory have not made a decision to charge or have not made a decision to try (or have made neither of those decisions), and(ii) the person's absence from the category 1 territory is not the sole reason for that failure,and(b) those representing the category 1 territory do not prove that—(i) the competent authorities in the category 1 territory have made a decision to charge and a decision to try, or(ii) in a case where one of those decisions has not been made (or neither of them has been made), the person's absence from the category 1 territory is the sole reason for that failure.(2) In this section “to charge” and “to try”, in relation to a person and an extradition offence, mean—(a) to charge the person with the offence in the category 1 territory, and(b) to try the person for the offence in the category 1 territory.”(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
137
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) In a case where the Part 1 warrant (within the meaning of the Extradition Act 2003) has been issued before the time when the amendments made by this section come into force, those amendments apply to the extradition concerned only if, at that time, the judge has not yet decided all of the questions in section 11(1) of that Act.157 Proportionality(1) In section 11 of the Extradition Act 2003 (bars to extradition), in subsection (5), for “21” there is substituted “ 21A ”.(2) After section 21 of that Act there is inserted—“21A Person not convicted: human rights and proportionality(1) If the judge is required to proceed under this section (by virtue of section 11), the judge must decide both of the following questions in respect of the extradition of the person (“D”)—(a) whether the extradition would be compatible with the Convention rights within the meaning of the Human Rights Act 1998;(b) whether the extradition would be disproportionate.(2) In deciding whether the extradition would be disproportionate, the judge must take into account the specified matters relating to proportionality (so far as the judge thinks it appropriate to do so); but the judge must not take any other matters into account.(3) These are the specified matters relating to proportionality—(a) the seriousness of the conduct alleged to constitute the extradition offence;(b) the likely penalty that would be imposed if D was found guilty of the extradition offence;(c) the possibility of the relevant foreign authorities taking measures that would be less coercive than the extradition of D.(4) The judge must order D's discharge if the judge makes one or both of these decisions—(a) that the extradition would not be compatible with the Convention rights;(b) that the extradition would be disproportionate.(5) The judge must order D to be extradited to the category 1 territory in which the warrant was issued if the judge makes both of these decisions—(a) that the extradition would be compatible with the Convention rights;(b) that the extradition would not be disproportionate.(6) If the judge makes an order under subsection (5) he must remand the person in custody or on bail to wait for extradition to the category 1 territory.(1) 
138	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(7) If the person is remanded in custody, the appropriate judge may later grant bail.(8) In this section “relevant foreign authorities” means the authorities in the territory to which D would be extradited if the extradition went ahead.”(3) In section 2 of that Act (Part 1 warrant and certificate), after subsection (7) there is inserted—“(7A) But in the case of a Part 1 warrant containing the statement referred to in subsection (3), the designated authority must not issue a certificate under this section if it is clear to the designated authority that a judge proceeding under section 21A would be required to order the person's discharge on the basis that extradition would be disproportionate.In deciding that question, the designated authority must apply any general guidance issued for the purposes of this subsection.(7B) Any guidance under subsection (7A) may be revised, withdrawn or replaced.(7C) The function of issuing guidance under subsection (7A), or of revising, withdrawing or replacing any such guidance, is exercisable by the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales with the concurrence of—(a) the Lord Justice General of Scotland, and(b) the Lord Chief Justice of Northern Ireland.”F76(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(5) In a case where the Part 1 warrant (within the meaning of the Extradition Act 2003) has been issued before the time when the amendments made by this section come into force, those amendments apply to the extradition concerned only if, at that time, the judge has not yet decided all of the questions in section 11(1) of that Act.158 Hostage-taking considerations(1) Section 16 of the Extradition Act 2003 (extradition to category 1 territory barred by reason of hostage-taking considerations) is repealed.(2) In section 11 of that Act (bars to extradition), paragraph (e) of subsection (1) is omitted.(3) In a case where the Part 1 warrant (within the meaning of the Extradition Act 2003) has been issued before the time when the amendments made by this section come into force, those amendments apply to the extradition concerned only if, at that time, the judge has not yet decided all of the questions in section 11(1) of that Act.(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
139
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes159 Request for temporary transfer etcBefore section 22 of the Extradition Act 2003 there is inserted—“21B Request for temporary transfer etc(1) This section applies if—(a) a Part 1 warrant is issued which contains the statement referred to in section 2(3) (warrant issued for purposes of prosecution for offence in category 1 territory), and(b) at any time before or in the extradition hearing, the appropriate judge is informed that a request under subsection (2) or (3) has been made.(2) A request under this subsection is a request by a judicial authority of the category 1 territory in which the warrant is issued (“the requesting territory”)—(a) that the person in respect of whom the warrant is issued be temporarily transferred to the requesting territory, or(b) that arrangements be made to enable the person to speak with representatives of an authority in the requesting territory responsible for investigating, prosecuting or trying the offence specified in the warrant.(3) A request under this subsection is a request by the person in respect of whom the warrant is issued—(a) to be temporarily transferred to the requesting territory, or(b) that arrangements be made to enable the person to speak with representatives of an authority in the requesting territory responsible for investigating, prosecuting or trying the offence specified in the warrant.(4) The judge must order further proceedings in respect of the extradition to be adjourned if the judge thinks it necessary to do so to enable the person (in the case of a request under subsection (2)) or the authority by which the warrant is issued (in the case of a request under subsection (3)) to consider whether to consent to the request.An adjournment under this subsection must not be for more than 7 days.(5) If the person or authority consents to the request, the judge must—(a) make whatever orders and directions seem appropriate for giving effect to the request;(b) order further proceedings in respect of the extradition to be adjourned for however long seems necessary to enable the orders and directions to be carried out.(6) If the request, or consent to the request, is withdrawn before effect (or full effect) has been given to it—(a) no steps (or further steps) may be taken to give effect to the request;(a) 
140	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) the judge may make whatever further orders and directions seem appropriate (including an order superseding one made under subsection (5)(b)).(7) A person may not make a request under paragraph (a) or (b) of subsection (3) in respect of a warrant if the person has already given consent to a request under the corresponding paragraph of subsection (2) in respect of that warrant (even if that consent has been withdrawn).(8) A person may not make a further request under paragraph (a) or (b) of subsection (3) in respect of a warrant if the person has already made a request under that paragraph in respect of that warrant (even if that request has been withdrawn).(9) If—(a) a request under subsection (2) or (3) is made before a date has been fixed on which the extradition hearing is to begin, and(b) the proceedings are adjourned under this section,the permitted period for the purposes of fixing that date (see section 8(4)) is extended by the number of days for which the proceedings are so adjourned.”160 Appeals(1) In section 26 of the Extradition Act 2003 (appeal against extradition order: category 1 territory)—(a) in subsection (3), for “section may” there is substituted “section—(a) may”;(b) at the end of that subsection there is inserted “, but(b) lies only with the leave of the High Court.”;(c) after subsection (4) there is inserted—“(5) But where a person gives notice of application for leave to appeal after the end of the permitted period, the High Court must not for that reason refuse to entertain the application if the person did everything reasonably possible to ensure that the notice was given as soon as it could be given.”(2) In section 28 of that Act (appeal against discharge at extradition hearing: category 1 territory)—(a) in subsection (4), for “section may” there is substituted “section—(a) may”;(b) at the end of that subsection there is inserted “, but(b) lies only with the leave of the High Court.”(3) In section 103 of that Act (appeal where case sent to Secretary of State)—(a) in subsection (4), for “section may” there is substituted “section—(a) may”;(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
141
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) at the end of that subsection there is inserted “, but(b) lies only with the leave of the High Court.”;(c) after subsection (9) there is inserted—“(10) But where a person gives notice of application for leave to appeal after the end of the permitted period, the High Court must not for that reason refuse to entertain the application if the person did everything reasonably possible to ensure that the notice was given as soon as it could be given.”(4) In section 105 of that Act (appeal against discharge at extradition hearing: category 2 territory)—(a) in subsection (4), for “section may” there is substituted “section—(a) may”;(b) at the end of that subsection there is inserted “, but(b) lies only with the leave of the High Court.”(5) In section 108 of that Act (appeal against extradition order: category 2 territory)—(a) in subsection (3), for “section may” there is substituted “section—(a) may”;(b) at the end of that subsection there is inserted “, but(b) lies only with the leave of the High Court.”;(c) after subsection (7) there is inserted—“(7A) Where a person gives notice of application for leave to appeal after the end of the permitted period (whether or not the application is for leave to appeal on human rights grounds), the High Court must not for that reason refuse to entertain the application if the person did everything reasonably possible to ensure that the notice was given as soon as it could be given.”(6) In section 110 of that Act (appeal against discharge by Secretary of State)—(a) in subsection (4), for “section may” there is substituted “section—(a) may”;(b) at the end of that subsection there is inserted “, but(b) lies only with the leave of the High Court.”161 Judge informed after extradition hearing or order that person is charged with offence or serving sentence in United Kingdom(1) After section 36A of the Extradition Act 2003 there is inserted—“36B Judge informed after extradition hearing that person is charged with offence in United Kingdom(1) This section applies if—(1) 
142	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) an order has been made for the extradition of the person in respect of whom the Part 1 warrant is issued, and(b) before the extradition order is carried out the appropriate judge is informed that the person is charged with an offence in the United Kingdom.(2) The appropriate judge must order the extradition order not to be carried out until one of these occurs—(a) the charge is disposed of;(b) the charge is withdrawn;(c) proceedings in respect of the charge are discontinued;(d) an order is made for the charge to lie on the file, or in relation to Scotland, the diet is deserted pro loco et tempore.(3) If a sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention is imposed in respect of the offence charged, the appropriate judge may order the extradition order not to be carried out until the person is released from detention pursuant to the sentence (whether on licence or otherwise).(4) Rules of court may provide that where there is an appeal against the extradition order —(a) a reference in this section to the appropriate judge has effect, in prescribed circumstances, as if it were a reference to the court hearing the appeal, and(b) this section has effect with any other prescribed modifications.36C Judge informed after extradition hearing that person is serving sentence in United Kingdom(1) This section applies if—(a) an order has been made for the extradition of the person in respect of whom the Part 1 warrant is issued, and(b) before the extradition order is carried out the appropriate judge is informed that the person is serving a sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention in the United Kingdom.(2) The appropriate judge may order the extradition order not to be carried out until the person is released from detention pursuant to the sentence (whether on licence or otherwise).(3) Rules of court may provide that where there is an appeal against the extradition order —(a) a reference in this section to the appropriate judge has effect, in prescribed circumstances, as if it were a reference to the court hearing the appeal, and(b) this section has effect with any other prescribed modifications.”(2) After section 118B of that Act there is inserted—(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
143
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“118C Judge informed after extradition order that person is charged with offence in United Kingdom(1) This section applies if—(a) the Secretary of State has made an order for a person's extradition under this Part, and(b) before the extradition order is carried out the appropriate judge is informed that the person is charged with an offence in the United Kingdom.(2) The appropriate judge must order the extradition order not to be carried out until one of these occurs—(a) the charge is disposed of;(b) the charge is withdrawn;(c) proceedings in respect of the charge are discontinued;(d) an order is made for the charge to lie on the file, or in relation to Scotland, the diet is deserted pro loco et tempore.(3) If a sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention is imposed in respect of the offence charged, the appropriate judge may order the extradition order not to be carried out until the person is released from detention pursuant to the sentence (whether on licence or otherwise).(4) Rules of court may provide that where there is an appeal against the extradition order —(a) a reference in this section to the appropriate judge has effect, in prescribed circumstances, as if it were a reference to the court hearing the appeal, and(b) this section has effect with any other prescribed modifications.118D Judge informed after extradition order that person is serving sentence in United Kingdom(1) This section applies if—(a) the Secretary of State has made an order for a person's extradition under this Part, and(b) before the extradition order is carried out the appropriate judge is informed that the person is serving a sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention in the United Kingdom.(2) The appropriate judge may order the extradition order not to be carried out until the person is released from detention pursuant to the sentence (whether on licence or otherwise).(3) Rules of court may provide that where there is an appeal against the extradition order—(a) a reference in this section to the appropriate judge has effect, in prescribed circumstances, as if it were a reference to the court hearing the appeal, and(b) this section has effect with any other prescribed modifications.”(a) 
144	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes162 Asylum etc(1) In section 39 of the Extradition Act 2003 (asylum claim: extradition to category 1 territory)—(a) subsections (1) and (2) are repealed;(b) in subsection (3), for “The person” there is substituted “If—(a) an order is made under this Part for a person to be extradited in pursuance of a Part 1 warrant, and(b) the person has made an asylum claim (whether before or after the issue of the warrant),the person ”.(2) In section 121 of that Act (asylum claim: extradition to category 2 territory)—(a) subsections (1) and (2) are repealed;(b) in subsection (3), for “The person” there is substituted “If—(a) an order is made under this Part for a person to be extradited in pursuance of a request, and(b) the person has made an asylum claim (whether before or after the making of the request),the person ”.(3) In section 93 of that Act (Secretary of State's consideration of case)—(a) in subsection (4)(c), after “he orders the person's discharge” there is inserted “ under subsection (6A) or ”;(b) after subsection (6) there is inserted—“(6A) The Secretary of State may order the person's discharge if the person—(a) has been recorded by the Secretary of State as a refugee within the meaning of the Refugee Convention, or(b) has been granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom on the ground that it would be a breach of Article 2 or 3 of the Human Rights Convention to remove the person to the territory to which extradition is requested.”163 Consent to extradition not to be taken as waiver of speciality rightsIn the Extradition Act 2003 the following provisions are repealed—(a) section 45(3);(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
145
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) section 128(5).164 Definition of “extradition offence”(1) For sections 64 and 65 of the Extradition Act 2003 there is substituted—“64 Extradition offences: person not sentenced for offence(1) This section sets out whether a person's conduct constitutes an “extradition offence” for the purposes of this Part in a case where the person—(a) is accused in a category 1 territory of an offence constituted by the conduct, or(b) has been convicted in that territory of an offence constituted by the conduct but not sentenced for it.(2) The conduct constitutes an extradition offence in relation to the category 1 territory if the conditions in subsection (3), (4) or (5) are satisfied.(3) The conditions in this subsection are that—(a) the conduct occurs in the category 1 territory;(b) the conduct would constitute an offence under the law of the relevant part of the United Kingdom if it occurred in that part of the United Kingdom;(c) the conduct is punishable under the law of the category 1 territory with imprisonment or another form of detention for a term of 12 months or a greater punishment.(4) The conditions in this subsection are that—(a) the conduct occurs outside the category 1 territory;(b) in corresponding circumstances equivalent conduct would constitute an extra-territorial offence under the law of the relevant part of the United Kingdom;(c) the conduct is punishable under the law of the category 1 territory with imprisonment or another form of detention for a term of 12 months or a greater punishment.(5) The conditions in this subsection are that—(a) the conduct occurs in the category 1 territory;(b) no part of the conduct occurs in the United Kingdom;(c) a certificate issued by an appropriate authority of the category 1 territory shows that the conduct falls within the European framework list;(d) the certificate shows that the conduct is punishable under the law of the category 1 territory with imprisonment or another form of detention for a term of 3 years or a greater punishment.(6) For the purposes of subsections (3)(b) and (4)(b)—(3) 
146	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) if the conduct relates to a tax or duty, it does not matter whether the law of the relevant part of the United Kingdom imposes the same kind of tax or duty or contains rules of the same kind as those of the law of the category 1 territory;(b) if the conduct relates to customs or exchange, it does not matter whether the law of the relevant part of the United Kingdom contains rules of the same kind as those of the law of the category 1 territory.65 Extradition offences: person sentenced for offence(1) This section sets out whether a person's conduct constitutes an “extradition offence” for the purposes of this Part in a case where the person—(a) has been convicted in a category 1 territory of an offence constituted by the conduct, and(b) has been sentenced for the offence.(2) The conduct constitutes an extradition offence in relation to the category 1 territory if the conditions in subsection (3), (4) or (5) are satisfied.(3) The conditions in this subsection are that—(a) the conduct occurs in the category 1 territory;(b) the conduct would constitute an offence under the law of the relevant part of the United Kingdom if it occurred in that part of the United Kingdom;(c) a sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention for a term of 4 months or a greater punishment has been imposed in the category 1 territory in respect of the conduct.(4) The conditions in this subsection are that—(a) the conduct occurs outside the category 1 territory;(b) in corresponding circumstances equivalent conduct would constitute an extra-territorial offence under the law of the relevant part of the United Kingdom;(c) a sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention for a term of 4 months or a greater punishment has been imposed in the category 1 territory in respect of the conduct.(5) The conditions in this subsection are that—(a) the conduct occurs in the category 1 territory;(b) no part of the conduct occurs in the United Kingdom;(c) a certificate issued by an appropriate authority of the category 1 territory shows that the conduct falls within the European framework list;(d) the certificate shows that a sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention for a term of 4 months or a greater punishment has been imposed in the category 1 territory in respect of the conduct.(6) For the purposes of subsections (3)(b) and (4)(b)—(a) if the conduct relates to a tax or duty, it does not matter whether the law of the relevant part of the United Kingdom imposes the same kind of tax or duty or contains rules of the same kind as those of the law of the category 1 territory;(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
147
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) if the conduct relates to customs or exchange, it does not matter whether the law of the relevant part of the United Kingdom contains rules of the same kind as those of the law of the category 1 territory.”(2) In section 66 (supplementary provision for the purposes of sections 64 and 65) after subsection (1) there is inserted—“(1A) References to “conduct” (except in the expression “equivalent conduct”) are to the conduct specified in the Part 1 warrant.”(3) In section 137 of that Act (definition of extradition offence for the purposes of Part 2 of the Act: person not sentenced for offence) for subsections (1) to (5) there is substituted—“(1) This section sets out whether a person's conduct constitutes an “extradition offence” for the purposes of this Part in a case where the person—(a) is accused in a category 2 territory of an offence constituted by the conduct, or(b) has been convicted in that territory of an offence constituted by the conduct but not sentenced for it.(2) The conduct constitutes an extradition offence in relation to the category 2 territory if the conditions in subsection (3), (4) or (5) are satisfied.(3) The conditions in this subsection are that—(a) the conduct occurs in the category 2 territory;(b) the conduct would constitute an offence under the law of the relevant part of the United Kingdom punishable with imprisonment or another form of detention for a term of 12 months or a greater punishment if it occurred in that part of the United Kingdom;(c) the conduct is so punishable under the law of the category 2 territory.(4) The conditions in this subsection are that—(a) the conduct occurs outside the category 2 territory;(b) in corresponding circumstances equivalent conduct would constitute an extra-territorial offence under the law of the relevant part of the United Kingdom punishable with imprisonment or another form of detention for a term of 12 months or a greater punishment;(c) the conduct is so punishable under the law of the category 2 territory.(5) The conditions in this subsection are that—(a) the conduct occurs outside the category 2 territory;(b) no part of the conduct occurs in the United Kingdom;(c) the conduct constitutes, or if committed in the United Kingdom would constitute, an offence mentioned in subsection (6);(d) the conduct is punishable under the law of the category 2 territory with imprisonment or another form of detention for a term of 12 months or a greater punishment.”(4) After subsection (7) of that section there is inserted—“(7A) References in this section to “conduct” (except in the expression “equivalent conduct”) are to the conduct specified in the request for the person's extradition”.
148	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) In section 138 of that Act (definition of “extradition offence” for the purposes of Part 2 of the Act: person sentenced for offence) for subsections (1) to (5) there is substituted—“(1) This section sets out whether a person's conduct constitutes an “extradition offence” for the purposes of this Part in a case where the person—(a) has been convicted, in the category 2 territory to which extradition is requested, of an offence constituted by the conduct, and(b) has been sentenced for the offence.(2) The conduct constitutes an extradition offence in relation to the category 2 territory if the conditions in subsection (3), (4) or (5) are satisfied.(3) The conditions in this subsection are that—(a) the conduct occurs in the category 2 territory;(b) the conduct would constitute an offence under the law of the relevant part of the United Kingdom punishable with imprisonment or another form of detention for a term of 12 months or a greater punishment if it occurred in that part of the United Kingdom;(c) a sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention for a term of 4 months or a greater punishment has been imposed in the category 2 territory in respect of the conduct.(4) The conditions in this subsection are that—(a) the conduct occurs outside the category 2 territory;(b) in corresponding circumstances equivalent conduct would constitute an extra-territorial offence under the relevant part of the United Kingdom punishable as mentioned in subsection (3)(b);(c) a sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention for a term of 4 months or a greater punishment has been imposed in the category 2 territory in respect of the conduct.(5) The conditions in this subsection are that—(a) the conduct occurs outside the category 2 territory;(b) no part of the conduct occurs in the United Kingdom;(c) the conduct constitutes, or if committed in the United Kingdom would constitute, an offence mentioned in subsection (6);(d) a sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention for a term of 4 months or a greater punishment has been imposed in the category 2 territory in respect of the conduct.”(6) After subsection (7) of that section there is inserted—“(7A) References in this section to “conduct” (except in the expression “equivalent conduct”) are to the conduct specified in the request for the person's extradition”.
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
149
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes165 Extradition to the United Kingdom to be sentenced or to serve a sentenceIn section 142 of the Extradition Act 2003 (issue of Part 3 warrant), for subsection (2A) there is substituted—“(2A) The condition is that—(a) the person has been convicted of an extradition offence by a court in the United Kingdom,(b) his extradition is sought for the purpose of his being sentenced for the offence or of his serving a sentence of imprisonment or another form of detention imposed in respect of the offence, and(c) either a domestic warrant has been issued in respect of the person or the person may be arrested without a warrant.”166 Detention of extradited person for trial in England and Wales for other offences(1) In sections 150 and 151A of the Extradition Act 2003 (dealing with extradited person for other offences), at the end of subsection (2) there is inserted—“This is subject to section 151B.”(2) After section 151A of that Act there is inserted—“151B Detention of person for trial in England and Wales for other offences(1) Section 150 or 151A does not prevent a person in whose case that section applies from being detained with a view to trial in England and Wales for an offence if the conditions in subsection (2) are satisfied.(2) The conditions are that—(a) the United Kingdom and the territory from which the person was extradited have each made a declaration under Article 14(3) of the Extradition Convention, and the declarations are still in force;(b) the Secretary of State makes a request for the consent referred to in section 150(3)(c) or 151A(3)(c) in respect of the offence (“the consent request”);(c) the Secretary of State gives notification, which is explicitly acknowledged on behalf of the territory, of the date on which the detention is to begin (“the notified date”).(3) The Extradition Convention is the European Convention on Extradition done at Paris on 13 December 1957.(4) This section applies only to detention during the period beginning with the notified date and ending with whichever of the following occurs first—(a) if a notification of opposition to the detention is given on behalf of the territory, the date on which Secretary of State receives it;(a) 
150	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) the date on which the Secretary of State receives notification given on behalf of the territory as to whether the consent request is granted or refused;(c) the expiry of the period of 90 days beginning with the date on which the consent request is received.”167 Proceedings on deferred warrant or request etc(1) In section 180 of the Extradition Act 2003 (proceedings on deferred warrant or request)—(a) in subsection (1), at the end of paragraph (b) there is inserted “in the person's favour”;(b) after subsection (9) there is inserted—“(10) An extradition claim made in respect of a person is disposed of in the person's favour if—(a) in the case of a Part 1 warrant, the warrant is disposed of as mentioned in subsection (1)(a) or (b) of section 213;(b) in the case of a request for extradition, the request is disposed of as mentioned in subsection (2)(a) or (b) of that section.”(2) In section 181 of that Act (proceedings where extradition deferred)—(a) in subsection (1), at the end of paragraph (b) there is inserted “in the person's favour”;(b) after subsection (9) there is inserted—“(10) An extradition claim made in respect of a person is disposed of in the person's favour if—(a) in the case of a Part 1 warrant, the warrant is disposed of as mentioned in subsection (1)(a) or (b) of section 213;(b) in the case of a request for extradition, the request is disposed of as mentioned in subsection (2)(a) or (b) of that section.”168 Non-UK extradition: transit through the United KingdomAfter section 189 of the Extradition Act 2003 there is inserted—
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
151
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“Non-UK extradition: transit through the United Kingdom189A Facilitating transit through the United Kingdom(1) The relevant UK authority may issue a transit certificate in relation to the non- UK extradition of a person if that authority has been requested to facilitate the transit of the person through the United Kingdom for the purposes of the extradition.(2) If the relevant UK authority issues a transit certificate in relation to the non- UK extradition of a person, an authorised officer may do any or all of the following—(a) escort the person from, or to, any means of transport used for the purposes of the extradition;(b) take the person into custody to facilitate the transit of the person through the United Kingdom for the purposes of the extradition;(c) search the person, and any item in the possession of the person, for any item which the person might use to cause physical injury to that person or any other person;(d) in a case where the person has been taken into custody under paragraph (b), search the person, and any item in the possession of the person, for any item which the person might use to escape from custody.(3) An authorised officer searching a person in the exercise of a power conferred by subsection (2)(c) or (d) may seize any item found if the officer has reasonable grounds for believing that the person searched might use the item—(a) to cause physical injury to that person or any other person; or(b) in a case where the person has been taken into custody, to escape from custody.(4) If no request is made under subsection (1) in relation to the non-UK extradition of a person, or if such a request is made but a transit certificate is not issued, that does not—(a) prevent the transit of the person through the United Kingdom for the purposes of the extradition; or(b) affect the powers which an authorised officer has (otherwise than under this section) in relation to the person while in the United Kingdom.189B Unscheduled arrival in the United Kingdom(1) This section applies in a case where—(a) a person is being extradited,(b) the extradition is a non-UK extradition, and(c) the person makes an unscheduled arrival in the United Kingdom.(2) An authorised officer may do any or all of the following—(a) take the person into custody to facilitate the transit of the person through the United Kingdom for the purposes of the extradition;(a) 
152	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) search the person, and any item in the possession of the person, for any item which the person might use to cause physical injury to that person or any other person;(c) in a case where the person has been taken into custody under paragraph (a), search the person, and any item in the possession of the person, for any item which the person might use to escape from custody.(3) Any power conferred by subsection (2) may be exercised—(a) upon the unscheduled arrival, or(b) at any later time when the person is still in the United Kingdom after the unscheduled arrival.(4) A person taken into custody under this section may be kept in custody until the expiry of the period of 72 hours beginning with the time when the person is taken (or first taken) into custody under this section.(5) But if a transit certificate is issued under section 189A in respect of the non- UK extradition of the person, the person must not be kept in custody under this section after the issue of the certificate.(6) Subsection (5) does not prevent the person from being taken into custody under section 189A.(7) An authorised officer searching a person in the exercise of a power conferred by subsection (2)(b) or (c) may seize any item found if the officer has reasonable grounds for believing that the person searched might use the item—(a) to cause physical injury to that person or any other person; or(b) in a case where the person has been taken into custody, to escape from custody.189C Exercise of the extradition transit powers(1) The extradition transit powers include power to use reasonable force when necessary.(2) An authorised officer may not, when exercising a relevant search power, require a person to remove any clothing other than an outer coat, jacket, headgear or gloves.(3) Any item seized from a person in the exercise of a relevant search power may be retained while the person is in transit through the United Kingdom.189D Codes of practice(1) The Secretary of State must issue a code of practice in connection with—(a) the exercise of extradition transit powers;(b) the retention, use and return of anything seized under a relevant search power.(2) If the Secretary of State proposes to issue a code of practice under this section the Secretary of State must—(a) publish a draft of the code;(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
153
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) consider any representations made to the Secretary of State about the draft;(c) if the Secretary of State thinks it appropriate, modify the draft in the light of any such representations.(3) The Secretary of State must lay the code before Parliament.(4) After doing so the Secretary of State may bring the code into operation by order.(5) The Secretary of State may revise the whole or any part of a code issued under this section and issue the code as revised; and subsections (2) to (4) apply to such a revised code as they apply to the original code.(6) A failure by an authorised officer to comply with a provision of a code issued under this section does not of itself make the authorised officer liable to criminal or civil proceedings.(7) A code issued under this section is admissible in evidence in any proceedings and must be taken into account by a court in determining any question to which it appears to the court to be relevant.(8) If the Secretary of State publishes a draft code of practice in connection with a matter specified in subsection (1) before the date on which this section comes into force—(a) the draft is as effective as one published under subsection (2) on or after that date;(b) representations made to the Secretary of State about the draft before that date are as effective as such representations made after that date;(c) modifications made by the Secretary of State to the draft in the light of any such representations before that date are as effective as any such modifications made on or after that date.189E Sections 189A to 189D: interpretation(1) An “authorised officer” is—(a) a constable, or(b) a person who is of a description specified by the Secretary of State by order.(2) A National Crime Agency officer, prison officer, or any other person who has the powers of a constable (but is not a constable)—(a) does not have the extradition transit powers by virtue of having the powers of a constable; and(b) accordingly, has the extradition transit powers only if the person is of a description specified under subsection (1)(b).(3) These expressions have the meanings given—“extradition transit powers” means the powers under—(a) section 189A (except the power to issue transit certificates), and(b) section 189B;“foreign territory” means a territory outside the United Kingdom; “non-UK extradition” means extradition from one foreign territoryto another foreign territory;
154	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“relevant search power” means a power of search under—(a) section 189A(2)(c) or (d), or(b) section 189B(2)(b) or (c); “relevant UK authority” means—(a) the National Crime Agency (in the case of a non-UK extradition to a category 1 territory), or(b) the Secretary of State (in any other case).(4) A reference to the transit of a person through the United Kingdom is a reference to the person arriving in, being in, and departing from the United Kingdom (whether or not the person travels within the United Kingdom between arrival and departure).(5) This section applies for the purposes of section 189A to 189D (and this section).”169 Extradition to a territory that is party to an international ConventionFor section 193 of the Extradition Act 2003 there is substituted—“193 Parties to international Conventions(1) The Secretary of State may by order—(a) designate an international Convention to which the United Kingdom is a party, and(b) specify conduct to which the Convention applies.(2) If the Secretary of State believes, in respect of a request for a person's extradition, that—(a) the request is for extradition to a territory that is a party to a Convention designated under subsection (1)(a),(b) the territory is not a category 1 territory or a category 2 territory, and(c) the conduct specified in the request is conduct specified under subsection (1)(b),the Secretary of State may certify that the conditions in paragraphs (a) to (c) are satisfied in relation to the extradition of the person.(3) If the Secretary of State issues a certificate under subsection (2) this Act applies in respect of the person's extradition to the territory as if the territory were a category 2 territory.(4) As applied by subsection (3), this Act has effect as if—(a) sections 71(4), 73(5), 74(11)(b), 84(7), 86(7), 137 and 138 wereomitted;(b) the conduct that constituted an extradition offence for the purposes of Part 2 were the conduct specified under subsection (1)(b).(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
155
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) A certificate under subsection (3) in relation to a person is conclusive evidence that the conditions in paragraphs (a) to (c) of subsection (2) are satisfied in relation to the person's extradition.”170 Electronic transmission of European arrest warrant etcIn section 204 of the Extradition Act 2003 (warrant issued by category 1 territory: transmission by electronic means), in subsection (5)—(a) for “subsection (1), a” there is substituted “subsection (1)—(a) a”;(b) at the end there is inserted—“(b) information contained in the warrant is treated as being received by the designated authority in a form in which it is intelligible if the authority receives—(i) a summary of that information in English, and    (ii) the text of the warrant itself, in a form in which it is legible.”Time spent in custody awaiting extradition to the United Kingdom171 Discount on sentence for time spent in custody awaiting extradition: England and WalesIn section 49 of the Prison Act 1952 (persons unlawfully at large), after subsection (3) there is inserted—“(3A) Where—(a) a person is extradited to the United Kingdom from a category 1 territory for the purpose of serving a term of imprisonment or another form of detention mentioned in subsection (2) of this section, and(b) the person was for any time kept in custody in that territory with a view to the extradition (and not also for any other reason),the Secretary of State shall exercise the power under that subsection to direct that account shall be taken of that time in calculating the period for which the person is liable to be detained.(3B) In subsection (3A) of this section “category 1 territory” means a territory designated under the Extradition Act 2003 for the purposes of Part 1 of that Act.”
156	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes172 Discount on sentence for time spent in custody awaiting extradition: Scotland(1) Section 210 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 (consideration of time spent in custody) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)—(a) in paragraph (a), after “United Kingdom” there is inserted “ otherwise than from a category 1 territory ”;(b) in paragraph (c)(ii), for “for the purposes of this section” there is substituted “ who was extradited to the United Kingdom otherwise than from a category 1 territory ”.(3) After subsection (1) there is inserted— “(1A) Subsection (1B) applies where—(a) a court is passing a sentence of imprisonment or detention on a person for an offence, and(b) the person is an extradited prisoner who was extradited to the United Kingdom from a category 1 territory.(1B) The court shall specify—(a) the period of time spent in custody awaiting extradition, and(b) the date of commencement of the sentence in accordance with subsection (1C).(1C) The date of commencement of the sentence is to be a date the relevant number of days earlier than the date the sentence would have commenced had the person not spent time in custody awaiting extradition.(1D) In subsection (1C), “the relevant number of days” means the number of days in the period specified under subsection (1B)(a).”(4) After subsection (2) there is inserted—“(2A) In this section, “category 1 territory” means a territory designated under the Extradition Act 2003 for the purposes of Part 1 of that Act.”(5) Subsection (3) is repealed.173 Discount on sentence for time spent in custody awaiting extradition: Northern Ireland(1) In section 38 of the Prison Act (Northern Ireland) 1953 (arrest, etc, of persons unlawfully at large), for subsection (3) there is substituted—(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 12 – ExtraditionCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
157
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(3) The provisions of subsection (2) shall not apply to any period during which any such person—(a) is detained in pursuance of any other sentence of any court in the United Kingdom in a prison or other institution, or(b) is kept in custody in a category 1 territory before, and only for the purpose of, being extradited to the United Kingdom to serve the term of imprisonment or detention referred to in that subsection,but shall apply in addition to any other provisions of this Act imposing any punishment for an escape.(3A) In subsection (3) “category 1 territory” means a territory designated under the Extradition Act 2003 for the purposes of Part 1 of that Act.”(2) In section 26 of the Treatment of Offenders Act (Northern Ireland) 1968 (duration of sentence), at the end of subsection (2A) there is inserted “; or(c) any period during which he was in custody in a category 1 territory with a view to his being extradited to the United Kingdom to be tried or sentenced for that offence (and not for any other reason).In paragraph (c) “category 1 territory” means a territory designated under the Extradition Act 2003 for the purposes of Part 1 of that Act.”Procedure rules174 Criminal Procedure Rules to apply to extradition proceedings etc(1) In section 68 of the Courts Act 2003 (Criminal Procedure Rules: meaning of “criminal court”), at the end there is inserted—“(c)	the High Court in relation to its jurisdiction under the Extradition Act 2003.”(2) In section 1 of the Civil Procedure Act 1997 (Civil Procedure Rules), in subsection (1) (b), after “the High Court” there is inserted “ except in relation to its jurisdiction under the Extradition Act 2003 ”.(3) In section 157 of the Extradition Act 2003 (production orders), after subsection (8) there is inserted—“(9) Criminal Procedure Rules may make provision about applications under this section to a circuit judge.”(4) In section 160 of that Act (warrants: special procedure material and excluded material), after subsection (9) there is inserted—“(10) Criminal Procedure Rules may make provision about applications under this section to a circuit judge.”
158	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 13 – Criminal justice and court feesCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 13CRIMINAL JUSTICE AND COURT FEES175 Compensation for miscarriages of justice(1) In section 133 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 (compensation for miscarriages of justice) after subsection (1) there is inserted—“(1ZA) For the purposes of subsection (1), there has been a miscarriage of justice in relation to a person convicted of a criminal offence in England and Wales or, in a case where subsection (6H) applies, Northern Ireland, if and only if the new or newly discovered fact shows beyond reasonable doubt that the person did not commit the offence (and references in the rest of this Part to a miscarriage of justice are to be construed accordingly).”(2) Subsection (1ZA) of section 133 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 has effect in relation to—(a) any application for compensation made under subsection (2) of that section on or after the day on which this section comes into force, and(b) any application for compensation made before that day in relation to which the question whether there is a right to compensation has not been finally determined before that day by the Secretary of State under subsection (3) of that section.176 Low-value shoplifting(1) The Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 is amended as follows.(2) In section 2 (trial of summary offences), in subsection (3)(a) for “22” there is substituted “ 22A ”.(3) After section 22 there is inserted—“22A Low-value shoplifting to be a summary offence(1) Low-value shoplifting is triable only summarily.(2) But where a person accused of low-value shoplifting is aged 18 or over, and appears or is brought before the court before the summary trial of the offence begins, the court must give the person the opportunity of electing to be tried by the Crown Court for the offence and, if the person elects to be so tried—(a) subsection (1) does not apply, and(b) the court must send the person to the Crown Court for trial for the offence.(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 13 – Criminal justice and court feesCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
159
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) “Low-value shoplifting” means an offence under section 1 of the Theft Act 1968 in circumstances where—(a) the value of the stolen goods does not exceed £200,(b) the goods were being offered for sale in a shop or any other premises, stall, vehicle or place from which there is carried on a trade or business, and(c) at the time of the offence, the person accused of low-value shoplifting was, or was purporting to be, a customer or potential customer of the person offering the goods for sale.(4) For the purposes of subsection (3)(a)—(a) the value of the stolen goods is the price at which they were being offered for sale at the time of the offence, and(b) where the accused is charged on the same occasion with two or more offences of low-value shoplifting, the reference to the value involved has effect as if it were a reference to the aggregate of the values involved.(5) A person guilty of low-value shoplifting is liable on summary conviction to—(a) imprisonment for a period not exceeding 51 weeks (or 6 months, if the offence was committed before the commencement of section 281(4) and (5) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003),(b) a fine, or(c) both.(6) A person convicted of low-value shoplifting by a magistrates' court may not appeal to the Crown Court against the conviction on the ground that the convicting court was mistaken as to whether the offence was one of low-value shoplifting.(7) For the purposes of this section, any reference to low-value shoplifting includes aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring the commission of low- value shoplifting.”(4) In section 143 (power to alter sums specified in certain provisions)—(a) after subsection (2)(a) there is inserted— “(aza)	section 22A(3)(a) above;”;(b) the word “or” after paragraph (a) of subsection (3) is omitted;(c) after subsection (3)(a) there is inserted—“(aa)	in relation to section 22A(3)(a) above, the date of the coming into force of that section; or”.(5) The Criminal Attempts Act 1981 is amended as follows—(a) in section 1 (attempting to commit an offence) after subsection (4) there is inserted—“(5) This section also applies to low-value shoplifting (which is defined in, and is triable only summarily by virtue of, section 22A of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980).”;(b) in section 4 (trial and penalties) in paragraph (c) of subsection (1), after “either way,” there is inserted “or is low-value shoplifting (which is defined in, and(a) 
160	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 13 – Criminal justice and court feesCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesis triable only summarily by virtue of, section 22A of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980),”.(6) Any reference in the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 to an “indictable offence” has effect as if it included a reference to low-value shoplifting (as defined in section 22A(3) of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980).(7) In section 84 of the Armed Forces Act 2006 (definitions), after subsection (2) there is inserted—“(2A) In subsection (2)(a), the reference to an “indictable offence” has effect as if it included a reference to low-value shoplifting (as defined in section 22A(3) of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980).”(8) The amendments made by this section have effect in relation to—(a) low-value shoplifting (which is defined in section 22A(3) of the 1980 Act) committed on or after the day on which this section comes into force, and(b) low-value shoplifting committed before that day in respect of which proceedings have not yet been instituted.177 Abolition of defence of marital coercion(1) The defence of marital coercion is abolished.(2) Accordingly, section 47 of the Criminal Justice Act 1925 (coercion of married woman by husband) is repealed.(3) This section does not have effect in respect of an offence alleged to have been committed before the date on which it comes into force.178 Protection arrangements for persons at risk(1) The Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 is amended as follows.(2) In section 82 (protection of persons involved in investigations or proceedings)—(a) in the heading, for “of persons involved in investigations or proceedings” there is substituted “ arrangements for persons at risk ”;(b) in subsection (1), for the words from “a person” to “United Kingdom” there is substituted “ any person if he reasonably believes that the person's safety is at risk in view of the criminal conduct or possible criminal conduct of another person ”;(c) after subsection (5) there is inserted—“(5A) In subsection (1), “criminal conduct” means conduct which constitutes an offence in England and Wales or Scotland, or would do if it occurred there.(5B) Nothing in this section prevents a protection provider from making arrangements under this section for the protection of a person where
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 13 – Criminal justice and court feesCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
161
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesnon-statutory arrangements have already been made in respect of that person.”;(d) subsection (6) is repealed.(3) Sections 91 and 92 are repealed.(4) In section 93, paragraph (b) of subsection (1) and the word “or” before it are repealed.(5) In section 172, paragraph (e) of subsection (5) is repealed.(6) Schedule 5 is repealed.(7) Nothing in this section affects arrangements made before the commencement of this section for the purpose of protecting a person under section 82(1) of the 2005 Act.179 Surcharges: imprisonment in default and remission of fines(1) In section 82 of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 (restriction on power to impose imprisonment for default), after subsection (1) there is inserted—“(1A) Subsection (1)(c) above does not apply in relation to a surcharge ordered to be paid under section 161A of the Criminal Justice Act 2003.”(2) In section 85 of that Act (power to remit fine), after subsection (3) there is inserted— “(3A) Where—(a) the court remits the whole or part of the fine, and(b) the offender was ordered under section 161A of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 to pay a surcharge the amount of which was set by reference to the amount of the fine,the court shall determine how much the surcharge would have been if the fine had not included the amount remitted, and remit the balance of the surcharge.”F77(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(4) Subsections (2) and (3) apply in any case where the fine, or part of it, is remitted on or after the day on which this section comes into force.
162	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 14 – GeneralCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes180 Court and tribunal fees(1) In prescribing a fee under an enactment specified in subsection (2), the Lord Chancellor may with the consent of the Treasury prescribe a fee of an amount which is intended to exceed the cost of anything in respect of which the fee is charged.(2) The enactments are—(a) section 92 of the Courts Act 2003 (Senior Courts, county courts and magistrates' courts fees);(b) section 54 of the Mental Capacity Act 2005 (Court of Protection fees);(c) section 58(4)(b) of that Act (Public Guardian fees);(d) section 42 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (tribunal fees).(3) Before prescribing a fee by virtue of subsection (1) under an enactment specified in subsection (2)(a), (b) or (d), the Lord Chancellor must have regard to—(a) the financial position of the courts and tribunals for which the Lord Chancellor is responsible, including in particular any costs incurred by those courts and tribunals that are not being met by current fee income, and(b) the competitiveness of the legal services market.(4) For the purposes of subsection (3)(a), the courts and tribunals for which the Lord Chancellor is responsible are the courts listed in section 1(1) of the Courts Act 2003 and the tribunals listed in section 39(1) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.(5) A fee prescribed by virtue of subsection (1) under section 58(4)(b) of the Mental Capacity Act 2005 must be used to finance the efficient and effective discharge of functions of the Public Guardian.(6) A fee prescribed by virtue of subsection (1) under any other enactment specified in subsection (2) must be used to finance an efficient and effective system of courts and tribunals.(7) A statutory instrument—(a) containing an order or regulations under an enactment specified in subsection (2), and(b) setting a fee in excess of the cost of anything in respect of which the fee is charged,may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before both Houses of Parliament and approved by a resolution of each House.(8) But subsection (7) does not apply if the statutory instrument only adjusts a fee to reflect changes in the value of money.PART 14GENERAL181 Amendments(1) Schedule 11 (minor and consequential amendments) has effect.(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 14 – GeneralCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
163
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) The Secretary of State may by order make consequential amendments to provisions contained in or made under any Act.“Consequential amendments” here means amendments that are consequential on any provision of this Act, other than the provisions listed in subsection (4) as they apply in Wales.(3) The Secretary of State may by order make amendments to sections 136 and 142 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 that are consequential on the coming into force of any amendment of Part 2 of that Act made by the Criminal Justice Act (Northern Ireland) 2013.(4) The Welsh Ministers may by order make consequential amendments to provisions contained in or made under any Act or any Measure or Act of the National Assembly for Wales.“Consequential amendments” here means amendments that are consequential on any of the following provisions as they apply in Wales—(a) sections 94 to 98 and Schedule 3;(b) section 100;(c) paragraphs 2, 7 to 10, 12 to 14, 15(4), 16, 18 to 20, 47(4) and 48 ofSchedule 11.182 Orders and regulations(1) A power under this Act to make an order or regulations is exercisable by statutory instrument, but this does not apply to a power of the Scottish Ministers to make an order under section 185.(1) 
164	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 14 – GeneralCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) A statutory instrument containing—(a) an order under section 5(5),(b) an order under section 53(4),(c) regulations under section 116(5)(b), or(d) an order under section 181(2) that amends an Act,may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before both Houses of Parliament and approved by a resolution of each House.(3) A statutory instrument containing an order under section 181(4) that amends an Act or a Measure or Act of the National Assembly for Wales may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before and approved by a resolution of the National Assembly for Wales.(4) A statutory instrument containing—(a) an order under this Act made by the Secretary of State, other than an order within subsection (2) or an order under section 181(3) or 185, or(b) regulations under this Act made by the Secretary of State, other than regulations within subsection (2),is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.(5) A statutory instrument containing—(a) an order under this Act made by the Welsh Ministers, other than an order within subsection (3) or an order under section 185, or(b) regulations under this Act made by the Welsh Ministers,is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of the National Assembly for Wales.(6) An order or regulations under this Act (other than an order under section 185) may make saving, transitional, transitory, supplementary or consequential provision.183 Financial provisionThere is to be paid out of money provided by Parliament any increase attributable to this Act in the sums payable under any other Act out of money so provided.184 Extent(1) The following provisions extend to England and Wales only—(a) Parts 1 to 6;(b) section 106 except subsections (2)(a)(ii) and (6);(c) section 114;(d) sections 116 to 119;(e) sections 120 and 121;(f) sections 123 to 130;(g) section 133(1), (2) and (4);(h) sections 135 to 143;(i) sections 144, 145 and 146(1);(j) sections 149 and 151;(k) section 152 and Schedule 10;(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) PART 14 – GeneralCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
165
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(l) sections 153 and 154;(m) sections 166, 171 and 174;(n) section 176 except subsection (7);(o) sections 177 and 179.(2) The following provisions extend to England and Wales and Scotland (but not Northern Ireland)—(a) sections 106(2)(a)(ii) and (6) and 107;(b) sections 108 to 110 and 112;(c) section 133(3);(d) section 178.(3) The following provisions extend to England and Wales and Northern Ireland (but not Scotland)—(a) section 115 and Schedule 6;(b) section 132 and Schedule 7;(c) section 175.(4) The following provisions extend to England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland—(a) section 111;(b) section 113 and Schedule 5;(c) section 131;(d) section 133(5);(e) section 146(2);(f) section 147 and Schedule 8;(g) section 148 and Schedule 9;(h) section 150;(i) Part 12, except sections 166 and 171 to 174;(j) section 180.(5) Sections 122 and 172 extend only to Scotland.(6) Sections 134 and 173 extend only to Northern Ireland.(7) Section 176(7) has the same extent as section 84 of the Armed Forces Act 2006, and the powers conferred by section 384 of that Act (power to extend Act to the Channel Islands and powers to make provisions of that Act apply with modifications in relation to the Channel Islands, British overseas territories and the Isle of Man) are exercisable in relation to the amendment of that Act made by section 176(7) of this Act.(8) An amendment, repeal or revocation made by Schedule 11 has the same extent as the relevant part of the Act or instrument amended, repealed or revoked.(9) The powers conferred by sections 177, 178 and 222 of the Extradition Act 2003 (powers to make provisions of that Act apply in relation to British overseas territories, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man) are exercisable in relation to any amendment of that Act made by this Act.(1) 
166	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)PART 14 – GeneralCHAPTER 3 – Closure of premises associated with nuisance or disorder etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes185 Commencement(1) This Act comes into force on whatever day or days the Secretary of State appoints by order.(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to—(a) sections 150, 175, 180, 181(2) and (4) and 182 to 186, which come into force on the day on which this Act is passed;(b) sections 151 and 177, which come into force at the end of the period of 2 months beginning with that day;(c) the provisions listed in subsection (3) as they apply in Wales;(d) section 149;(e) section 122.(3) The following provisions, as they apply in Wales, come into force on whatever day or days the Welsh Ministers appoint by order—(a) sections 94 to 98 and Schedule 3;(b) section 100;(c) paragraphs 2, 7 to 10, 12 to 14, 15(4), 16, 18 to 20, 47(4) and 48 of Schedule 11 (and section 181(1) so far as it relates to those paragraphs).(4) Different days may be appointed under subsection (1) or (3) for different purposes or different areas.(5) Section 149 comes into force on whatever day the Attorney General appoints by order.(6) Section 122 comes into force on whatever day the Scottish Ministers appoint by order.(7) The Secretary of State may by order make whatever saving, transitional or transitory provision (in addition to the provision in sections 21, 33, 42, 58 and 93) the Secretary of State thinks appropriate in connection with the coming into force of any provision of this Act, other than the provisions listed in subsection (3) as they apply in Wales.(8) The Welsh Ministers may by order make whatever saving, transitional or transitory provision they think appropriate in connection with the coming into force in Wales of the provisions listed in subsection (3) as they apply in Wales.(9) The Scottish Ministers may by order make whatever saving, transitional or transitory provision they think appropriate in connection with the coming into force of section 122.(10) An order under this section bringing into force on a particular day a provision which refers to the Police Negotiating Board for Scotland may, if it appears to the Secretary of State that no body of that name will be in existence on that day, bring the provision into force subject to whatever consequential amendment or transitional provision the Secretary of State thinks appropriate.186 Short titleThis Act may be cited as the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014.
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 1 – Remands under sections 9 and 10Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
167
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesSCHEDULES SCHEDULE 1	Section 11REMANDS UNDER SECTIONS 9 AND 10Introductory1 (1) This Schedule applies where—(a) a judge has power to remand a person under section 9(5),(b) a justice of the peace is required to remand a person under section 9(6), or(c) a court has power to remand a person under section 10(8).(2) A reference in the following paragraphs of this Schedule to a judge is to be read as including a justice of the peace.Remand in custody or on bail2 (1) The judge or the court may remand the person—(a) in custody, or(b) on bail.But a person aged under 18 may not be remanded in custody unless paragraph 6 applies.(2) A reference in this Schedule to remanding a person in custody is a reference to committing the person to custody to be brought before the court at the end of the period of remand or at whatever earlier time the court may require.(3) The judge or the court may remand the person on bail—(a) by taking from the person a recognizance, with or without sureties, conditioned as provided in paragraph 3, or(b) by fixing the amount of the recognizances with a view to their being taken subsequently and, in the meantime, committing the person to custody as mentioned in sub-paragraph (2).(4) Where a person is brought before the court after remand, the court may further remand the person.
168	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 1 – Remands under sections 9 and 10Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes3 (1) Where a person is remanded on bail, the judge or the court may direct that the person's recognizance be conditioned for his or her appearance—(a) before the court at the end of the period of remand, or(b) at every time and place to which during the course of the proceedings the hearing may from time to time be adjourned.(2) Where a recognizance is conditioned for a person's appearance as mentioned in sub- paragraph (1)(b), the fixing of a time for the person next to appear is to be treated as a remand.(3) Nothing in this paragraph affects the power of the court at any subsequent hearing to remand the person afresh.4 (1) The judge or the court may not remand a person for a period exceeding 8 clear days unless—(a) paragraph 5 or 6 applies, or(b) the person is remanded on bail and both that person and the person who applied for the injunction consent to a longer period.(2) Where the judge or the court has power to remand a person in custody, the person may be committed to the custody of a constable if the remand is for a period not exceeding 3 clear days.Remand for medical examination and report5 (1) This paragraph applies where—(a) the judge or the court has reason to think that a medical report will be needed, and(b) the judge or the court remands the person in order to enable a medical examination to take place and a report to be made.(2) If (in the case of a person aged 18 or over) the person is remanded in custody, the adjournment may not be for more than 3 weeks at a time.(3) If the person is remanded on bail, the adjournment may not be for more than 4 weeks at a time.6 (1) If the judge or the court—1 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 1 – Remands under sections 9 and 10Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
169
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) is satisfied, on the written or oral evidence of a registered medical practitioner, that there is reason to suspect that the person is suffering from mental disorder, and(b) is of the opinion that it would be impracticable for a report on the person's mental condition to be made if he or she were remanded on bail,the judge or the court may remand the person to a hospital or registered establishment specified by the judge or the court for such a report to be made.(2) In sub-paragraph (1)—  “hospital” has the meaning given by section 145(1) of the Mental Health Act 1983;  “mental disorder” has the meaning given by section 1 of that Act (reading subsection (2B) of that section as if it included a reference to sub- paragraph (1) above);“registered establishment” has the meaning given by 34(1) of that Act.(3) Subsections (4) to (10) of section 35 of the Mental Health Act 1983 apply for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) with any necessary modifications (in particular, with references to the accused person being read as references to the person mentioned in that sub-paragraph, and references to the court being read as references to the judge or the court).Further remand7 (1) If the court is satisfied that a person who has been remanded is unable by reason of illness or accident to appear or be brought before the court at the end of the period of remand, the court may further remand the person in his or her absence.(2) The power in sub-paragraph (1) may, in the case of a person who was remanded on bail, be exercised by enlarging the person's recognizance and those of any sureties for the person to a later time.(3) Where a person remanded on bail is bound to appear before the court at any time and the court has no power to remand the person under sub-paragraph (1), the court may (in the person's absence) enlarge the person's recognizance and those of any sureties for the person to a later time.(4) The enlargement of the person's recognizance is to be treated as a further remand.(5) Paragraph 4(1) (limit of remand) does not apply to the exercise of the powers conferred by this paragraph.
170	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 2 – Breach of injunctions: powers of court in respect of under-18sDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPostponement of taking recognizance8 Where under paragraph 2(3)(b) the court fixes the amount in which the principal and the sureties, if any, are to be bound, the recognizance may afterwards be taken by a person prescribed by rules of court, with the same consequences as if it had been entered into before the court.Requirements imposed on remand on bail9 The court may when remanding a person on bail under this Schedule require the person to comply, before release on bail or later, with any requirements that appear to the court to be necessary to secure that the person does not interfere with witnesses or otherwise obstruct the course of justice.SCHEDULE 2	Section 12BREACH OF INJUNCTIONS: POWERS OF COURT IN RESPECT OF UNDER-18SPART 1INTRODUCTORYPower to make supervision order or detention order1 (1) A youth court, if satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that a person aged under 18 is in breach of a provision of an injunction under section 1 to which he or she is subject, may make in respect of the person—(a) a supervision order (see Part 2 of this Schedule), or(b) a detention order (see Part 3 of this Schedule).(2) An order under sub-paragraph (1) may be made only on the application of the person who applied for the injunction.(3) A person making an application for an order under sub-paragraph (1) must before doing so—(a) consult any youth offending team specified under section 3(1) or, if a youth offending team is not specified under that subsection, the local youth offending team within the meaning of section 14;(b) inform any other body or individual the applicant thinks appropriate.(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 2 – Breach of injunctions: powers of court in respect of under-18s Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
171
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4) In considering whether and how to exercise its powers under this paragraph, the court must consider any representations made by the youth offending team referred to in sub-paragraph (3)(a).(5) A detention order may not be made under sub-paragraph (1) in respect of a person aged under 14.(6) The court may not make a detention order under sub-paragraph (1) unless it is satisfied that, in view of the severity or extent of the breach, no other power available to the court is appropriate.PART 2SUPERVISION ORDERSSupervision orders2 (1) A supervision order is an order imposing on the person in respect of whom it is made (“the defaulter”) one or more of the following requirements—(a) a supervision requirement (see paragraph 3);(b) an activity requirement (see paragraph 4);(c) a curfew requirement (see paragraph 5).(2) Before making a supervision order the court must obtain and consider information about the defaulter's family circumstances and the likely effect of a supervision order on those circumstances.(3) Before making a supervision order imposing two or more requirements, the court must consider their compatibility with each other.(4) The court must ensure, as far as practicable, that requirements imposed by a supervision order are such as to avoid—(a) any interference with the times, if any, at which the defaulter normally works or attends school or any other educational establishment;(b) any conflict with the requirements of any other court order or injunction to which the defaulter may be subject.(5) A supervision order must for the purposes of this Schedule specify a maximum period for the operation of any requirement contained in the order.(6) The period specified under sub-paragraph (5) may not exceed 6 months (not counting the day on which the order is made).(7) A supervision order must for the purposes of this Schedule specify—(a) the youth offending team in whose area it appears to the court that the respondent will live during the period specified under sub-paragraph (5), or(b) if it appears to the court that the defaulter will live in more than one such area, whichever of the relevant youth offending teams the court decides.(a) 
172	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 2 – Breach of injunctions: powers of court in respect of under-18sDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesSupervision requirements3 (1) In this Schedule “supervision requirement”, in relation to a supervision order, means a requirement that the defaulter attend appointments with—(a) the responsible officer (see paragraph 7), or(b) another person decided by the responsible officer,at whatever times and places the responsible officer instructs.(2) The appointments must be within the period for the time being specified in the order under paragraph 2(5).Activity requirements4 (1) In this Schedule “activity requirement”, in relation to a supervision order, means a requirement that the defaulter do any or all of the following within the period for the time being specified in the order under paragraph 2(5)—(a) participate, on however many days are specified in the order, in activities at a place or places specified in it;(b) participate in an activity or activities specified in the order on however many days are specified in it;(c) participate in one or more residential exercises for a continuous period or periods comprising however many days are specified in the order;(d) in accordance with sub-paragraphs (8) to (10), engage in activities in accordance with instructions of the responsible officer on however many days are specified in the order.(2) The aggregate number of days specified in a supervision order in relation to an activity requirement must not be less than 12 or more than 24.(3) A requirement referred to in sub-paragraph (1)(a) operates to require the defaulter, in accordance with instructions given by the responsible officer, on the number of days specified in the order in relation to the requirement—(a) to present himself or herself at a place specified in the order to a person of a description specified in it;(b) on each day, to comply with instructions given by, or under the authority of, the person in charge of the place.(4) A requirement referred to in sub-paragraph (1)(b) operates to require the defaulter, in accordance with instructions given by the responsible officer, on the number of days specified in the order in relation to the requirement—(a) to participate in an activity specified in the order;(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 2 – Breach of injunctions: powers of court in respect of under-18s Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
173
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) on each day, to comply with instructions given by, or under the authority of, the person in charge of the activity.(5) Where the order includes a requirement referred to in sub-paragraph (1)(c) to participate in a residential exercise, it must specify either—(a) a place, or(b) an activity,in relation to the exercise.(6) A requirement under sub-paragraph (1)(c) to participate in a residential exercise in relation to which a place is specified under sub-paragraph (5) operates to require the defaulter, in accordance with instructions given by the responsible officer—(a) to present himself or herself at the beginning of the period specified in the order in relation to the exercise, at the place specified in it, to a person of a description specified in the instructions;(b) to live there for that period;(c) during that period to comply with instructions given by, or under the authority of, the person in charge of the place.(7) A requirement under sub-paragraph (1)(c) to participate in a residential exercise in relation to which an activity is specified under sub-paragraph (5) operates to require the defaulter, in accordance with instructions given by the responsible officer—(a) to participate, for the period specified in the order in relation to the exercise, in the activity specified in it;(b) during that period to comply with instructions given by, or under the authority of, the person in charge of the activity.(8) Subject to sub-paragraph (9), instructions under sub-paragraph (1)(d) relating to any particular day must require the defaulter to do either of the following—(a) to present himself or herself to a person of a description specified in the instructions at a place specified in them;(b) to participate in an activity specified in the instructions.The instructions operate to require the defaulter, on that day or while participating in that activity, to comply with instructions given by, or under the authority of, the person in charge of the place or activity.(9) If the supervision order so provides, instructions under sub-paragraph (1)(d) may require the defaulter to participate in a residential exercise for a period comprising not more than seven days, and for that purpose—(a) to present himself or herself at the beginning of that period to a person of a description specified in the instructions at a place specified in them, and to live there for that period, or(b) to participate for that period in an activity specified in the instructions.(10) Instructions of the kind mentioned in sub-paragraph (9)—(a) may not be given except with the consent of a parent or guardian of the defaulter;(b) operate to require the defaulter, during the period specified under that sub- paragraph, to comply with instructions given by, or under the authority of, the person in charge of the place or activity specified under paragraph (a) or(b) of that sub-paragraph.
174	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 2 – Breach of injunctions: powers of court in respect of under-18sDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(11) Instructions given by, or under the authority of, a person in charge of a place under sub-paragraph (3)(b), (6)(c), (8) or (10)(b) may require the defaulter to engage in activities otherwise than at that place.(12) Where a supervision order contains an activity requirement, the court may, on the application of the original applicant or the defaulter, amend the order by substituting for a number of days, place, activity, period or description of persons specified in the order a new number of days, place, activity, period or description (subject, in the case of a number of days, to sub-paragraph (2)).(13) A court may include an activity requirement in a supervision order or vary an activity requirement under sub-paragraph (12) only if—(a) it has consulted the youth offending team that is to be, or is, specified in the order,(b) it is satisfied that it is feasible to secure compliance with the requirement, or the requirement as varied,(c) it is satisfied that provision for the defaulter to participate in the activities proposed can be made under the arrangements for persons to participate in those activities which exist in the area of the youth offending team that is to be, or is, specified in the order, and(d) in a case where the requirement, or the requirement as varied, would involve the co-operation of a person other than the defaulter and the responsible officer, that person consents to its inclusion or variation.(14) In sub-paragraph (10) “guardian” has the same meaning as in the Children and Young Persons Act 1933. But where a local authority has parental responsibility (within the meaning given by section 3 of the Children Act 1989) for a defaulter who—(a) is in the authority's care, or(b) is provided with accommodation by the authority in the exercise of social services functions (within the meaning given by section 1A of the Local Authority Social Services Act 1970 [F78in relation to a local authority in England or for the purposes of the Social Services and Well-being (Wales)Act 2014 in relation to a local authority in Wales]),the reference to “guardian” in sub-paragraph (10) is to be read as a reference to that authority.Curfew requirements5 (1) In this Schedule “curfew requirement”, in relation to a supervision order, means a requirement that the defaulter remain at a place specified in the order for the periods specified in it.1 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 2 – Breach of injunctions: powers of court in respect of under-18s Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
175
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) A supervision order imposing a curfew requirement may specify different places or different periods for different days.(3) The periods specified under sub-paragraph (1)—(a) must be within the period for the time being specified in the order under paragraph 2(5);(b) may not amount to less than 2 or more than 8 hours in any day.(4) Before specifying a place under sub-paragraph (1), the court making the order must obtain and consider information about the place proposed to be specified (including information as to the attitude of persons likely to be affected by the enforced presence there of the defaulter).(5) Where a supervision order contains a curfew requirement, the court may, on the application of the original applicant or the defaulter, amend the order by—(a) substituting new periods for the periods specified in the order under this paragraph (subject to sub-paragraph (3));(b) substituting a new place for the place specified in the order under this paragraph (subject to sub-paragraph (4)).Electronic monitoring requirements6 (1) A supervision order containing a curfew requirement may also contain a requirement (an “electronic monitoring requirement”) for securing the electronic monitoring of compliance with the curfew requirement during a period—(a) specified in the order, or(b) determined by the responsible officer in accordance with the order.(2) In the case referred to in sub-paragraph (1)(b), the responsible officer must, before the beginning of the period when the electronic monitoring requirement is to take effect, notify—(a) the defaulter,(b) the person responsible for the monitoring, and  (c) any person within sub-paragraph (3)(b), of the time when that period is to begin.(3) Where—(a) it is proposed to include an electronic monitoring requirement in a supervision order, but(b) there is a person (other than the defaulter) without whose co-operation it will not be practicable to secure that the monitoring takes place,the requirement may not be included in the order without that person's consent.(4) A supervision order imposing an electronic monitoring requirement must include provision for making a person responsible for the monitoring.(2) 
176	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 2 – Breach of injunctions: powers of court in respect of under-18sDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) An electronic monitoring requirement may not be included in a supervision order unless the court making the order—(a) has been notified by the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order that arrangements for electronic monitoring are available in the area that includes the place the court proposes to specify in the order for the purposes of the curfew requirement, and(b) is satisfied that the necessary provision can be made under the arrangements currently available.(6) Where a supervision order contains an electronic monitoring requirement, the court may, on the application of the original applicant or the defaulter, amend the order by substituting a new period for the period specified in the order under this paragraph.(7) Sub-paragraph (3) applies in relation to the variation of an electronic monitoring requirement under sub-paragraph (6) as it applies in relation to the inclusion of a requirement.“Responsible officer”7 (1) For the purposes of this Part of this Schedule, the “responsible officer”, in relation to a supervision order, means—(a) in a case where the order imposes a curfew requirement and an electronic monitoring requirement, but does not impose an activity or supervision requirement, the person who under paragraph 6(4) is responsible for the electronic monitoring;(b) in any other case, the member of the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order who is for the time being responsible for discharging the functions conferred by this Schedule on the responsible officer.(2) Where a supervision order has been made, it is the duty of the responsible officer—(a) to make any arrangements that are necessary in connection with the requirements contained in the order;(b) to promote the defaulter's compliance with those requirements.(3) The responsible officer must ensure, so far as practicable, that any instructions given by the officer under a supervision order are such as to avoid the things referred to in paragraph 2(4).(4) A defaulter in respect of whom a supervision order is made must—(a) keep in touch with the responsible officer, in accordance with any instructions given by the responsible officer from time to time;  (b) notify the responsible officer of any change of address. These obligations have effect as requirements of the order.  (a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 2 – Breach of injunctions: powers of court in respect of under-18s Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
177
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesAmendment of operative period8 (1) The court may, on the application of the original applicant, amend a supervision order by substituting a new period for the one specified in the order for the time being under paragraph 2(5) (subject to paragraph 2(6)).(2) A court amending a supervision order under sub-paragraph (1) may make whatever other amendments to the order the court considers appropriate in relation to a requirement imposed by the order.Amendment on change of area of residence9 (1) This paragraph applies where, on an application made in relation to a supervision order by the original applicant or the defaulter, the court is satisfied that the defaulter proposes to live, or is living, in the area of a youth offending team other than the team for the time being specified in the order.(2) If the application is made by the defaulter, the court may amend the order by substituting for the youth offending team specified in the order the youth offending team for the area referred to in sub-paragraph (1) (or, if there is more than one youth offending team for that area, whichever of them the court decides).(3) If the application is made by the original applicant, the court must amend the order in the way mentioned in sub-paragraph (2) (subject to sub-paragraph (5)).(4) Where a court amends the supervision order under sub-paragraph (2) or (3) but the order contains a requirement that, in the opinion of the court, cannot reasonably be complied with if the defaulter lives in the area referred to in sub-paragraph (1), the court must also amend the order by—(a) removing that requirement, or(b) substituting for that requirement a new requirement that can reasonably be complied with if the defaulter lives in that area.(5) Sub-paragraph (3) does not require a court to amend the supervision order if in its opinion sub-paragraph (4) would produce an inappropriate result.(6) The original applicant must consult the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order before making an application under sub-paragraph (1).
178	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 2 – Breach of injunctions: powers of court in respect of under-18sDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesRevocation of supervision order10 (1) The original applicant or the defaulter may apply to a youth court—(a) to revoke a supervision order;(b) to amend a supervision order by removing a requirement from it.(2) If it appears to the court to be in the interests of justice to do so, having regard to circumstances that have arisen since the supervision order was made, the court may grant an application under sub-paragraph (1) and revoke or amend the order accordingly.(3) The circumstances referred to in sub-paragraph (2) include the conduct of the defaulter.(4) If an application under this paragraph is dismissed, the party by which the dismissed application was made may make no further application under this paragraph without—(a) the consent of the court, or(b) the agreement of the other party.(5) The original applicant must consult the youth offending team for the time being specified in the supervision order before making an application under sub- paragraph (1).Compliance with supervision order11 If the responsible officer considers that the defaulter has complied with all the requirements of the supervision order, the officer must inform the original applicant.Non-compliance with supervision order12 (1) If the responsible officer considers that the defaulter has failed to comply with a requirement of the supervision order, the officer must inform the original applicant.(2) On being informed under sub-paragraph (1) the original applicant may apply to a youth court.(3) Before making an application under sub-paragraph (2) the original applicant must—(a) consult the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order;(b) inform any other body or individual the original applicant thinks appropriate.(4) If on an application under sub-paragraph (2) the court is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the defaulter has without reasonable excuse failed to comply with a requirement of the supervision order, the court may—(a) revoke the supervision order and make a new one;(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 2 – Breach of injunctions: powers of court in respect of under-18s Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
179
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) revoke the order and make a detention order (see Part 3 of this Schedule).(5) The powers in sub-paragraph (4)—(a) may not be exercised after the defaulter reaches the age of 18;(b) are in addition to any other power of the court in relation to the breach of the supervision order.(6) The court must consider any representations made by the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order before exercising its powers under this paragraph.Copies of supervision order etc13 (1) A court that makes a supervision order must straight away provide a copy of the order to—(a) the defaulter;(b) the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order.(2) Where a supervision order is made, the original applicant must straight away provide a copy of so much of the order as is relevant—(a) in a case where the order includes an activity requirement specifying a place under paragraph 4(1)(a), to the person in charge of that place;(b) in a case where the order includes an activity requirement specifying an activity under paragraph 4(1)(b), to the person in charge of that activity;(c) in a case where the order includes an activity requirement specifying a residential exercise under paragraph 4(1)(c), to the person in charge of the place or activity specified under paragraph 4(5) in relation to that residential exercise;(d) in a case where the order contains an electronic monitoring requirement, to—(i) any person who by virtue of paragraph 6(4) will be responsible for the electronic monitoring, and(ii) any person without whose consent that requirement could not have been included in the order.(3) A court that revokes or amends a supervision order must straight away provide a copy of the revoking order, or of the order as amended, to—(a) the defaulter;(b) the youth offending team for the time being specified in the order.(4) Where—(a) a copy of a supervision order (or part of a supervision order) has been given to a person under sub-paragraph (2) by virtue of a requirement contained in the order, and(b) the order is revoked, or amended in respect of that requirement,the original applicant must straight away give a copy of the revoking order, or of so much of the order as amended as is relevant, to that person.
180	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 2 – Breach of injunctions: powers of court in respect of under-18sDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 3DETENTION ORDERSDetention orders14 (1) A detention order is an order that the person in respect of whom it is made (“the defaulter”) be detained for a period specified in the order in whatever youth detention accommodation the Secretary of State decides.(2) The period specified under sub-paragraph (1) may not exceed the period of 3 months (not counting the day on which the order is made).(3) In sub-paragraph (1) “youth detention accommodation” means—(a) a secure training centre;(b) a young offender institution;(c) secure accommodation, as defined by section 23(12) of the Children and Young Persons Act 1969.(4) The function of the Secretary of State under sub-paragraph (1) is exercisable concurrently with the Youth Justice Board.(5) A person detained under a detention order is in legal custody.Revocation of detention order15 (1) Where a detention order is made, the original applicant or the defaulter may apply to a youth court to revoke it.(2) If it appears to the court to be in the interests of justice to do so, having regard to circumstances that have arisen since the detention order was made, the court may grant an application under sub-paragraph (1) and revoke the order accordingly.(3) The circumstances referred to in sub-paragraph (2) include the conduct of the defaulter.(4) If an application under this paragraph is dismissed, the party by which the dismissed application was made may make no further application under this paragraph without—(a) the consent of the court, or(b) the agreement of the other party.(5) A person making an application under this paragraph in relation to a detention order made under paragraph 1 must before doing so consult any youth offending team(2) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 3 – Schedule to be inserted as Schedule 2A to the Housing Act 1985 Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
181
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesspecified in the injunction under section 3(1) or, if none is specified, the local youth offending team within the meaning of section 14.(6) A person making an application under this paragraph in relation to a detention order made under paragraph 12(4)(b) must before doing so consult the youth offending team for the time being specified in the relevant supervision order.SCHEDULE 3	Section 94(2)SCHEDULE TO BE INSERTED AS SCHEDULE 2A TO THE HOUSING ACT 1985“SCHEDULE 2A	Section 84A(9)ABSOLUTE GROUND FOR POSSESSION FOR ANTI-SOCIAL BEHAVIOUR: SERIOUS OFFENCESViolent offences1 Murder.2 Manslaughter.3 Kidnapping.4 False imprisonment.5 An offence under any of the following sections of the Offences against the Person Act 1861—(a) section 4 (soliciting murder),(b) section 16 (threats to kill),(c) section 18 (wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm),(d) section 20 (malicious wounding),(e) section 21 (attempting to choke, suffocate or strangle in order to commit or assist in committing an indictable offence),(f) section 22 (using chloroform etc. to commit or assist in the committing of any indictable offence),(g) section 23 (maliciously administering poison etc. so as to endanger life or inflict grievous bodily harm),(h) section 24 (maliciously administering poison etc. with intent to injure, aggrieve or annoy any other person),(i) section 27 (abandoning or exposing children whereby life is endangered or health permanently injured),(a) 
182	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 3 – Schedule to be inserted as Schedule 2A to the Housing Act 1985Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(j) section 28 (causing bodily injury by explosives),(k) section 29 (using explosives etc. with intent to do grievous bodily harm),(l) section 30 (placing explosives with intent to do bodily injury),(m) section 31 (setting spring guns etc. with intent to do grievous bodily harm),(n) section 38 (assault with intent to resist arrest),(o) section 47 (assault occasioning actual bodily harm).6 An offence under any of the following sections of the Explosive Substances Act 1883—(a) section 2 (causing explosion likely to endanger life or property),(b) section 3 (attempt to cause explosion, or making or keeping explosive with intent to endanger life or property),(c) section 4 (making or possession of explosive under suspicious circumstances).7 An offence under section 1 of the Infant Life (Preservation) Act 1929 (child destruction).8 An offence under section 1 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 (cruelty to children).9 An offence under section 1 of the Infanticide Act 1938 (infanticide).10 An offence under any of the following sections of the Public Order Act 1986—(a) section 1 (riot),(b) section 2 (violent disorder),(c) section 3 (affray).11 An offence under either of the following sections of the Protection from Harassment Act 1997—(a) section 4 (putting people in fear of violence),(b) section 4A (stalking involving fear of violence or serious alarm or distress).12 An offence under any of the following provisions of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998—(a) section 29 (racially or religiously aggravated assaults),(b) section 31(1)(a) or (b) (racially or religiously aggravated offences under section 4 or 4A of the Public Order Act 1986),(c) section 32 (racially or religiously aggravated harassment etc.).13 An offence under either of the following sections of the Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003—(a) section 1 (female genital mutilation),(b) section 2 (assisting a girl to mutilate her own genitalia).14 An offence under section 5 of the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004 (causing or allowing the death of a child or vulnerable adult).Sexual offences15 An offence under section 33A of the Sexual Offences Act 1956 (keeping a brothel used for prostitution).16 An offence under section 1 of the Protection of Children Act 1978 (indecent photographs of children).17 An offence under section 160 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 (possession of indecent photograph of a child).1 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 3 – Schedule to be inserted as Schedule 2A to the Housing Act 1985 Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
183
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes18 An indictable offence under Part 1 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (sexual offences).Offensive weapons19 An offence under either of the following sections of the Prevention of Crime Act 1953—(a) section 1 (prohibition of the carrying of offensive weapons without lawful authority or reasonable excuse),(b) section 1A (threatening with offensive weapon in public).20 An offence under any of the following provisions of the Firearms Act 1968—(a) section 16 (possession of firearm with intent to endanger life),(b) section 16A (possession of firearm with intent to cause fear of violence),(c) section 17(1) (use of firearm to resist arrest),(d) section 17(2) (possession of firearm at time of committing or being arrested for offence specified in Schedule 1 to the Act of 1968),(e) section 18 (carrying a firearm with criminal intent),(f) section 19 (carrying a firearm in a public place),(g) section 20 (trespassing with firearm),(h) section 21 (possession of firearms by persons previously convicted of crime).21 An offence under either of the following sections of the Criminal Justice Act 1988—(a) section 139 (having article with blade or point in public place),(b) section 139AA (threatening with article with blade or point or offensive weapon).Offences against property22 An offence under any of the following sections of the Theft Act 1968—(a) section 8 (robbery or assault with intent to rob),(b) section 9 (burglary),(c) section 10 (aggravated burglary).23 An offence under section 1 of the Criminal Damage Act 1971 (destroying or damaging property).24 An offence under section 30 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (racially or religiously aggravated criminal damage).Road traffic offences25 An offence under section 35 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861 (injuring persons by furious driving).26 An offence under section 12A of the Theft Act 1968 (aggravated vehicle-taking involving an accident which caused the death of any person).27 An offence under any of the following sections of the Road Traffic Act 1988—(a) section 1 (causing death by dangerous driving),(b) section 1A (causing serious injury by dangerous driving),(c) section 3A (causing death by careless driving when under influence of drink or drugs).(a) 
184	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 4 – ASB case reviews: supplementary provisionDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesDrug-related offences28 An offence under any of the following provisions of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971—(a) section 4 (restriction of production and supply of controlled drugs),(b) section 5(3) (possession of controlled drugs with intent to supply),(c) section 8(a) or (b) (occupiers etc. of premises to be punishable for permitting unlawful production or supply etc. of controlled drugs there).29 An offence under section 6 of that Act (restrictions of cultivation of cannabis plant) where the cultivation is for profit and the whole or a substantial part of the dwelling- house concerned is used for the cultivation.Inchoate offences30 (1) An offence of attempting or conspiring the commission of an offence specified or described in this Schedule.(2) An offence under Part 2 of the Serious Crime Act 2007 (encouraging or assisting) where the offence (or one of the offences) which the person in question intends or believes would be committed is an offence specified or described in this Schedule.(3) An offence of aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring the commission of an offence specified or described in this Schedule.Scope of offences31 Where this Schedule refers to offences which are offences under the law of England and Wales and another country or territory, the reference is to be read as limited to the offences so far as they are offences under the law of England and Wales.”SCHEDULE 4	Section 104ASB CASE REVIEWS: SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONPART 1MAKING AND REVISING REVIEW PROCEDURES ETCConsultation: local policing bodies1 (1) In making and revising the review procedures, the relevant bodies in a local government area must consult the local policing body for the relevant police area.(2) The “relevant police area” is the police area which consists of, or includes, the local government area.
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 4 – ASB case reviews: supplementary provision Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
185
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesConsultation: local providers of social housing2 In making and revising the review procedures, the relevant bodies in a local government area must consult such local providers of social housing as they consider appropriate.Dissatisfaction with ASB case reviews3 The review procedures must include provision about what is to happen where an applicant is dissatisfied with the way in which the relevant bodies have—(a) dealt with an application for an ASB case review, or(b) carried out an ASB case review.Assessment and revision of review procedures4 The review procedures must include provision about—(a) the assessment of the effectiveness of those procedures, and(b) the revision of those procedures.PART 2INCLUSION OF LOCAL PROVIDERS OF SOCIAL HOUSING AMONG RELEVANT BODIESCo-option arrangements5 (1) The responsible authorities in a local government area must make arrangements (“co- option arrangements”) for the inclusion of local providers of social housing among the relevant bodies in that area.(2) In this paragraph “responsible authorities” means—(a) in relation to a local government area in England—(i) the relevant district council or the unitary authority,(ii) the chief officer of police for the police area which that local government area is within, and[F79(iii) each integrated care board established under section 14Z25 of the National Health Service Act 2006 whose area is wholly or partly within that local government area;]
186	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 4 – ASB case reviews: supplementary provisionDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) in relation to a local government area in Wales—(i) the council for the area,(ii) the chief officer of police for the police area which that local government area is within, and(iii) each Local Health Board whose area is wholly or partly within that local government area.PART 3ASB CASE REVIEWSConsultation and co-operation: local providers of social housing6 (1) The relevant bodies in a local government area must consult such local providers of social housing as they consider appropriate in carrying out ASB case reviews.(2) The local providers of social housing must co-operate with the relevant bodies in the local government area in any matters specified by the relevant bodies that concern ASB case reviews.Information7 (1) The relevant bodies in a local government area may request any person to disclose information for a purpose connected with the carrying out of an ASB case review.(2) If such a request is made to a person that exercises public functions, and that person possesses the requested information in connection with the exercise of such functions, the person must (subject to sub-paragraph (4)) comply with the request.(3) If such a request is made to a person who is not required by sub-paragraph (2) to disclose the requested information, the person may (subject to sub-paragraph (4)) comply with the request.(4) This paragraph does not require or authorise—(a) a disclosure, in contravention of any provisions of [F80the data protection legislation], of personal data which [F81is] not exempt from those provisions, or(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 4 – ASB case reviews: supplementary provision Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
187
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) a disclosure which is prohibited by [F82 any of Parts 1 to 7 or Chapter 1 of Part 9 of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016].(5) Subject to that, a disclosure under this paragraph does not breach—(a) any obligation of confidence owed by the person making the disclosure, or(b) any other restriction on the disclosure of information (however imposed).[F83(6) In this paragraph, “the data protection legislation” has the same meaning as in the Data Protection Act 2018 (see section 3 of that Act).]PART 4GENERALJoint review procedures or co-option arrangements8 (1) The relevant bodies in two or more local government areas—(a) may jointly make review procedures applicable to those areas;(b) must secure that such jointly-made review procedures are in place if co- option arrangements applicable to those areas have been jointly made under sub-paragraph (2).(2) The responsible authorities in two or more local government areas—(a) may jointly make co-option arrangements applicable to those areas;(b) must secure that such jointly-made co-option arrangements are in place if review procedures applicable to those areas have been jointly made under sub-paragraph (1).(3) In a case where review procedures or co-option arrangements are made jointly in accordance with this paragraph, a reference to any of the following in section 104, section 105 or this Schedule is to be read accordingly—(a) the relevant bodies (in the case of review procedures) or the responsible authorities (in the case of co-option arrangements);(b) the local government area or the relevant police area (in either case).(a) 
188	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesDifferent review procedures or co-option arrangements for different parts of an area etc9 (1) Review procedures may make different provision in relation to different parts of a local government area.(2) Review procedures or co-option arrangements made jointly in accordance with paragraph 8 may make different provision in relation to—(a) different local government areas to which the procedures or arrangements are applicable, or(b) different parts of such areas.SCHEDULE 5	Section 113AMENDMENTS OF PARTS 2 AND 3 OF THE SEXUAL OFFENCES ACT 2003Introduction1 Part 2 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (notification and orders) is amended as set out in paragraphs 2 to 6.Sexual harm prevention orders2 After section 103 there is inserted—“Sexual harm prevention orders (England and Wales)103A Sexual harm prevention orders: applications and grounds(1) A court may make an order under this section (a “sexual harm prevention order”) in respect of a person (“the defendant”) where subsection (2) or (3) applies to the defendant.(2) This subsection applies to the defendant where—(a) the court deals with the defendant in respect of—(i) an offence listed in Schedule 3 or 5, or(i) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
189
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(ii) a finding that the defendant is not guilty of an offence listed in Schedule 3 or 5 by reason of insanity, or(iii) a finding that the defendant is under a disability and has done the act charged against the defendant in respect of an offence listed in Schedule 3 or 5,and(b) the court is satisfied that it is necessary to make a sexual harm prevention order, for the purpose of—(i) protecting the public or any particular members of the public from sexual harm from the defendant, or(ii) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(3) This subsection applies to the defendant where—(a) an application under subsection (4) has been made in respect of the defendant and it is proved on the application that the defendant is a qualifying offender, and(b) the court is satisfied that the defendant's behaviour since the appropriate date makes it necessary to make a sexual harm prevention order, for the purpose of—(i) protecting the public or any particular members of the public from sexual harm from the defendant, or(ii) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(4) A chief officer of police or the Director General of the National Crime Agency (“the Director General”) may by complaint to a magistrates' court apply for a sexual harm prevention order in respect of a person if it appears to the chief officer or the Director General that—(a) the person is a qualifying offender, and(b) the person has since the appropriate date acted in such a way as to give reasonable cause to believe that it is necessary for such an order to be made.(5) A chief officer of police may make an application under subsection (4) only in respect of a person—(a) who resides in the chief officer's police area, or(b) who the chief officer believes is in that area or is intending to come to it.(6) An application under subsection (4) may be made to any magistrates' court acting for a local justice area that includes—(a) any part of a relevant police area, or(b) any place where it is alleged that the person acted in a way mentioned in subsection (4)(b).(7) The Director General must as soon as practicable notify the chief officer of police for a relevant police area of any application that the Director has made under subsection (4).(2) 
190	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(8) Where the defendant is a child, a reference in this section to a magistrates' court is to be taken as referring to a youth court (subject to any rules of court made under section 103K(1)).(9) In this section “relevant police area” means—(a) where the applicant is a chief officer of police, the officer's police area;(b) where the applicant is the Director General—(i) the police area where the person in question resides, or(ii) a police area which the Director General believes the person is in or is intending to come to.103B Section 103A: supplemental(1) In section 103A—  “appropriate date”, in relation to a qualifying offender, means the date or (as the case may be) the first date on which the offender was convicted, found or cautioned as mentioned in subsection (2) or (3) below;“child” means a person under 18;“the public” means the public in the United Kingdom;  “sexual harm” from a person means physical or psychological harm caused—(a) by the person committing one or more offences listed in Schedule 3, or(b) (in the context of harm outside the United Kingdom) by the person doing, outside the United Kingdom, anything which would constitute an offence listed in Schedule 3 if done in any part of the United Kingdom;  “qualifying offender” means a person within subsection (2) or (3) below;  “vulnerable adult” means a person aged 18 or over whose ability to protect himself or herself from physical or psychological harm is significantly impaired through physical or mental disability or illness, through old age or otherwise.(2) A person is within this subsection if, whether before or after the commencement of this Part, the person—(a) has been convicted of an offence listed in Schedule 3 (other than at paragraph 60) or in Schedule 5,(b) has been found not guilty of such an offence by reason of insanity,(c) has been found to be under a disability and to have done the act charged against him in respect of such an offence, or(d) has been cautioned in respect of such an offence.(3) A person is within this subsection if, under the law in force in a country outside the United Kingdom and whether before or after the commencement of this Part—(a) the person has been convicted of a relevant offence (whether or not the person has been punished for it),(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
191
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) a court exercising jurisdiction under that law has made in respect of a relevant offence a finding equivalent to a finding that the person is not guilty by reason of insanity,(c) such a court has made in respect of a relevant offence a finding equivalent to a finding that the person is under a disability and did the act charged against the person in respect of the offence, or(d) the person has been cautioned in respect of a relevant offence.(4) In subsection (3), “relevant offence” means an act which—(a) constituted an offence under the law in force in the country concerned, and(b) would have constituted an offence listed in Schedule 3 (other than at paragraph 60) or in Schedule 5 if it had been done in any part of the United Kingdom.For this purpose an act punishable under the law in force in a country outside the United Kingdom constitutes an offence under that law, however it is described in that law.(5) For the purposes of section 103A, acts, behaviour, convictions and findings include those occurring before the commencement of this Part.(6) Subject to subsection (7), on an application under section 103A(4) the condition in subsection (4)(b) above (where relevant) is to be taken as met unless, not later than rules of court may provide, the defendant serves on the applicant a notice—(a) stating that, on the facts as alleged with respect to the act concerned, the condition is not in the defendant's opinion met,(b) showing the grounds for that opinion, and(c) requiring the applicant to prove that the condition is met.(7) The court, if it thinks fit, may permit the defendant to require the applicant to prove that the condition is met without service of a notice under subsection (6).(8) Subsection (9) applies for the purposes of section 103A and this section.(9) In construing any reference to an offence listed in Schedule 3, any condition subject to which an offence is so listed that relates—(a) to the way in which the defendant is dealt with in respect of an offence so listed or a relevant finding (as defined by section 132(9)), or  (b) to the age of any person, is to be disregarded.103C SHPOs: effect(1) A sexual harm prevention order prohibits the defendant from doing anything described in the order.(2) Subject to section 103D(1), a prohibition contained in a sexual harm prevention order has effect—(a) for a fixed period, specified in the order, of at least 5 years, or(a) 
192	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) until further order.(3) A sexual harm prevention order—(a) may specify that some of its prohibitions have effect until further order and some for a fixed period;(b) may specify different periods for different prohibitions.(4) The only prohibitions that may be included in a sexual harm prevention order are those necessary for the purpose of—(a) protecting the public or any particular members of the public from sexual harm from the defendant, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(5) In subsection (4) “the public”, “sexual harm”, “child” and “vulnerable adult” each has the meaning given in section 103B(1).(6) Where a court makes a sexual harm prevention order in relation to a person who is already subject to such an order (whether made by that court or another), the earlier order ceases to have effect.103D SHPOs: prohibitions on foreign travel(1) A prohibition on foreign travel contained in a sexual harm prevention order must be for a fixed period of not more than 5 years.(2) A “prohibition on foreign travel” means—(a) a prohibition on travelling to any country outside the United Kingdom named or described in the order,(b) a prohibition on travelling to any country outside the United Kingdom other than a country named or described in the order, or(c) a prohibition on travelling to any country outside the United Kingdom.(3) Subsection (1) does not prevent a prohibition on foreign travel from being extended for a further period (of no more than 5 years each time) under section 103E.(4) A sexual harm prevention order that contains a prohibition within subsection (2)(c) must require the defendant to surrender all of the defendant's passports at a police station specified in the order—(a) on or before the date when the prohibition takes effect, or(b) within a period specified in the order.(5) Any passports surrendered must be returned as soon as reasonably practicable after the person ceases to be subject to a sexual harm prevention order containing a prohibition within subsection (2)(c) (unless the person is subject to an equivalent prohibition under another order).(6) Subsection (5) does not apply in relation to—(a) a passport issued by or on behalf of the authorities of a country outside the United Kingdom if the passport has been returned to those authorities;(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
193
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) a passport issued by or on behalf of an international organisation if the passport has been returned to that organisation.(7) In this section “passport” means—(a) a United Kingdom passport within the meaning of the Immigration Act 1971;(b) a passport issued by or on behalf of the authorities of a country outside the United Kingdom, or by or on behalf of an international organisation;(c) a document that can be used (in some or all circumstances) instead of a passport.103E SHPOs: variations, renewals and discharges(1) A person within subsection (2) may apply to the appropriate court for an order varying, renewing or discharging a sexual harm prevention order.(2) The persons are—(a) the defendant;(b) the chief officer of police for the area in which the defendant resides;(c) a chief officer of police who believes that the defendant is in, or is intending to come to, that officer's police area;(d) where the order was made on an application by a chief officer of police under section 103A(4), that officer.(3) An application under subsection (1) may be made—(a) where the appropriate court is the Crown Court, in accordance with rules of court;(b) in any other case, by complaint.(4) Subject to subsections (5) and (7), on the application the court, after hearing the person making the application and (if they wish to be heard) the other persons mentioned in subsection (2), may make any order, varying, renewing or discharging the sexual harm prevention order, that the court considers appropriate.(5) An order may be renewed, or varied so as to impose additional prohibitions on the defendant, only if it is necessary to do so for the purpose of—(a) protecting the public or any particular members of the public from sexual harm from the defendant, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.Any renewed or varied order may contain only such prohibitions as are necessary for this purpose.(6) In subsection (5) “the public”, “sexual harm”, “child” and “vulnerable adult” each has the meaning given in section 103B(1).(7) The court must not discharge an order before the end of 5 years beginning with the day on which the order was made, without the consent of the defendant and—(1) 
194	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) where the application is made by a chief officer of police, that chief officer, or(b) in any other case, the chief officer of police for the area in which the defendant resides.(8) Subsection (7) does not apply to an order containing a prohibition on foreign travel and no other prohibitions.(9) In this section “the appropriate court” means—(a) where the Crown Court or the Court of Appeal made the sexual harm prevention order, the Crown Court;(b) where an adult magistrates' court made the order, that court, an adult magistrates' court for the area in which the defendant resides or, where the application is made by a chief officer of police, any adult magistrates' court acting for a local justice area that includes any part of the chief officer's police area;(c) where a youth court made the order and the defendant is under the age of 18, that court, a youth court for the area in which the defendant resides or, where the application is made by a chief officer of police, any youth court acting for a local justice area that includes any part of the chief officer's police area;(d) where a youth court made the order and the defendant is aged 18 or over, an adult magistrates' court for the area in which the defendant resides or, where the application is made by a chief officer of police, any adult magistrates' court acting for a local justice area that includes any part of the chief officer's police area.In this subsection “adult magistrates' court” means a magistrates' court that is not a youth court.103F Interim SHPOs(1) This section applies where an application under section 103A(4) (“the main application”) has not been determined.(2) An application for an order under this section (“an interim sexual harm prevention order”)—(a) may be made by the complaint by which the main application is made, or(b) if the main application has been made, may be made by the person who has made that application, by complaint to the court to which that application has been made.(3) The court may, if it considers it just to do so, make an interim sexual harm prevention order, prohibiting the defendant from doing anything described in the order.(4) Such an order—(a) has effect only for a fixed period, specified in the order;(b) ceases to have effect, if it has not already done so, on the determination of the main application.(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
195
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(5) The applicant or the defendant may by complaint apply to the court that made the interim sexual harm prevention order for the order to be varied, renewed or discharged.103G SHPOs and interim SHPOs: notification requirements(1) Where—(a) a sexual harm prevention order is made in respect of a defendant who was a relevant offender immediately before the making of the order, and(b) the defendant would (apart from this subsection) cease to be subject to the notification requirements of this Part while the order (as renewed from time to time) has effect,the defendant remains subject to the notification requirements.(2) Where a sexual harm prevention order is made in respect of a defendant who was not a relevant offender immediately before the making of the order—(a) the order causes the defendant to become subject to the notification requirements of this Part from the making of the order until the order (as renewed from time to time) ceases to have effect, and(b) this Part applies to the defendant, subject to the modification set out in subsection (3).(3) The “relevant date” is the date of service of the order.(4) Subsections (1) to (3) apply to an interim sexual harm prevention order as if references to a sexual harm prevention order were references to an interim sexual harm prevention order, and with the omission of “(as renewed from time to time)” in both places.(5) Where—(a) a sexual harm prevention order is in effect in relation to a relevant sex offender (within the meaning of section 88A), and(b) by virtue of section 88F or 88G the relevant sex offender ceases to be subject to the notification requirements of this Part,the sexual harm prevention order ceases to have effect.(6) On an application for a sexual harm prevention order made by a chief officer of police, the court must make a notification order in respect of the defendant (either in addition to or instead of a sexual harm prevention order) if—(a) the applicant invites the court to do so, and(b) it is proved that the conditions in section 97(2) to (4) are met.(7) On an application for an interim sexual harm prevention order made by a chief officer of police, the court may, if it considers it just to do so, make an interim notification order (either in addition to or instead of an interim sexual harm prevention order).103H SHPOs and interim SHPOs: appeals(1) A defendant may appeal against the making of a sexual harm prevention order—(1) 
196	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) where the order was made by virtue of section 103A(2)(a)(i), as if the order were a sentence passed on the defendant for the offence;(b) where the order was made by virtue of section 103A(2)(a)(ii) or (iii), as if the defendant had been convicted of the offence and the order were a sentence passed on the defendant for that offence;(c) where the order was made on an application under section 103A(4), to the Crown Court.(2) A defendant may appeal to the Crown Court against the making of an interim sexual harm prevention order.(3) A defendant may appeal against the making of an order under section 103E, or the refusal to make such an order—(a) where the application for such an order was made to the Crown Court, to the Court of Appeal;(b) in any other case, to the Crown Court.(4) On an appeal under subsection (1)(c), (2) or (3)(b), the Crown Court may make such orders as may be necessary to give effect to its determination of the appeal, and may also make such incidental or consequential orders as appear to it to be just.(5) Any order made by the Crown Court on an appeal under subsection (1)(c) or (2) (other than an order directing that an application be re-heard by a magistrates' court) is for the purposes of section 103E(9) or 103F(5) (respectively) to be treated as if it were an order of the court from which the appeal was brought (and not an order of the Crown Court).103I Offence: breach of SHPO or interim SHPO etc(1) A person who, without reasonable excuse, does anything that the person is prohibited from doing by—(a) a sexual harm prevention order,(b) an interim sexual harm prevention order,(c) a sexual offences prevention order,(d) an interim sexual offences prevention order, or  (e) a foreign travel order, commits an offence.(2) A person commits an offence if, without reasonable excuse, the person fails to comply with a requirement imposed under section 103D(4).(3) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable—(a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or a fine or both;(b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 5 years.(4) Where a person is convicted of an offence under this section, it is not open to the court by or before which the person is convicted to make, in respect of the offence, an order for conditional discharge.(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
197
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes103J SHPOs and interim SHPOs: guidance(1) The Secretary of State must issue guidance to chief officers of police and to the Director General of the National Crime Agency in relation to the exercise by them of their powers with regard to sexual harm prevention orders and interim sexual harm prevention orders.(2) The Secretary of State may, from time to time, revise the guidance issued under subsection (1).(3) The Secretary of State must arrange for any guidance issued or revised under this section to be published in such manner as the Secretary of State considers appropriate.103K SHPOs and interim SHPOs: supplementary(1) Rules of court—(a) may provide for a youth court to give permission for an application under section 103A(4) against a person aged 18 or over to be made to the youth court if—(i) an application to the youth court has been made, or is to be made, under that section against a person aged under 18, and(ii) the youth court thinks that it would be in the interests of justice for the applications to be heard together;(b) may, in relation to a person attaining the age of 18 after proceedings against that person by virtue of section 103A, 103E, 103F or 103G(6) or (7) have begun—(i) prescribe circumstances in which the proceedings may or must remain in the youth court;(ii) make provision for the transfer of the proceedings from the youth court to a magistrates' court that is not a youth court (including provision applying section 103F with modifications).(2) A person's age is treated for the purposes of sections 103A to 103J and this section as being that which it appears to the court to be after considering any available evidence.”Sexual offences prevention orders and foreign travel orders3 (1) Sections 104 to 122 (sexual offences prevention orders and foreign travel orders) are repealed.(2) This paragraph extends only to England and Wales.(2) 
198	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesSexual risk orders4 Before section 123 there is inserted—“Sexual risk orders (England and Wales)Sexual risk orders: applications, grounds and effect122A(1) A chief officer of police or the Director General of the National Crime Agency (“the Director General”) may by complaint to a magistrates' court apply for an order under this section (a “sexual risk order”) in respect of a person (“the defendant”) if it appears to the chief officer or the Director General that the following condition is met.(2) The condition is that the defendant has, whether before or after the commencement of this Part, done an act of a sexual nature as a result of which there is reasonable cause to believe that it is necessary for a sexual risk order to be made.(3) A chief officer of police may make an application under subsection (1) only in respect of a person—(a) who resides in the chief officer's police area, or(b) who the chief officer believes is in that area or is intending to come to it.(4) An application under subsection (1) may be made to any magistrates' court acting for a local justice area that includes—(a) any part of a relevant police area, or(b) any place where it is alleged that the person acted in a way mentioned in subsection (2).(5) The Director General must as soon as practicable notify the chief officer of police for a relevant police area of any application that the Director has made under subsection (1).(6) On an application under subsection (1), the court may make a sexual risk order if it is satisfied that the defendant has, whether before or after the commencement of this Part, done an act of a sexual nature as a result of which it is necessary to make such an order for the purpose of—(a) protecting the public or any particular members of the public from harm from the defendant, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(7) Such an order—(a) prohibits the defendant from doing anything described in the order;(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
199
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) has effect for a fixed period (not less than 2 years) specified in the order or until further order.(8) A sexual risk order may specify different periods for different prohibitions.(9) The only prohibitions that may be imposed are those necessary for the purpose of—(a) protecting the public or any particular members of the public from harm from the defendant, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(10) Where a court makes a sexual risk order in relation to a person who is already subject to such an order (whether made by that court or another), the earlier order ceases to have effect.Section 122A: interpretation122B(1) In section 122A—“child” means a person under 18;  “harm” from the defendant means physical or psychological harm caused by the defendant doing an act of a sexual nature;“the public” means the public in the United Kingdom; “vulnerable adult” means a person aged 18 or over whose abilityto protect himself or herself from physical or psychological harmis significantly impaired through physical or mental disability or illness, through old age or otherwise.(2) Where the defendant is a child, a reference in that section to a magistrates' court is to be taken as referring to a youth court (subject to any rules of court made under section 122K(1)).(3) In that section “relevant police area” means—(a) where the applicant is a chief officer of police, the officer's police area;(b) where the applicant is the Director General of the National Crime Agency—(i) the police area where the person in question resides, or(ii) a police area which the Director General believes the person is in or is intending to come to.Sexual risk orders: prohibitions on foreign travel122C(1) A prohibition on foreign travel contained in a sexual risk order must not be for a period of more than 5 years.(2) A “prohibition on foreign travel” means—(a) a prohibition on travelling to any country outside the United Kingdom named or described in the order,(b) a prohibition on travelling to any country outside the United Kingdom other than a country named or described in the order, or(a) 
200	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) a prohibition on travelling to any country outside the United Kingdom.(3) Subsection (1) does not prevent a prohibition on foreign travel from being extended for a further period (of no more than 5 years each time) under section 122D.(4) A sexual risk order that contains a prohibition within subsection (2)(c) must require the defendant to surrender all of the defendant's passports at a police station specified in the order—(a) on or before the date when the prohibition takes effect, or(b) within a period specified in the order.(5) Any passports surrendered must be returned as soon as reasonably practicable after the person ceases to be subject to a sexual risk order containing such a prohibition (unless the person is subject to an equivalent prohibition under another order).(6) Subsection (5) does not apply in relation to—(a) a passport issued by or on behalf of the authorities of a country outside the United Kingdom if the passport has been returned to those authorities;(b) a passport issued by or on behalf of an international organisation if the passport has been returned to that organisation.(7) In this section “passport” means—(a) a United Kingdom passport within the meaning of the Immigration Act 1971;(b) a passport issued by or on behalf of the authorities of a country outside the United Kingdom, or by or on behalf of an international organisation;(c) a document that can be used (in some or all circumstances) instead of a passport.Sexual risk order: variations, renewals and discharges122D(1) A person within subsection (2) may by complaint to the appropriate court apply for an order varying, renewing or discharging a sexual risk order.(2) The persons are—(a) the defendant;(b) the chief officer of police for the area in which the defendant resides;(c) a chief officer of police who believes that the defendant is in, or is intending to come to, that officer's police area;(d) where the order was made on an application by a chief officer of police, that officer.(3) Subject to subsections (4) and (5), on the application the court, after hearing the person making the application and (if they wish to be heard) the other persons mentioned in subsection (2), may make any order, varying, renewing or discharging the sexual risk order, that the court considers appropriate.
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
201
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4) An order may be renewed, or varied so as to impose additional prohibitions on the defendant, only if it is necessary to do so for the purpose of—(a) protecting the public or any particular members of the public from harm from the defendant, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.Any renewed or varied order may contain only such prohibitions as are necessary for this purpose.(5) The court must not discharge an order before the end of 2 years beginning with the day on which the order was made, without the consent of the defendant and—(a) where the application is made by a chief officer of police, that chief officer, or(b) in any other case, the chief officer of police for the area in which the defendant resides.(6) Section 122B(1) applies for the purposes of this section.(7) In this section “the appropriate court” means—(a) where an adult magistrates' court made the sexual risk order, that court, any adult magistrates' court for the area in which the defendant resides or, where the application is made by a chief officer of police, any adult magistrates' court acting for a local justice area that includes any part of the chief officer's police area;(b) where a youth court made the order and the defendant is under the age of 18, that court, a youth court for the area in which the defendant resides or, where the application is made by a chief officer of police, any youth court acting for a local justice area that includes any part of the chief officer's police area;(c) where a youth court made the order and the defendant is aged 18 or over, an adult magistrates' court for the area in which the defendant resides or, where the application is made by a chief officer of police, any adult magistrates' court acting for a local justice area that includes any part of the chief officer's police area.In this subsection “adult magistrates' court” means a magistrates' court that is not a youth court.Interim sexual risk orders122(E1) This section applies where an application for a sexual risk order (“the main application”) has not been determined.(2) An application for an order under this section (“an interim sexual risk order”)—(a) may be made by the complaint by which the main application is made, or(b) if the main application has been made, may be made by the person who has made that application, by complaint to the court to which that application has been made.(a) 
202	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) The court may, if it considers it just to do so, make an interim sexual risk order, prohibiting the defendant from doing anything described in the order.(4) Such an order—(a) has effect only for a fixed period, specified in the order;(b) ceases to have effect, if it has not already done so, on the determination of the main application.(5) The applicant or the defendant may by complaint apply to the court that made the interim sexual risk order for the order to be varied, renewed or discharged.Sexual risk orders and interim sexual risk orders: notification requirements122(F1) A person in respect of whom a court makes—(a) a sexual risk order (other than one that replaces an interim sexual risk order), or(b) an interim sexual risk order,must, within the period of 3 days beginning with the date of service of the order, notify to the police the information set out in subsection (2) (unless the person is subject to the notification requirements of this Part on that date).(2) The information is—(a) the person's name and, where the person uses one or more other names, each of those names;(b) the person's home address.(3) A person who—(a) is subject to a sexual risk order or an interim sexual risk order (but is not subject to the notification requirements of this Part), and(b) uses a name which has not been notified under this section (or under any other provision of this Part), or changes home address,must, within the period of 3 days beginning with the date on which that happens, notify to the police that name or (as the case may be) the new home address.(4) Sections 87 (method of notification and related matters) and 91 (offences relating to notification) apply for the purposes of this section—(a) with references to section 83(1) being read as references to subsection (1) above,(b) with references to section 84(1) being read as references to subsection (3) above, and(c) with the omission of section 87(2)(b).Sexual risk orders and interim sexual risk orders: appeals122G(1) A defendant may appeal to the Crown Court—(a) against the making of a sexual risk order;(b) against the making of an interim sexual risk order; or(c) against the making of an order under section 122D, or the refusal to make such an order.(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
203
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) On any such appeal, the Crown Court may make such orders as may be necessary to give effect to its determination of the appeal, and may also make such incidental or consequential orders as appear to it to be just.(3) Any order made by the Crown Court on an appeal under subsection (1)(a) or (b) (other than an order directing that an application be re-heard by a magistrates' court) is for the purposes of section 122D(7) or 122E(5) (respectively) to be treated as if it were an order of the court from which the appeal was brought (and not an order of the Crown Court).Offence: breach of sexual risk order or interim sexual risk order etc122H(1) A person who, without reasonable excuse, does anything that the person is prohibited from doing by—(a) a sexual risk order,(b) an interim sexual risk order,(c) a risk of sexual harm order,(d) an interim risk of sexual harm order,(e) an order under section 2 of the Protection of Children and Prevention of Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2005 (risk of sexual harm orders in Scotland), or(f) an order under section 5 of that Act (interim risk of sexual harm orders in Scotland),commits an offence.(2) A person commits an offence if, without reasonable excuse, the person fails to comply with a requirement imposed under section 122C(4).(3) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable—(a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or a fine or both;(b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 5 years.(4) Where a person is convicted of an offence under this section, it is not open to the court by or before which the person is convicted to make, in respect of the offence, an order for conditional discharge.Effect of conviction etc of an offence under section 122H etc122(I1) This section applies to a person (“the defendant”) who—(a) is convicted of an offence mentioned in subsection (2);(b) is found not guilty of such an offence by reason of insanity;(c) is found to be under a disability and to have done the act charged against him in respect of such an offence; or(d) is cautioned in respect of such an offence.(2) Those offences are—(a) an offence under section 122H or 128 of this Act;(b) an offence under section 7 of the Protection of Children and Prevention of Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2005 (contravention(a) 
204	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesof risk of sexual harm order or interim risk of sexual harm order in Scotland).(3) Where—(a) a defendant was a relevant offender immediately before this section applied to the defendant, and(b) the defendant would (apart from this subsection) cease to be subject to the notification requirements of this Part while the relevant order (as renewed from time to time) has effect,the defendant remains subject to the notification requirements.(4) Where the defendant was not a relevant offender immediately before this section applied to the defendant—(a) this section causes the defendant to become subject to the notification requirements of this Part from the time the section first applies to the defendant until the relevant order (as renewed from time to time) ceases to have effect, and(b) this Part applies to the defendant, subject to the modification set out in subsection (5).(5) The “relevant date” is the date on which this section first applies to the defendant.(6) In this section “relevant order” means—(a) where the conviction, finding or caution within subsection (1) is in respect of a breach of a sexual risk order or a risk of sexual harm order, that order;(b) where the conviction, finding or caution within subsection (1) is in respect of a breach of an interim sexual risk order or an interim risk of sexual harm order, any sexual risk order or risk of sexual harm order made on the hearing of the application to which the interim order relates or, if no such order is made, the interim order.(7) In subsection (6) “risk of sexual harm order” and “interim risk of sexual harm order” include orders under sections 2 and 5 (respectively) of the Protection of Children and Prevention of Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2005.Sexual risk orders and interim sexual risk orders: guidance122(J1) The Secretary of State must issue guidance to chief officers of police and to the Director General of the National Crime Agency in relation to the exercise by them of their powers with regard to sexual risk orders and interim sexual risk orders.(2) The Secretary of State may, from time to time, revise the guidance issued under subsection (1).(3) The Secretary of State must arrange for any guidance issued or revised under this section to be published in such manner as the Secretary of State considers appropriate.Sexual risk orders and interim sexual risk orders: supplementary122K(1) Rules of court—
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
205
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) may provide for a youth court to give permission for an application under section 122A against a person aged 18 or over to be made to the youth court if—(i) an application to the youth court has been made, or is to be made, under that section against a person aged under 18, and(ii) the youth court thinks that it would be in the interests of justice for the applications to be heard together;(b) may, in relation to a person attaining the age of 18 after proceedings against that person by virtue of section 122A, 122D or 122E have begun—(i) prescribe circumstances in which the proceedings may or must remain in the youth court;(ii) make provision for the transfer of the proceedings from the youth court to a magistrates' court that is not a youth court (including provision applying section 122E with modifications).(2) A person's age is treated for the purposes of sections 122A to 122J and this section as being that which it appears to the court to be after considering any available evidence.”Risk of sexual harm orders5 (1) Sections 123 to 129 (risk of sexual harm orders) are repealed.(2) This paragraph extends only to England and Wales.Application etc of orders6 After section 136 there is inserted—“136ZA Application of orders throughout the United Kingdom(1) In this section “relevant order” means—(a) a sexual harm prevention order;(b) an interim sexual harm prevention order;(c) a sexual offences prevention order;(d) an interim sexual offences prevention order;(e) a foreign travel order;(f) a sexual risk order;(g) an interim sexual risk order;(a) 
206	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(h) a risk of sexual harm order;(i) an interim risk of sexual harm order;(j) an order under section 2 of the Protection of Children and Prevention of Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2005 (risk of sexual harm orders in Scotland);(k) an order under section 5 of that Act (interim risk of sexual harm orders in Scotland).(2) For the purposes of sections 103I, 113, 122, 122H and 128, prohibitions imposed by a relevant order made in one part of the United Kingdom apply (unless expressly confined to particular localities) throughout that and every other part of the United Kingdom.136ZB Order ceases to have effect when new order made(1) Where a court in England and Wales makes an order listed in the first column of the following Table in relation to a person who is already subject to an order listed opposite it in the second column, the earlier order ceases to have effect (whichever part of the United Kingdom it was made in) unless the court orders otherwise.New order	Earlier orderSexual harm prevention order	— sexual offences prevention order;ó foreign travel order.Sexual risk order	— risk of sexual harm order;ó foreign travel order.(2) Where a court in Northern Ireland or Scotland makes an order listed in the first column of the following Table in relation to a person who is already subject to an order or prohibition listed opposite it in the second column, the earlier order or prohibition ceases to have effect (even though it was made or imposed by a court in England and Wales) unless the court orders otherwise.New order	Earlier order or prohibitionSexual offences prevention order	— sexual harm prevention order notcontaining a prohibition on foreign travel;— in the case of a sexual harm prevention order containing a prohibition on foreign travel, each of its other prohibitions.Foreign travel order	— prohibition on foreign travel contained in a sexual harm prevention order.Risk of sexual harm order	— sexual risk order not containing aprohibition on foreign travel;— in the case of a sexual risk order containing a prohibition on foreign travel, each of its other prohibitions.(3) In this section—(a) “court”, in Scotland, includes sheriff;(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
207
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) “risk of sexual harm order” includes an order under section 2 of the Protection of Children and Prevention of Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2005.136ZC Variation of sexual harm prevention order by court in Northern Ireland(1) This section applies where a sexual harm prevention order has been made in respect of a person who now—(a) is residing in Northern Ireland, or(b) is in or is intending to come to Northern Ireland.(2) An application may be made to the appropriate court in Northern Ireland—(a) by the defendant, or(b) by the Chief Constable,for an order varying the sexual harm prevention order.(3) An application under subsection (2) may be made—(a) where the appropriate court is the Crown Court, in accordance with rules of court;(b) in any other case, by complaint.(4) Subject to subsections (5) and (6), on the application the court, after hearing the person making the application and the other person mentioned in subsection (2) (if that person wishes to be heard), may make any order varying the sexual harm prevention order that the court considers appropriate.(5) An order may be varied so as to impose additional prohibitions on the defendant only if it is necessary to do so for the purpose of—(a) protecting the public in Northern Ireland, or any particular members of the public in Northern Ireland, from sexual harm from the defendant, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(6) An order as varied under this section may contain only such prohibitions as are necessary for the purpose of—(a) protecting the public or any particular members of the public from sexual harm from the defendant, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from sexual harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(7) The defendant may appeal against the making of an order under this section, or the refusal to make such an order—(a) where the application for such an order was made to the Crown Court, to the Court of Appeal in Northern Ireland;(b) in any other case, to a county court in Northern Ireland.(a) 
208	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(8) On an appeal under subsection (7)(b), the county court may make such orders as may be necessary to give effect to its determination of the appeal, and may also make such incidental or consequential orders as appear to it to be just.(9) In this section—“the appropriate court” means—(a) where the sexual harm prevention order was made by—(i) the Crown Court, otherwise than on appeal from a magistrates' court, or(ii) the Court of Appeal,the Crown Court (in Northern Ireland);(b) where—(i) the sexual harm prevention order was made by a magistrates' court, or by the Crown Court on appeal from a magistrates' court, and(ii) the defendant is aged 18 or over,any court of summary jurisdiction in Northern Ireland;(c) where—(i) the defendant is aged under 18, and(ii) paragraph (a) does not apply,any youth court in Northern Ireland;  “the Chief Constable” means the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland;  “sexual harm”, “child” and “vulnerable adult” each has the meaning given in section 103B(1).136ZD Variation of sexual risk order by court in Northern Ireland(1) This section applies where a sexual risk order has been made in respect of a person who now—(a) is residing in Northern Ireland, or(b) is in or is intending to come to Northern Ireland.(2) An application may be made to the appropriate court in Northern Ireland—(a) by the defendant, or(b) by the Chief Constable,for an order varying the sexual risk order.(3) Subject to subsections (4) and (5), on the application the court, after hearing the person making the application and the other person mentioned in subsection (2) (if that person wishes to be heard), may make any order varying the sexual risk order that the court considers appropriate.(4) An order may be varied so as to impose additional prohibitions on the defendant only if it is necessary to do so for the purpose of—(a) protecting the public in Northern Ireland, or any particular members of the public in Northern Ireland, from harm from the defendant, or(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 5 – Amendments of Parts 2 and 3 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
209
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(5) An order as varied under this section may contain only such prohibitions as are necessary for the purpose of—(a) protecting the public or any particular members of the public from harm from the defendant, or(b) protecting children or vulnerable adults generally, or any particular children or vulnerable adults, from harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.(6) The defendant may appeal against the making of an order under this section, or the refusal to make such an order, to a county court in Northern Ireland.(7) On an appeal under subsection (6), the county court may make such orders as may be necessary to give effect to its determination of the appeal, and may also make such incidental or consequential orders as appear to it to be just.(8) In this section—“the appropriate court” means—(a) where the defendant is aged 18 or over, any court of summary jurisdiction in Northern Ireland;(b) where the defendant is aged under 18, any youth court in Northern Ireland;  “the Chief Constable” means the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland;  “harm”, “child” and “vulnerable adult” each has the meaning given in section 122B(1).”Service courts7 (1) Section 137 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (service courts) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2), for “104(1)” there is substituted “ 103A(1) ”.(3) For subsection (3) there is substituted—“(3) Where the court making a sexual harm prevention order is a service court—(a) sections 103A(3) to (9), 103F and 103J do not apply;(b) sections 103A(1) and (2), 103B to 103E and 103G to 103I apply—(i) subject to paragraphs (c) and (d), and(ii) as if they extended to the whole of the United Kingdom;(c) in relation to an application under section 103E in respect of a defendant who at the time of the application is a person subject to service law or a civilian subject to service discipline—(i) the application may be made only by the defendant or a Provost Martial, and must be made to the Court Martial;(i) 
210	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 6 – Amendments of Part 2A of the Sexual Offences Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(ii) consent under section 103E(7) must be the consent of the defendant and a Provost Martial;(iii) an appeal against the making of an order under section 103E, or the refusal to make such an order, must be made to the Court Martial Appeal Court;(d) in relation to an application under section 103E in respect of a defendant who at the time of the application is neither a person subject to service law nor a civilian subject to service discipline—(i) the application must be made to the Crown Court in England and Wales;(ii) an appeal against the making of an order under section 103E, or the refusal to make such an order, must be made to the Court of Appeal in England and Wales.”(4) In subsection (4)—(a) for “section “service court” means” there is substituted “section—“civilian subject to service discipline” has the same meaning as in the Armed Forces Act 2006 (see section 370 of that Act);“service court” means”;(b) at the end there is inserted—“ “subject to service law” has the same meaning as in the Armed Forces Act 2006 (see section 374 of that Act).”(5) After subsection (5) there is inserted—“(6) Paragraphs (c)(i) and (d)(i) of subsection (3) have effect, in relation to a sexual harm prevention order made by the Court Martial Appeal Court, as if the reference to a service court in that subsection included a reference to that court.”SCHEDULE 6	Section 115AMENDMENTS OF PART 2A OF THE SEXUAL OFFENCES ACT 20031 Part 2A of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (closure orders) is amended as follows.2 (1) Section 136A (meaning of specified prostitution offence etc) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2)—(a) in paragraph (a) the words “section 47 of this Act or” are omitted;(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 6 – Amendments of Part 2A of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
211
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) in paragraph (b) the words “section 48 of this Act, or” are omitted;(c) in paragraph (c) the words “section 49 of this Act, or” are omitted;(d) in paragraph (d) the words “section 50 of this Act, or” are omitted.(3) In subsection (3)—(a) in paragraph (a) the words “section 48 of this Act, or” are omitted;(b) in paragraph (b) the words “section 49 of this Act, or” are omitted;(c) in paragraph (c) the words “section 50 of this Act, or” are omitted.(4) After that subsection there is inserted—“(3A) The specified child sex offences are—(a) an offence under any of the following sections of this Act— sections 5 to 13;sections 16 to 19;sections 25 and 26;sections 47 to 50;(b) an offence under section 1 of the Protection of Children Act 1978 (indecent photographs of children);(c) an offence under any of the following sections of this Act committed against a person under 18—sections 1 to 4;sections 30 to 41; section 59A; section 61;sections 66 and 67.”(5) In subsection (4)(a)—(a) the words “section 47 of this Act or” are omitted;(b) the words “subsection (1)(a) of that section or, as the case may be,” are omitted.(6) After subsection (5) there is inserted—“(5A) Premises are being used for activities related to a specified child sex offence at any time when the premises are used—(a) to commit the offence, or(b) for activities intended to arrange or facilitate the commission of the offence.”3 In section 136B (power to authorise issue of closure notice), in the heading, for “notice” there is substituted “ notice: prostitution or pornography offences ”.1 
212	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 6 – Amendments of Part 2A of the Sexual Offences Act 2003Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes4 After that section there is inserted—“136BA Power to authorise issue of closure notice: child sex offences in England and Wales(1) A member of a police force not below the rank of superintendent (“the authorising officer”) may authorise the issue of a closure notice in respect of any premises in England and Wales if three conditions are met.(2) The first condition is that the officer has reasonable grounds for believing that—(a) during the relevant period, the premises were used for activities related to one or more specified child sex offences, or(b) the premises are likely to be used (unless a closure order is made) for activities related to one or more specified child sex offences.(3) In subsection (2)(a), “the relevant period” means the period of 3 months ending with the day on which the officer is considering whether to authorise the issue of the notice.(4) The second condition is that the officer has reasonable grounds for believing that the making of a closure order under section 136D is necessary to prevent the premises being used for activities related to one or more specified child sex offences.(5) For the purposes of the second condition, it does not matter whether the officer believes that the offence or offences in question have been committed or that they will be committed (or will be committed unless a closure order is made).(6) The third condition is that the officer is satisfied that reasonable efforts have been made—(a) to consult the local authority for the area in which the premises are situated, and(b) to establish the identity of any person who resides on the premises or who has control of or responsibility for or an interest in the premises.(7) If the local authority has not been consulted when the notice is issued, it must be consulted as soon as possible afterwards.(8) An authorisation under subsection (1) may be given orally or in writing, but if it is given orally the authorising officer must confirm it in writing as soon as it is practicable.(9) The issue of a closure notice may be authorised whether or not a person has been convicted of any specified child sex offence that the authorising officer believes has been committed.(10) The Secretary of State may by regulations specify premises or descriptions of premises to which this section does not apply.”(1) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 6 – Amendments of Part 2A of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
213
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes5 (1) Section 136C (contents and service of closure notice) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)(c), after “section 136B” there is inserted “ or 136BA ”.(3) In subsection (3)(d), after “section 136B(7)(b)” there is inserted “ or 136BA(6)(b) ”.6 (1) Section 136D (power to make a closure order) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (5), for “either subsection (6) or subsection (7) (or both)” there is substituted “ at least one of subsections (6), (7) and (7A) ”.(3) After subsection (7) there is inserted— “(7A) This subsection applies if—(a) during the relevant period, the premises were used for activities related to one or more specified child sex offences, or(b) the premises are likely to be used (unless a closure order is made) for activities related to one or more specified child sex offences.”(4) In subsection (8), for “subsections (6) and (7)” there is substituted “ subsections (6),(7) and (7A)(a) ”.(5) In subsection (9), for “prostitution or pornography offences” there is substituted “ prostitution, pornography or child sex offences ”.(6) In subsection (10)(a), after “section 136B(7)(b)” there is inserted “ or 136BA(6)(b) ”.(7) In subsection (12), for “prostitution or pornography offences” there is substituted “ prostitution, pornography or child sex offences ”.7 In section 136H (applications for extension of closure order), in subsection (4), for “prostitution or pornography offences” there is substituted “ prostitution, pornography or child sex offences ”.8 In section 136I (orders extending closure orders), in subsection (2), for “prostitution or pornography offences” there is substituted “ prostitution, pornography or child sex offences ”.1 
214	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 6A – Anonymity of victims of forced marriageDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes9 In section 136J (discharge of closure order), in subsection (3), for “prostitution or pornography offences” there is substituted “ prostitution, pornography or child sex offences ”.10 In section 136O (compensation), in subsection (5)(a), after “section 136B” there is inserted “ or 136BA ”.11 (1) Section 136R (interpretation) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2), after “section 136B” there is inserted “ or 136BA ”.(3) After subsection (14) there is inserted—“(15) In the application of this Part to England and Wales, references to specified pornography offences are to be ignored.(16) “Specified child sex offence” means an offence listed in section 136A(3A).(17) In the application of this Part to Northern Ireland, references to specified child sex offences and to section 136BA are to be ignored.”[F84SCHEDULE 6A	Section 122AANONYMITY OF VICTIMS OF FORCED MARRIAGEProhibition on the identification of victims in publications1 (1) This paragraph applies where an allegation has been made that an offence of forced marriage has been committed against a person.(2) No matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the person, as the person against whom the offence is alleged to have been committed, may be included in any publication during the person’s lifetime.(2) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 6A – Anonymity of victims of forced marriage Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
215
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) In any criminal proceedings before a court, the court may direct that the restriction imposed by sub-paragraph (2) is not to apply (whether at all or to the extent specified in the direction) if the court is satisfied that either of the following conditions is met.(4) The first condition is that the conduct of a person’s defence at a trial of an offence of forced marriage would be substantially prejudiced if the direction were not given.(5) The second condition is that—(a) the effect of sub-paragraph (2) is to impose a substantial and unreasonable restriction on the reporting of the proceedings, and(b) it is in the public interest to remove or relax the restriction.(6) A direction under sub-paragraph (3) does not affect the operation of sub- paragraph (2) at any time before the direction is given.(7) In this paragraph, “the court” means a magistrates’ court or the Crown Court.Penalty for breaching prohibition imposed by paragraph 1(2)2 (1) If anything is included in a publication in contravention of the prohibition imposed by paragraph 1(2), each of the persons responsible for the publication is guilty of an offence.(2) A person guilty of an offence under this paragraph is liable, on summary conviction, to a fine.(3) The persons responsible for a publication are as follows—
Type of publicationNewspaper or other periodical Relevant programmeAny other kind of publication
Persons responsibleAny person who is a proprietor, editor or publisher of the newspaper or periodical.Any person who—(a) is a body corporate engaged in providing the programmeservice in which the programme is included, or(b) has functions in relation to the programme corresponding to those of an editor of a newspaper.Any	person	who	publishes	the publication.
(4) If an offence under this paragraph is proved to have been committed with the consent or connivance of, or to be attributable to any neglect on the part of—(a) a senior officer of a body corporate, or(b) a person purporting to act in such a capacity,the senior officer or person (as well as the body corporate) is guilty of the offence and liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.(5) “Senior officer”, in relation to a body corporate, means a director, manager, secretary or other similar officer of the body corporate; and for this purpose “director”, in(2) 
216	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 6A – Anonymity of victims of forced marriageDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesrelation to a body corporate whose affairs are managed by its members, means a member of the body corporate.(6) Proceedings for an offence under this paragraph may not be instituted except by, or with the consent of, the Attorney General.Offence under paragraph 2: defences3 (1) This paragraph applies where a person (“the defendant”) is charged with an offence under paragraph 2 as a result of the inclusion of any matter in a publication.(2) It is a defence for the defendant to prove that, at the time of the alleged offence, the defendant was not aware, and did not suspect or have reason to suspect, that—(a) the publication included the matter in question, or(b) the allegation in question had been made.(3) It is a defence for the defendant to prove that the publication in which the matter appeared was one in respect of which the victim had given written consent to the appearance of matter of that description.(4) The defence in sub-paragraph (3) is not available if—(a) the victim was under the age of 16 at the time when his or her consent was given, or(b) a person interfered unreasonably with the peace and comfort of the victim with a view to obtaining his or her consent.(5) In this paragraph, “the victim” means the person against whom the offence of forced marriage in question is alleged to have been committed.]Special rules for providers of information society servicesF854	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5 (1) Proceedings for an offence under paragraph 2 may not be taken against a non- UK service provider in respect of anything done in the course of the provision of information society services unless the derogation condition is met.(2) The derogation condition is that taking proceedings—(a) is necessary for the purposes of the public interest objective,(b) relates to an information society service that prejudices that objective or presents a serious and grave risk of prejudice to that objective, and(c) is proportionate to that objective.(3) “The public interest objective” means the pursuit of public policy.6 (1) A service provider does not commit an offence under paragraph 2 by providing access to a communication network or by transmitting, in a communication network, information provided by a recipient of the service, if the service provider does not—(a) initiate the transmission,(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 6A – Anonymity of victims of forced marriage Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
217
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) select the recipient of the transmission, or(c) select or modify the information contained in the transmission.(2) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1)—(a) providing access to a communication network, and(b) transmitting information in a communication network,include the automatic, intermediate and transient storage of the information transmitted so far as the storage is solely for the purpose of carrying out the transmission in the network.(3) Sub-paragraph (2) does not apply if the information is stored for longer than is reasonably necessary for the transmission.7 (1) A service provider does not commit an offence under paragraph 2 by storing information provided by a recipient of the service for transmission in a communication network if the first and second conditions are met.(2) The first condition is that the storage of the information—(a) is automatic, intermediate and temporary, and(b) is solely for the purpose of making more efficient the onward transmission of the information to other recipients of the service at their request.(3) The second condition is that the service provider—(a) does not modify the information,(b) complies with any conditions attached to having access to the information, and(c) if sub-paragraph (4) applies, promptly removes the information or disables access to it.(4) This sub-paragraph applies if the service provider obtains actual knowledge that—(a) the information at the initial source of the transmission has been removed from the network,(b) access to it has been disabled, or(c) a court or administrative authority has ordered the removal from the network of, or the disablement of access to, the information.8 (1) A service provider does not commit an offence under paragraph 2 by storing information provided by a recipient of the service if—(a) the service provider had no actual knowledge when the information was provided that it was, or contained, a prohibited publication, or(b) on obtaining actual knowledge that the information was, or contained, a prohibited publication, the service provider promptly removed the information or disabled access to it.(2) Sub-paragraph (1) does not apply if the recipient of the service is acting under the authority or control of the service provider.
218	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 6A – Anonymity of victims of forced marriageDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesInterpretation9 (1) In this Schedule—F86...  “the E-Commerce Directive” means Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2000 on certain legal aspects of information society services, in particular electronic commerce, in the Internal Market (Directive on electronic commerce);“information society services”—(a) has the meaning given in Article 2(a) of the E-Commerce Directive (which refers to Article 1(2) of Directive 98/34/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 June 1998 laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations), and(b) is summarised in recital 17 of the E-Commerce Directive as covering “any service normally provided for remuneration, at a distance, by means of electronic equipment for the processing (including digital compression) and storage of data, and at the individual request of a recipient of a service”;  “non-UK service provider” means a service provider established in an EEA stateF87...;“offence of forced marriage” means an offence under section 121; “programme service” has the same meaning as in the Broadcasting Act1990 (see section 201(1) of that Act);  “prohibited material” means any material the publication of which contravenes paragraph 1(2);  “publication” includes any speech, writing, relevant programme or other communication (in whatever form) which is addressed to, or is accessible by, the public at large or any section of the public;  “recipient”, in relation to a service, means a person who, for professional ends or otherwise, uses an information society service, in particular for the purposes of seeking information or making it accessible;  “relevant programme” means a programme included in a programme service;  “service provider” means a person providing an information society service.(2) For the purposes of the definition of “publication” in sub-paragraph (1)—(a) an indictment or other document prepared for use in particular legal proceedings is not to be taken as coming within the definition;(b) every relevant programme is to be taken as addressed to the public at large or to a section of the public.(3) For the purposes of the [F88definition of “non-UK service provider”] in sub- paragraph (1)—(a) a service provider is established [F89in a particular EEA state] if the service provider—(i) effectively pursues an economic activity using a fixed establishment in [F90that EEA state] for an indefinite period, and(i) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 7 – Schedule to be inserted as Schedule 4B to the Police Act 1996 Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
219
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(ii) is a national of an EEA state or a company or firm mentioned in Article 54 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union;(b) the presence or use in a particular place of equipment or other technical means of providing an information society service does not, of itself, constitute the establishment of a service provider;(c) where it cannot be determined from which of a number of establishments a given information society service is provided, that service is to be regarded as provided from the establishment at the centre of the service provider’s activities relating to that service.SCHEDULE 7	Section 132SCHEDULE TO BE INSERTED AS SCHEDULE 4B TO THE POLICE ACT 1996“SCHEDULE 4B	Section 64ATHE POLICE REMUNERATION REVIEW BODYInterpretation1 In this Schedule “review body” means the Police Remuneration Review Body.Members of the review body2 The Secretary of State shall determine how many members the review body should have and what kinds of experience the members should possess.1 
220	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 7 – Schedule to be inserted as Schedule 4B to the Police Act 1996Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes3 Members shall hold and vacate office in accordance with the terms of their appointment.4 Members shall adhere to any statement of principles issued by the Secretary of State as to their conduct as members.Resignation of members5 (1) The chair of the review body may resign by giving written notice to the Prime Minister.(2) Resignation may be either—(a) as chair, or(b) as both chair and member.6 (1) The deputy chair of the review body may resign by giving written notice to the Secretary of State.(2) Resignation may be either—(a) as deputy chair, or(b) as both deputy chair and member.7 A member other than the chair or deputy chair may resign by giving written notice to the Secretary of State.Dismissal of members8 (1) The Prime Minister may by written notice dismiss the chair on the ground that—(a) the chair has been adjudged bankrupt, has been made the subject of a debt relief order (under Part 7A of the Insolvency Act 1986) or has made an arrangement with creditors;(b) in the opinion of the Prime Minister the chair is unable, unfit or unwilling to perform—(i) the functions of chair, or(ii) the functions of a member.(2) Dismissal may be either—(a) as chair, or(b) as both chair and member (but only if sub-paragraph (1)(a) or (b)(ii) applies).9 (1) The Secretary of State may by written notice dismiss the deputy chair on the ground that—(a) the deputy chair has been adjudged bankrupt, has been made the subject of a debt relief order (under Part 7A of the Insolvency Act 1986) or has made an arrangement with creditors;(b) in the opinion of the Secretary of State the deputy chair is unable, unfit or unwilling to perform—(i) the functions of deputy chair, or(ii) the functions of a member.(2) Dismissal may be either—(a) as deputy chair, or(b) as both deputy chair and member (but only if sub-paragraph (1)(a) or (b)(ii) applies).(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 7 – Schedule to be inserted as Schedule 4B to the Police Act 1996 Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
221
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes10 The Secretary of State may by written notice dismiss a member other than the chair or deputy chair on the ground that—(a) the member has been adjudged bankrupt, has been made the subject of a debt relief order (under Part 7A of the Insolvency Act 1986) or has made an arrangement with creditors, or(b) in the opinion of the Secretary of State the member is unable, unfit or unwilling to perform the functions of a member.Procedure11 (1) Subject to sub-paragraph (2), the review body shall determine its own procedure.(2) The Secretary of State may give directions to the review body as to its procedure, including in particular directions about—(a) the persons from whom the review body is to obtain evidence;(b) the procedure for obtaining evidence.(3) The validity of proceedings of the review body is not affected by—(a) a vacancy in its membership (including a vacancy in the position of chair);(b) a defect in a person's appointment.Matters to be considered12 The Secretary of State may give directions to the review body about the matters that it is to consider when making decisions.Consultation13 (1) The Secretary of State shall consult with the persons and bodies listed in sub- paragraph (2), and any others that the Secretary of State thinks fit, before—(a) making or revising a determination under paragraph 2;(b) issuing or revising a statement of principles under paragraph 4;(c) giving or revising a direction under paragraph 11(2) or 12.(2) The persons and bodies are—(a) the Department of Justice in Northern Ireland;(b) persons whom the Secretary of State considers to represent the views of chief officers of police and of the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland;(c) persons whom the Secretary of State considers to represent the interests of members of police forces;(d) persons whom the Secretary of State considers to represent the interests of members of the Police Service of Northern Ireland;(e) persons whom the Secretary of State considers to represent the views of the persons and bodies who between them maintain the police forces in England and Wales;(f) the Northern Ireland Policing Board.(3) The Minister shall consult with the Department of Justice in Northern Ireland before exercising a power of dismissal under paragraph 8, 9 or 10.(2) 
222	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 8 – Powers to seize invalid passports etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPublication14 The Secretary of State shall arrange for the publication of—(a) a statement of any determination made under paragraph 2 (and of any revised determination);(b) any statement of principles issued under paragraph 4 (and any revised statement);(c) any direction given under paragraph 11(2) or 12 (and any revised direction).Money15 The Secretary of State or the Department of Justice in Northern Ireland—(a) may defray expenses incurred by the review body;(b) may pay remuneration and allowances to members;(c) may make payments to or in respect of a member by way of or in connection with—(i) a pension;(ii) an allowance or gratuity on retirement or death;(d) may pay compensation to a person who ceases to be a member if it seems to the Secretary of State or the Department to be right to do so by reason of special circumstances.”SCHEDULE 8	Section 147POWERS TO SEIZE INVALID PASSPORTS ETCInterpretation1 (1) In this Schedule “examining officer” means—(a) a constable,(b) a person appointed as an immigration officer under paragraph 1 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971, or(c) a general customs official designated under section 3(1) of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.(2) In this Schedule “travel document” means anything that is, or appears to be, a passport or other document which—(a) has been issued by or for Her Majesty's Government, or the government of another state, and(b) enables or facilitates travel from one state to another.(3) For the purposes of this Schedule a travel document is “invalid” if—(a) it has been cancelled,(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 8 – Powers to seize invalid passports etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
223
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) it has expired,(c) it was not issued by the government or authority by which it purports to have been issued, or(d) it has undergone an unauthorised alteration.(4) In this Schedule “port” means—(a) an airport,(b) a sea port,(c) a hoverport,(d) a heliport,(e) a railway station where passenger trains depart for, or arrive from, places outside the United Kingdom, or(f) any other place at which a person is able, or attempting, to get on or off any craft, vessel or vehicle in connection with entering or leaving Great Britain or Northern Ireland.Powers of search and seizure etc: ports2 (1) An examining officer may exercise any of the powers under this paragraph in the case of a person at a port whom the officer believes to be there in connection with—(a) entering or leaving Great Britain or Northern Ireland, or(b) travelling by air within Great Britain or within Northern Ireland.(2) The powers are—(a) to require the person to hand over all travel documents in his or her possession for inspection by the examining officer;(b) to search for travel documents and to take possession of any that the officer finds;(c) to inspect any travel document taken from the person and to retain it while its validity is checked;(d) (subject to paragraph 4) to retain any travel document taken from the person that the examining officer believes to be invalid.(3) The power under sub-paragraph (2)(b) is a power to search—(a) the person;(b) anything that the person has with him or her;(c) any vehicle in which the examining officer believes the person to have been travelling or to be about to travel.(4) An examining officer—(a) may stop a person or vehicle for the purposes of exercising a power under this paragraph;(b) may if necessary use reasonable force for the purpose of exercising a power under this paragraph;(c) may authorise a person to carry out on the officer's behalf a search under this paragraph.(a) 
224	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 8 – Powers to seize invalid passports etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF91[Powers of search and seizure etc: places other than ports]3 F92[(1) An examining officer who is a constable or a person appointed as an immigration officer under paragraph 1 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 may exercise any of the powers under this paragraph, at a place that is not a port, if the examining officer reasonably believes that a person is in possession of a cancelled UK passport or an invalid non-UK travel document.](2) F93[A passport is “a cancelled UK passport”] if—(a) the passport was issued by or for Her Majesty's Government, F94[and](b) the Secretary of State has cancelled the passport on the basis that the person to whom it was issued has or may have been, or will or may become, involved in activities so undesirable that it is contrary to the public interest for the person to have access to passport facilities, F95...F96(c)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F97[(2A) An invalid travel document is “an invalid non-UK travel document” if it is, or appears to be, a passport or other document which has been issued by or for the government of a state other than the United Kingdom.](3) The powers are—(a) to require the person to hand over all travel documents in his or her possession for inspection by F98[the examining officer];(b) to search for travel documents and to take possession of any that F99[the examining officer] finds;(c) to inspect any travel document taken from the person and to retain it while its validity is checked;(d) (subject to paragraph 4) to retain any travel document taken from the person that F100[the examining officer reasonably believes] to be invalid.(4) The power under sub-paragraph (3)(b) is a power to search—(a) the person;(b) anything that the person has with him or her;(c) any vehicle in which F101[the examining officer reasonably believes] the person to have been travelling or to be about to travel;(d) any premises on which F102[the examining officer] is lawfully present.(5) F103[An examining officer]—(2) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 8 – Powers to seize invalid passports etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
225
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) may if necessary use reasonable force for the purpose of exercising a power under this paragraph;(b) may authorise a person to carry out on F104[the examining officer’s behalf] a search under this paragraph.Textual AmendmentsF92 Sch. 8 para. 3(1) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 163(3), 183(1), (5)(e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 34F93 Words in Sch. 8 para. 3(2) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 163(4)(a), 183(1), (5)(e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 34F94 Word in Sch. 8 para. 3(2)(a) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 163(4)(b), 183(1), (5)(e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 34F95 Word in Sch. 8 para. 3(2)(b) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 in so far as not already in force) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 163(4)(c), 183(1), (5)(e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 34F96 Sch. 8 para. 3(2)(c) omitted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 in so far as not already in force ) by virtue of Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 163(4)(d), 183(1), (5)(e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 34F97 Sch. 8 para. 3(2A) inserted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 163(5), 183(1), (5)(e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 34F98 Words in Sch. 8 para. 3(3)(a) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 163(6)(a)(i), 183(1), (5)(e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 34F99 Words in Sch. 8 para. 3(3)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 163(6)(a)(ii), 183(1), (5)(e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 34F100 Words in Sch. 8 para. 3(3)(d) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 in so far as not already in force ) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 163(6)(a)(iii), 183(1), (5)(e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 34F101 Words in Sch. 8 para. 3(4)(c) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 163(6)(b)(i), 183(1), (5)(e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 34F102 Words in Sch. 8 para. 3(4)(d) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 163(6)(b)(ii), 183(1), (5)(e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 34F103 Words in Sch. 8 para. 3(5) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 in so far as not already in force ) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 163(6)(c)(i), 183(1), (5)(e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 34F104 Words in Sch. 8 para. 3(5)(b) substituted (31.1.2017 for specified purposes, 3.4.2017 in so far as not already in force) by Policing and Crime Act 2017 (c. 3), ss. 163(6)(c)(ii), 183(1), (5)(e); S.I. 2017/399, reg. 2, Sch. para. 34Commencement InformationI255 Sch. 8 para. 3 in force at 14.3.2014 by S.I. 2014/630, art. 2
226	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 8 – Powers to seize invalid passports etcDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF105[Powers of entry, search and seizure etc: constables][F1063A(1) A constable may exercise any of the powers under this paragraph in relation to any premises, other than premises forming part of a port, if the constable reasonably believes that a cancelled UK passport or an invalid non-UK travel document is on the premises (whether or not in the possession of a person who is also on the premises).(2) The powers are—(a) to enter the premises;(b) to search the premises for travel documents and to take possession of any that the constable finds;(c) to inspect any travel document taken and to retain it while its validity is checked;(d) (subject to paragraph 4) to retain any travel document taken that the constable reasonably believes to be invalid.(3) A constable—(a) may if necessary use reasonable force for the purpose of exercising a power under this paragraph;(b) may authorise a person to carry out on the constable’s behalf a search under this paragraph.(4) This paragraph does not affect any power of a constable under paragraph 3(3), (4)(a) to (c) or (5) in relation to a person on any premises entered under sub-paragraph (2) (a).]Retention or return of documents seized4 (1) If a travel document is retained under paragraph F107[2(2)(c), 3(3)(c) or 3A(2)(c)] while its validity is checked, the checking must be carried out as soon as possible.(2) If it is established that a travel document taken from a person under paragraph 2 or 3—(a) is valid, or  (b) is invalid only because it has expired, it must be returned to the person straight away.F108[(2A) If it is established that a travel document taken from any premises under paragraph 3A—(a) is valid, or(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 8 – Powers to seize invalid passports etc Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
227
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) is invalid only because it has expired,it must be returned to the person to whom it was issued straight away.](3) A travel document taken from a person under paragraph 2 or 3 must be returned to the person before the end of the period of 7 days beginning with the day on which it was taken, unless during that period it is established that the document is invalid for some reason other than expiry.F109[(3A) A travel document taken from premises under paragraph 3A must be returned to the person to whom it was issued before the end of the period of 7 days beginning with the day on which it was taken, unless during that period it is established that the document is invalid for some reason other than expiry.](4) A requirement under sub-paragraph F110[(2)(b), (2A), (3) or (3A)] to return an expired travel document does not apply where the officer concerned reasonably believes that the person from whom he or she took the document F111[or (as the case may be) to whom it was issued], or some other person, intends to use it for purposes for whichit is no longer valid.(5) A requirement under sub-paragraph F112[(2), (2A), (3) or (3A)] to return a travel document has effect subject to any provision not in this Schedule under which the document may be lawfully retained.Offences5 (1) A person who is required under paragraph 2(2)(a) or 3(3)(a) to hand over all travel documents in the person's possession commits an offence if he or she fails without reasonable excuse to do so.1 
228	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 9 – Port and border controlsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesF113(2) A person who intentionally obstructs, or seeks to frustrate, [F114a search under paragraph 2 or 3][F114the exercise of a power of search under paragraph 2, 3 or 3A, or the exercise of a power of entry under paragraph 3A,] commits an offence.(3) A person guilty of an offence under this paragraph is liable on summary conviction—(a) to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months, or  (b) to a fine, which in Scotland or Northern Ireland may not exceed £5,000, or to both.F1156	An examining officer, other than a constable, exercising a power under paragraph [F1162][F1162 or 3] has the same powers of arrest without warrant as a constable in relation to an offence under—(a) paragraph 5, or(b) section 4 or 6 of the Identity Documents Act 2010.SCHEDULE 9	Section 148PORT AND BORDER CONTROLSExamining officers1 (1) Schedule 7 to the Terrorism Act 2000 is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph 1(1)(b), after “officer” there is inserted “ who is designated for the purpose of this Schedule by the Secretary of State ”.(2) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 9 – Port and border controlsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
229
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) After paragraph 1 there is inserted—“Examining officers etc1A (1) The Secretary of State must under paragraph 6 of Schedule 14 issue a code of practice about—(a) training to be undertaken by constables, immigration officers and customs officers who are to act as examining officers or exercise other functions under this Schedule, and(b) the procedure for making designations under paragraph 1(1)(b) and (c).(2) In particular, the code must make provision for consultation with the relevant chief officer of police before designations are made under paragraph 1(1)(b) or (c).(3) “Relevant chief officer of police” means—(a) in England and Wales, the chief officer of police for the police area in which the persons designated would act as examining officers,(b) in Scotland, the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Scotland, and(c) in Northern Ireland, the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland.”Time limits on examination without detention and on detention2 (1) Schedule 7 to the Terrorism Act 2000 is amended as follows.(2) Paragraph 6(4) is repealed.(3) After paragraph 6 there is inserted—“6A (1) This paragraph applies where a person is questioned under paragraph 2 or 3.(2) After the end of the 1 hour period, the person may not be questioned under either of those paragraphs unless the person is detained under paragraph 6.(3) If the person is detained under paragraph 6 the person must be released not later than the end of the 6 hour period (unless detained under another power).(4) In this paragraph—“the 1 hour period” is the period of 1 hour beginning with the time the person is first questioned under paragraph 2 or 3;“the 6 hour period” is the period of 6 hours beginning with that time.”
230	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 9 – Port and border controlsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPowers to search persons3 In paragraph 8 of Schedule 7 to the Terrorism Act 2000, after sub-paragraph (3) there is inserted—“(4) An intimate search of a person may not be carried out under this paragraph.(5) A strip search of a person may not be carried out under this paragraph unless—(a) the person is detained under paragraph 6,(b) the examining officer has reasonable grounds to suspect that the person is concealing something which may be evidence that the person falls within section 40(1)(b), and(c) the search is authorised by a senior officer who has not been directly involved in questioning the person.(6) “Senior officer” means—(a) where the examining officer is a constable, a constable of a higher rank than the examining officer,(b) where the examining officer is an immigration officer, an immigration officer of a higher grade than the examining officer, and(c) where the examining officer is a customs officer, a customs officer of a higher grade than the examining officer.(7) In this paragraph—  “intimate search” means a search which consists of a physical examination of a person's body orifices other than the mouth;  “strip search” means a search which is not an intimate search but involves the removal of an article of clothing which—(a) is being worn wholly or partly on the trunk, and(b) is being so worn either next to the skin or next to an article of underwear.”Power to make and retain copies4 In Schedule 7 to the Terrorism Act 2000, after paragraph 11 there is inserted—“Power to make and retain copies11A	(1) This paragraph applies where the examining officer is a constable.
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 9 – Port and border controlsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
231
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) The examining officer may copy anything which—(a) is given to the examining officer in accordance with paragraph 5,(b) is searched or found on a search under paragraph 8, or(c) is examined under paragraph 9.(3) The copy may be retained—(a) for so long as is necessary for the purpose of determining whether a person falls within section 40(1)(b),(b) while the examining officer believes that it may be needed for use as evidence in criminal proceedings, or(c) while the examining officer believes that it may be needed in connection with a decision by the Secretary of State whether to make a deportation order under the Immigration Act 1971.”  Right of person detained under Schedule 7 to have someone informed and to consult a solicitor5 (1) Schedule 8 to the Terrorism Act 2000 is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph 1(5) (definition of examining officer) for “paragraph” there is substituted “ Schedule ”.(3) In paragraph 2(2)(d), the words “(within the meaning of that Schedule)” are omitted.(4) In paragraph 6, for “police station”, in each place, there is substituted “ place ”.(5) In paragraph 7(1) the words “at a police station” are omitted.(6) After paragraph 7 there is inserted—“7A (1) This paragraph applies where a person detained under Schedule 7 requests to consult a solicitor.(2) The examining officer may not question the detained person under paragraph 2 or 3 of Schedule 7 until the person has consulted a solicitor (or no longer wishes to do so).(3) Sub-paragraph (2) does not apply if the examining officer reasonably believes that postponing the questioning until then would be likely to prejudice determination of the relevant matters.(4) The powers given by paragraph 8 of Schedule 7 (search powers where a person is questioned under paragraph 2 of Schedule 7) may be used when questioning is postponed because of sub-paragraph (2).(5) The detained person is entitled to consult a solicitor in person.(2) 
232	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 9 – Port and border controlsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(6) Sub-paragraph (5) does not apply if the examining officer reasonably believes that the time it would take to consult a solicitor in person would be likely to prejudice determination of the relevant matters.(7) In that case the examining officer may require any consultation to take place in another way.(8) In this paragraph “the relevant matters” means the matters the examining officer seeks to determine under paragraph 2 or 3 of Schedule 7.”(7) In paragraph 8(1), for “an officer” there is substituted “ a police officer ”.(8) In paragraph 9(2)(a) and (b)—(a) the words “at a police station” are omitted;(b) for “an officer” there is substituted “ a police officer ”.(9) In paragraph 16—(a) in sub-paragraphs (1) and (3), in each place, for “police station” there is substituted “ place ”;(b) in sub-paragraph (6), after “detained” there is inserted “ as mentioned in sub- paragraph (1) ”.(10) After paragraph 16 there is inserted—“16A(1) This paragraph applies where a person detained under Schedule 7 requests to consult a solicitor.(2) The examining officer may not question the detained person under paragraph 2 or 3 of Schedule 7 until the person has consulted a solicitor (or no longer wishes to do so).(3) Sub-paragraph (2) does not apply if the examining officer reasonably believes that postponing the questioning until then would be likely to prejudice determination of the relevant matters.(4) The powers given by paragraph 8 of Schedule 7 (search powers where a person is questioned under paragraph 2 of Schedule 7) may be used when questioning is postponed because of sub-paragraph (2).(5) The detained person is entitled to consult a solicitor in person.(6) Sub-paragraph (5) does not apply if the examining officer reasonably believes that the time it would take to consult a solicitor in person would be likely to prejudice determination of the relevant matters.(7) In that case the examining officer may require any consultation to take place in another way.(8) In this paragraph “the relevant matters” means the matters the examining officer seeks to determine under paragraph 2 or 3 of Schedule 7.”(11) In paragraph 17(1)—(a) for “An officer” there is substituted “ A police officer ”;(b) after “uniformed” there is inserted “ police ”.(12) In paragraph 18—(2) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 9 – Port and border controlsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
233
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) in sub-paragraph (1), for “and” there is substituted “ to ”;(b) in sub-paragraph (2), for “police station” there is substituted “ place ”;(c) after sub-paragraph (2) there is inserted—“(3) In relation to a person detained under Schedule 7 at a place other than a police station—(a) sub-paragraph (2), and(b) section 15(4) of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 as applied by that sub-paragraph,apply as if references to a constable included an examining officer.”Biometrics6 (1) Paragraph 10 of Schedule 8 to the Terrorism Act 2000 is amended as follows.(2) In sub-paragraph (5), for “the detained person only” there is substituted “ a person detained under section 41, but only ”.(3) In sub-paragraph (6)(b), after “in any case” there is inserted “ in which an authorisation under that sub-paragraph may be given ”.Review of detention under Schedule 77 (1) The Terrorism Act 2000 is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph 6(3) of Schedule 7 (provisions of Schedule 8 applying to detention under Schedule 7)—(a) for “Part I” there is substituted “ Parts 1 and 1A ”;(b) after “treatment” there is inserted “ and review of detention ”.(3) In Schedule 8, after Part 1 there is inserted—“PART 1AREVIEW OF DETENTION UNDER SCHEDULE 7General requirements20K	(1) A person's detention under Schedule 7 must be periodically reviewed by a review officer.(2) The first review must be carried out before the end of the period of one hour beginning with the person's detention under that Schedule.(2) 
234	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 9 – Port and border controlsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) Subsequent reviews must be carried out at intervals of not more than two hours.(4) The review officer may authorise a person's continued detention under Schedule 7 only if satisfied that it is necessary for the purposes of exercising a power under paragraph 2 or 3 of that Schedule.(5) If on a review under this paragraph the review officer does not authorise a person's continued detention, the person must be released (unless detained under another power).(6) In this Part of this Schedule “review officer” means a senior officer who has not been directly involved in questioning the detained person under paragraph 2 or 3 of Schedule 7.(7) “Senior officer” means—(a) where the examining officer is a constable, a constable of a higher rank than the examining officer,(b) where the examining officer is an immigration officer, an immigration officer of a higher grade than the examining officer, and(c) where the examining officer is a customs officer, a customs officer of a higher grade than the examining officer.(8) The Secretary of State must under paragraph 6 of Schedule 14 issue a code of practice about reviews under this Part of this Schedule.(9) The code of practice must include provision about training to be undertaken by persons who are to act as review officers.Representations20L  (1) Before determining whether to authorise a person's continued detention, a review officer must give either of the following persons an opportunity to make representations about the detention—(a) the detained person, or(b) a solicitor representing the detained person who is available at the time of the review.(2) Representations may be oral or written.(3) A review officer may refuse to hear oral representations from the detained person if the officer considers that the detained person is unfit to make representations because of the detained person's condition or behaviour.Rights20M	(1) Where a review officer authorises continued detention the officer must inform the detained person—(a) of any of the detained person's rights under paragraphs 6 and 7 which have not yet been exercised, and(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 9 – Port and border controlsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
235
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) if the exercise of any of those rights is being delayed in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 8, of the fact that it is being delayed.(2) Where a review of a person's detention is being carried out at a time when the person's exercise of a right under paragraph 6 or 7 is being delayed—(a) the review officer must consider whether the reason or reasons for which the delay was authorised continue to subsist, and(b) if in the review officer's opinion the reason or reasons have ceased to subsist, the review officer must inform the officer who authorised the delay of that opinion (unless the review officer was that officer).(3) In the application of this paragraph to Scotland, for the references to paragraphs 6, 7 and 8 substitute references to paragraph 16.Record20N	(1) A review officer carrying out a review must make a written record of the outcome of the review and of any of the following which apply—(a) the fact that the officer is satisfied that continued detention is necessary for the purposes of exercising a power under paragraph 2 or 3 of Schedule 7,(b) the fact that the detained person has been informed as required under paragraph 20M(1),(c) the officer's conclusion on the matter considered under paragraph 20M(2)(a), and(d) the fact that the officer has taken action under paragraph 20M(2) (b).(2) The review officer must inform the detained person whether the officer is authorising continued detention, and if so that the officer is satisfied that continued detention is necessary for the purposes of exercising a power under paragraph 2 or 3 of Schedule 7.(3) Sub-paragraph (2) does not apply where the detained person is—(a) incapable of understanding what is said,(b) violent or likely to become violent, or(c) in urgent need of medical attention.”Codes of practice8 (1) Schedule 14 to the Terrorism Act 2000 (exercise of powers—codes of practice etc) is amended as follows.1 
236	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 10 – Powers of community support officersDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) In paragraph 1, after “ “officer” means” there is inserted “ (subject to paragraph 6A) ”.(3) After paragraph 6 there is inserted—“6A	In paragraphs 5 and 6, “officer” includes a constable, immigration officer or customs officer who—(a) has functions under Schedule 7, or(b) has functions under Schedule 8 in relation to a person detained under Schedule 7,otherwise than as an examining officer.”SCHEDULE 10	Section 152POWERS OF COMMUNITY SUPPORT OFFICERSIntroductionF1171	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Additional powers to issue fixed penalty noticesF1182	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Powers to issue fixed penalty notices: consultation with local authoritiesF1193	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 10 – Powers of community support officers Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
237
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesGeneral power of seizureF1204	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Powers with regard to charity collectorsF1215	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Power to stop cyclesF1226	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
238	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesSCHEDULE 11	Section 181MINOR AND CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTSPART 1AMENDMENTS RELATING TO PARTS 1 TO 6Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 (c. 43)1 In section 143(2) of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 (provisions in which sums may be altered) paragraph (da) is omitted.Housing Act 1980 (c. 51)2 In Schedule 9 to the Housing Act 1980 (provisions relating to housing association and housing trust tenancies under Rent Act 1977), in paragraph 5, after “83” there is inserted “ or 83ZA ”.Highways Act 1980 (c. 66)3 Sections 129A to 129G of the Highways Act 1980 (restriction of rights over highway) are repealed.Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60)4 In section 64A of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (photographing of suspects etc), for paragraph (ca) of subsection (1B) there is substituted—“(ca)	given a direction by a constable under section 35 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014;”.
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
239
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesProsecution of Offences Act 1985 (c. 23)5 (1) In section 3 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 (functions of DPP), subsection (2) is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph (fa), for the words from “section 1C” to “proceedings)” there is substituted “ section 22 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (criminal behaviour orders made on conviction) ”.(3) In paragraph (fb)—(a) for “section 1CA(3) of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998” there is substituted “ section 27 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 ”;(b) for “section 1C” there is substituted “ section 22 ”.(4) In paragraph (fc)—(a) for “section 1CA” there is substituted “ section 27 ”;(b) for “section 1C” there is substituted “ section 22 ”.(5) Paragraphs (fd) and (fe) are omitted.Housing Act 1985 (c. 68)6 (1) Section 82A of the Housing Act 1985 (demotion because of anti-social behaviour) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (4)(a), for sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) there is substituted—“(i) conduct that is capable of causing nuisance or annoyance to some person (who need not be a particular identified person) and that directly or indirectly relates to or affects the landlord's housing management functions, or(ii) conduct that consists of or involves using housing accommodation owned or managed by the landlord for an unlawful purpose, and”.(3) For subsection (7A) there is substituted—“(7A) In subsection (4)(a)(ii) “housing accommodation” includes—(a) flats, lodging-houses and hostels;(b) any yard, garden, outhouses and appurtenances belonging to the accommodation or usually enjoyed with it;(c) any common areas used in connection with the accommodation.”7 (1) Section 83 of that Act (proceedings for possession or termination: notice requirements) is amended as follows.1 
240	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) In the heading, after “termination:” there is inserted “ general ”.(3) Before subsection (1) there is inserted—“(A1) This section applies in relation to proceedings for an order mentioned in section 82(1A) other than—(a) proceedings for possession of a dwelling-house under section 84A (absolute ground for possession for anti-social behaviour), including proceedings where possession is also sought on one or more of the grounds set out in Schedule 2, or(b) proceedings for possession of a dwelling-house under section 107D (recovery of possession on expiry of flexible tenancy).”(4) In subsection (1), for the words from “proceedings for” to “tenancy),” there is substituted “ proceedings to which this section applies ”.8 (1) Section 83A of that Act (additional requirements in relation to certain proceedings for possession) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2)(a), after “83” there is inserted “ or 83ZA ”.(3) In subsection (2)(b), for “subsection (4)(a) of that section” there is substituted “ section 83(4)(a) or section 83ZA(9)(a) ”.(4) In subsection (3)(a), after “83” there is inserted “ or 83ZA ”.(5) In subsection (4)(a), after “83” there is inserted “ or 83ZA ”.(6) In subsection (5)—(a) for “the notice” there is substituted “ a notice ”;(b) after “83” there is inserted “ or a notice is served under section 83ZA ”.9 (1) Section 84 of that Act (grounds and orders for possession) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1), after “in accordance with” there is inserted “ section 84A (absolute ground for possession for anti-social behaviour) or ”.(3) In subsection (2)(a), for “that Schedule” there is substituted “ Schedule 2 ”.(4) In subsection (3)—(a) after “83” there is inserted “ or 83ZA ”;(b) for “such an order on any of those grounds above” there is substituted “ an order on any of the grounds mentioned in subsection (2) ”.(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
241
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes10 In the heading of section 85A of that Act (proceedings for possession: anti-social behaviour) after “possession” there is inserted “ on non-absolute grounds ”.11 (1) Section 121A of that Act (order suspending right to buy because of anti-social behaviour) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (3)(a), for sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) there is substituted—“(i) conduct that is capable of causing nuisance or annoyance to some person (who need not be a particular identified person) and that directly or indirectly relates to or affects the landlord's housing management functions, or(ii) conduct that consists of or involves using housing accommodation owned or managed by the landlord for an unlawful purpose, and”.(3) In subsection (7)(a), for sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) there is substituted—“(i) conduct that is capable of causing nuisance or annoyance to some person (who need not be a particular identified person) and that directly or indirectly relates to or affects the landlord's housing management functions, or(ii) conduct that consists of or involves using housing accommodation owned or managed by the landlord for an unlawful purpose, and”.(4) For subsection (10) there is substituted—“(10) In this section “housing accommodation” includes—(a) flats, lodging-houses and hostels;(b) any yard, garden, outhouses and appurtenances belonging to the accommodation or usually enjoyed with it;(c) any common areas used in connection with the accommodation.”12 (1) In Schedule 1 to that Act (tenancies which are not secure tenancies), paragraph 4ZA (family intervention tenancies) is amended as follows.(2) In sub-paragraph (3)(a)—(a) in the opening words, for “possession order under section 84” there is substituted “ relevant possession order ”;(a) 
242	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(b) in sub-paragraph (i) the words “, on ground 2 or 2A of Part 1 of Schedule 2” are omitted.(3) In sub-paragraph (12), after the definition of “the new tenant” there is inserted— ““relevant possession order” means—(a) a possession order under section 84 that is made on ground 2, 2ZA or 2A of Part 1 of Schedule 2, or(b) a possession order under section 84A;”.13 In Part 5 of Schedule 2 to that Act (approval of redevelopment schemes for purposes of Ground 10A), in paragraph 5(3), after “83” there is inserted “ or 83ZA ”.14 In Schedule 3 to that Act (grounds for withholding consent to assignment by way of exchange), in Ground 2, after “83” there is inserted “ or 83ZA ”.15 (1) In that Schedule, Ground 2A is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph (a), for “or suspended Ground 2 or 14 possession order” there is substituted “ , a suspended anti-social behaviour possession order or a suspended riot-related possession order ”.(3) In paragraph (b), for “or a Ground 2 or 14 possession order” there is substituted “ , an anti-social behaviour possession order or a riot-related possession order ”.(4) In the definition of “relevant order”—(a) the word “or” before the final entry is omitted;(b) in the final entry, after “section 91 of the Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003” there is inserted “ or section 27 of the Police and Justice Act 2006 ”;(c) at the end there is inserted—“an injunction under section 1 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014;an order under section 22 of that Act.”(5) After the definition of “relevant order” there is inserted—(2) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
243
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“An “anti-social behaviour possession order” means an order for possession under Ground 2 in Schedule 2 to this Act or Ground 14 in Schedule 2 to the Housing Act 1988.”(6) After the definition of “demotion order” there is inserted—“A “riot-related possession order” means an order for possession under Ground 2ZA in Schedule 2 to this Act or Ground 14ZA in Schedule 2 to the Housing Act 1988.”(7) The definition of a “Ground 2 or 14 possession order” is omitted.16 After Ground 2A in that Schedule there is inserted—“Ground 2BThe dwelling-house is subject to a closure notice or closure order under Chapter 3 of Part 4 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014.”Housing Act 1988 (c. 50)17 (1) Section 6A of the Housing Act 1988 (demotion because of anti-social behaviour) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (4), for paragraph (a) there is substituted—“(a) that the tenant or a person residing in or visiting the dwelling-house has engaged or has threatened to engage in—(i) conduct that is capable of causing nuisance or annoyance to some person (who need not be a particular identified person) and that directly or indirectly relates to or affects the landlord's housing management functions, or(ii) conduct that consists of or involves using housing accommodation owned or managed by the landlord for an unlawful purpose, and”.(3) After subsection (10) there is inserted—“(10A) In subsection (4)(a)(ii) “housing accommodation” includes—(a) flats, lodging-houses and hostels;(b) any yard, garden, outhouses and appurtenances belonging to the accommodation or usually enjoyed with it;(a) 
244	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(c) any common areas used in connection with the accommodation.”18 (1) Section 7 of that Act (orders for possession) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (3), after “below” there is inserted “ (and to any available defence based on the tenant's Convention rights, within the meaning of the Human Rights Act 1998) ”.(3) In subsection (5A)(a), for “and 5” there is substituted “ , 5 and 7A ”.(4) In subsection (6)(a), after “Ground 2” there is inserted “ , Ground 7A ”.19 In the heading of section 9A of that Act (proceedings for possession: anti-social behaviour) after “possession” there is inserted “ on non-absolute grounds ”.20 In Schedule 1 to that Act (tenancies which cannot be assured tenancies), in paragraph 12ZA (family intervention tenancies), in sub-paragraph (3)(a)(i), for “ground 14” there is substituted “ ground 7A of Part 1 of Schedule 2 or ground 14, 14ZA ”.Environmental Protection Act 1990 (c. 43)21 In the Environmental Protection Act 1990, sections 92 to 94A (litter abatement notices, litter clearing notices and street litter control notices) are repealed.
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
245
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesHousing Act 1996 (c. 52)22 In the Housing Act 1996, sections 153A to 158 and Schedule 15 (injunctions against housing-related anti-social behaviour) are repealed.23 In section 218A of that Act (anti-social behaviour: landlords' policies and procedures), for subsections (8) and (8A) there is substituted—“(8) Anti-social behaviour is—(a) conduct that is capable of causing nuisance or annoyance to some person (who need not be a particular identified person) and that directly or indirectly relates to or affects the landlord's housing management functions, or(b) conduct that consists of or involves using or threatening to use housing accommodation owned or managed by the landlord for an unlawful purpose.”Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (c. 37)24 The following provisions of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 are repealed—(a) sections 1 to 1K (anti-social behaviour orders etc);(b) section 4 (appeals against orders);(c) section 8A (parenting orders on breach of anti-social behaviour order).25 (1) Section 8 of that Act (parenting orders) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)(b), for “an anti-social behaviour order or” there is substituted “ an injunction is granted under section 1 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014, an order is made under section 22 of that Act or a ”.(3) In subsection (1)(c) the words “, except in a case where section 8A below applies (parenting order on breach of anti-social behaviour order)” are omitted.(4) In subsection (6)(a), for the words after “behaviour which led to” there is substituted “ the order being made or the injunction granted ”.(2) 
246	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes26 (1) Section 9 of that Act (parenting orders: supplemental) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1) the words “, other than an offence under section 1(10) above in respect of an anti-social behaviour order,” are omitted.(3) In subsection (1B)—(a) for “an anti-social behaviour order” there is substituted “ an injunction under section 1 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is granted or an order is made under section 22 of that Act ”;(b) after “which” there is inserted “ grants the injunction or ”.(4) In subsection (2)—(a) paragraph (d) and the word “or” before it are omitted;(b) in the text after paragraph (d) the words “(including any report prepared under section 1(1C))” are omitted.(5) Subsection (2AA) is repealed.27 (1) Section 18 of that Act (interpretation etc) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)—(a) the definitions of “anti-social behaviour order” and “individual support order” are omitted;(b) paragraph (za) of the definition of “responsible officer” is omitted.(3) In subsection (4)—(a) the words “an individual support order or” are omitted;(b) for “the child, defendant or parent, as the case may be” there is substituted “ the child or, as the case may be, the parent ”.28 In section 38 of that Act (local provision of youth justice services), in subsection (4)(f) the words “individual support orders,” are omitted.29 In section 114 of that Act (orders and regulations), in subsection (2) “(1A), (1G)” is omitted.1 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
247
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesCriminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (c. 16)30 Sections 12 to 16 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001 (alcohol consumption in designated public places) are repealed.Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)31 (1) Section 50 of the Police Reform Act 2002 (power of constable to require person acting in an anti-social manner to give name and address) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1) the words “(within the meaning of section 1 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (c. 37) (anti-social behaviour orders)” are omitted.(3) After that subsection there is inserted—“(1A) In subsection (1) “anti-social behaviour” has the meaning given by section 2 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (ignoring subsection (2) of that section).”F12332	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .33 In Schedule 5 to that Act (powers exercisable by accredited persons), in paragraph 1(2), paragraph (d) and the word “and” before it are omitted.Licensing Act 2003 (c. 17)34 Sections 161 to 166 of the Licensing Act 2003 (closure orders of identified premises) are repealed.33 
248	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes35 (1) Section 167 of that Act (review of premise licence following closure order) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)(a), for “a closure order has come into force” there is substituted “a magistrates' court has made a closure order under section 80 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014, or the Crown Court has made a closure order on appeal under section 84 of that Act,”.(3) In subsection (1)(b), for the words after “the relevant licensing authority has” there is substituted “ accordingly received a notice under section 80(9) or 84(7) of that Act ”.(4) In subsection (4)(a), for the words after “notice of” there is substituted “ the review and of the order mentioned in subsection (1)(a) ”.(5) In subsection (5)(a), for the words after “to consider” there is substituted “ the order mentioned in subsection (1)(a) and any relevant representations; ”.36 In section 168 of that Act (provisions about decisions under section 167), in subsections (3)(b) and (6)(b), for the words after “the premises to which the licence relates” there is substituted “ are closed at the time of the decision by virtue of an closure order made under section 80 or 84 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 ”.37 Section 169 of that Act (enforcement of closure order) is repealed.38 (1) Section 170 of that Act (exemption of police from liability for damages) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1) the words “of his functions in relation to a closure order or any extension of it or” are omitted.(3) Paragraph (b) of subsection (2) is omitted.(2) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
249
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes39 (1) Section 171 of that Act (interpretation of Part 8) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (2), for “Relevant premises” there is substituted “ Premises ”.(3) In subsection (3) the word “relevant” is omitted.(4) In subsection (5)—(a) in the definition of “appropriate person” the word “relevant” is omitted;(b) the definitions of “closure order”, “extension”, “relevant magistrates' court”, “relevant premises”, “responsible senior police officer” and “senior police officer” are omitted.40 In Schedule 3 to that Act (matters to be entered in licensing register), for the words after “any notice given to it under” in paragraph (z) there is substituted “ section 80(9) or 84(7) of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (notification by court of closure order) ”.Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003 (c. 38)41 The following provisions of the Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003 are repealed—(a) Part 1 (closure of premises where drugs used unlawfully);(b) Part 1A (closure of premises associated with persistent disorder or nuisance);(c) Part 4 (dispersal of groups etc);(d) sections 40 and 41 (closure of noisy premises);(e) sections 48 to 52 (removal of graffiti and fly-posting) and the cross-heading before section 48.Clean Neighbourhoods and Environment Act 2005 (c. 16)42 Sections 55 to 64, 66 and 67 of the Clean Neighbourhoods and Environment Act2005 are repealed.
250	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesGovernment of Wales Act 2006 (c. 32)F12443	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006 (c. 38)44 The following provisions of the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006 (which relate to drinking banning orders) are repealed—(a) sections 1 to 7;(b) section 8(1) to (6);(c) sections 9 to 14.45 Section 27 of that Act (directions to individuals who represent a risk of disorder) is repealed.Crime and Security Act 2010 (c. 17)46 Sections 40 and 41 of the Crime and Security Act 2010 (anti-social behaviour orders: report on family circumstances and parenting orders on breach) are repealed.Localism Act 2011 (c. 20)47 (1) In Schedule 14 to the Localism Act 2011 (grounds on which landlord may refuse to surrender and grant tenancies under section 158 of that Act), paragraph 6 (Ground 6) is amended as follows.(2) In sub-paragraph (2), for “or suspended Ground 2 or 14 possession order” there is substituted “ , a suspended anti-social behaviour possession order or a suspended riot-related possession order ”.(3) In sub-paragraph (3), for “or a Ground 2 or 14 possession order” there is substituted “ , an anti-social behaviour possession order or a riot-related possession order ”.(2) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
251
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(4) In sub-paragraph (4), in the definition of “relevant order”—(a) the word “or” before paragraph (e) is omitted;(b) in paragraph (e), after “section 91 of the Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003” there is inserted “ or section 27 of the Police and Justice Act 2006 ”;(c) at the end there is inserted—“(f)	an injunction under section 1 of the Anti-social Behaviour,Crime and Policing Act 2014, or(g)	an order under section 22 of that Act;”.(5) After the definition of “relevant order” in that sub-paragraph there is inserted—“An “anti-social behaviour possession order” means an order for possession under Ground 2 in Schedule 2 to the Housing Act 1985 or Ground 14 in Schedule 2 to the Housing Act 1988.”(6) After the definition of “demotion order” in that sub-paragraph there is inserted—“A “riot-related possession order” means an order for possession under Ground 2ZA in Schedule 2 to the Housing Act 1985 or Ground 14ZA in Schedule 2 to the Housing Act 1988.”(7) The definition of “Ground 2 or 14 possession order” in that sub-paragraph is omitted.48 After paragraph 6 of that Schedule there is inserted—“Ground 6A6A	This ground is that a dwelling-house let on an existing tenancy is subject to a closure notice or closure order under Chapter 3 of Part 4 of the Anti- social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014.”Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 (c. 10)49 (1) Schedule 1 to the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 (legal aid for civil legal services) is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph 36 of Part 1 (anti-social behaviour), in sub-paragraph (1), for the words after “in relation to” there is substituted “ an application for, or proceedings in respect of, an injunction against the individual under section 1 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014. ”(2) 
252	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(3) In paragraph 7 of Part 3 (certain advocacy services in a magistrates' court excepted from the advocacy exclusion), for “and 15 to 18” there is substituted “ , 15 to 18 and 36 ”.Repeal of spent provisions etc50 The following provisions are repealed.Short title and chapter	Extent of repeal
Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (c. 37)Powers	of		Criminal Courts(Sentencing)	Act	2000(c. 6)
Section 40(2).In Schedule 9, paragraph 192.
Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	Sections 61 to 66.
Licensing Act 2003 (c. 17)Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003 (c. 38)
Section 155(2).In Schedule 6, paragraphs 121 to 125.Section 13. Section 14(3)(a). Section 56(1).Section 85(2) to (7) and (9) to (11).Section 86(1) to (4).
Sexual Offences Act 2003 (c. 42) In Schedule 6, paragraph 38(3).
Criminal Justice Act 2003 (c. 44)
Sections 322 and 323.In Schedule 26, paragraph 59.
Children Act 2004 (c. 31)	In Schedule 2, paragraph 8.
Serious	Organised	Crime andPolice Act 2005 (c. 15)Clean	Neighbourhoods	and Environment Act 2005 (c. 16)
Section 139(1) to (9).Section 140(1) to (4).Sections 141 to 143.In Schedule 7, paragraph 36.In Schedule 10, paragraph 3(3)(b). Section 2.Section 20(2).Section 21.Section 22.
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
253
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
Drugs Act 2005 (c. 17)Violent	Crime	Reduction Act2006 (c. 38)Police  and  Justice  Act  2006
Section 31.In Schedule 4, paragraphs 7, 13 and 16 to 19.Section 20.In Schedule 1, paragraph 7.Section 8(7).Section 26.Section 59(1).Section 26.
(c. 48)	In Schedule 14, paragraphs 12(3), 13(3), 15, 32and 33.Mental Health Act 2007 (c. 12)	In Schedule 1, paragraph 21.
Criminal Justice and Immig- ration Act 2008 (c. 4)Transport for London Act 2008 (c. i)Coroners and Justice Act 2009 (c. 25)Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)Police Reform and Social Resp- onsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)
Section 118.Section 123.Section 124.Schedule 20. Section 29(a).In Schedule 21, paragraph 72.Section 31.In Schedule 16, paragraphs 307 to 309.
Localism Act 2011 (c. 20)	Section 155(1).PART 2AMENDMENTS RELATING TO PART 9Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 (c. 46)51 In section 19AA of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 (samples etc from sex offenders), in subsection (1)(c), after “an order under section” there is inserted “ 122A or ”.44 
254	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes52 In section 19AB of that Act (supplementary provision in risk of sexual harm order cases), in subsection (7), at the end of the definition of “risk of sexual harm order” there is inserted— “ and also includes an order under section 122A of the 2003 Act (sexual risk orders); ”.Police Act 1997 (c. 50)53 (1) Section 113CA of the Police Act 1997 (suitability information relating to children) is amended as follows.(2) After paragraph (f) of subsection (2) there is inserted—“(fa) if a sexual harm prevention order, made under section 103A of the Sexual Offences Act 2003, is in effect in respect of the applicant—(i) the prohibitions described in that order;(ii) the date of that order;(iii) the period for which the prohibitions have effect by virtue of section 103C(2) or 103D(1) of that Act;(iv) details as to whether the order has been varied or renewed under section 103E(5) of that Act;(fb)  if an interim sexual harm prevention order, made under section 103F of the Sexual Offences Act 2003, is in effect in respect of the applicant—(i) the prohibitions described in that order;(ii) the date of that order;(iii) the period for which that order has effect by virtue of section 103F(4) of that Act;(iv) details as to whether the order has been varied or renewed under section 103F(5) of that Act;”.(3) After paragraph (i) of that subsection there is inserted—“(ia)	if a sexual risk order, made under section 122A of the Sexual Offences Act 2003, is in effect in respect of the applicant—(i) the prohibitions described in that order;(ii) the date of that order;(iii) the period for which the prohibitions have effect by virtue of section 122A(7) or 122C(1) of that Act;(iv) details as to whether the order has been varied or renewed under section 122D(4) of that Act;(ib)	if an interim sexual risk order, made under section 122E of the Sexual Offences Act 2003, is in effect in respect of the applicant—(i) the prohibitions described in that order;(i) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
255
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(ii) the date of that order;(iii) the period for which that order has effect by virtue of section 122E(4) of that Act;(iv) details as to whether the order has been varied or renewed under section 122E(5) of that Act;”.54 (1) Section 113CB of that Act (suitability information relating to protected adults) is amended as follows.(2) After paragraph (f) of subsection (2) there is inserted—“(fa) if a sexual harm prevention order, made under section 103A of the Sexual Offences Act 2003, is in effect in respect of the applicant—(i) the prohibitions described in that order;(ii) the date of that order;(iii) the period for which the prohibitions have effect by virtue of section 103C(2) or 103D(1) of that Act;(iv) details as to whether the order has been varied or renewed under section 103E(5) of that Act;(fb)  if an interim sexual harm prevention order, made under section 103F of the Sexual Offences Act 2003, is in effect in respect of the applicant—(i) the prohibitions described in that order;(ii) the date of that order;(iii) the period for which that order has effect by virtue of section 103F(4) of that Act;(iv) details as to whether the order has been varied or renewed under section 103F(5) of that Act;”.(3) After paragraph (i) of that subsection there is inserted—“(ia)	if a sexual risk order, made under section 122A of the Sexual Offences Act 2003, is in effect in respect of the applicant—(i) the prohibitions described in that order;(ii) the date of that order;(iii) the period for which the prohibitions have effect by virtue of section 122A(7) or 122C(1) of that Act;(iv) details as to whether the order has been varied or renewed under section 122D(4) of that Act;(ib)	if an interim sexual risk order, made under section 122E of the Sexual Offences Act 2003, is in effect in respect of the applicant—(i) the prohibitions described in that order;(ii) the date of that order;(iii) the period for which that order has effect by virtue of section 122E(4) of that Act;(iv) details as to whether the order has been varied or renewed under section 122E(5) of that Act;”.(i) 
256	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesCrime and Disorder Act 1998 (c. 37)55 (1) Section 8 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (parenting orders) is amended as follows.(2) For “sexual offences prevention order” there is substituted “ sexual harm prevention order ”(a) in subsection (1)(b);(b) in subsection (6)(a).(3) For subsection (9) there is substituted—“(9) In this section “sexual harm prevention order” means an order under section 103A of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (sexual harm prevention orders).”Sexual Offences Act 2003 (c. 42)56 In section 88 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (section 87: interpretation), in subsection (4)(c), after “interim notification order,” there is inserted “ sexual harm prevention order, interim sexual harm prevention order, ”.57 In section 89 of that Act (young offenders: parental directions), in the Table in subsection (1), after “interim notification order,” there is inserted “ sexual harm prevention order, interim sexual harm prevention order, ”.58 In section 91A of that Act (review of indefinite notification requirements: qualifying young offender), in subsection (2)(b), after “not subject to” there is inserted “ a sexual harm prevention order under section 103A, an interim sexual harm prevention order under section 103F, ”.
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
257
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes59 In the cross-heading before section 104 of that Act (sexual offences prevention orders: application and grounds), after “orders” there is inserted “ (Scotland and Northern Ireland) ”.60 In section 108 of that Act (SOPOs: variations, renewals and discharges), in subsection (8)(b) the words “2 or” and “England and Wales or” are omitted.61 In section 109 of that Act (interim SOPOs), in subsection (7)(a) the words “2A or” and “England and Wales or” are omitted.62 (1) Section 110 of that Act (SOPOs and interim SOPOs: appeals) is amended as follows.(2) For the heading there is substituted “ Appeals in relation to SOPOs and interim SOPOs: Northern Ireland ”.(3) In subsections (1)(c), (2) and (3)(b), for “the Crown Court” there is substituted “ a county court ”.(4) In subsection (4), for “the Crown Court” there is substituted “ the county court ”.(5) For subsection (5) there is substituted—“(5) Any order made by a county court on an appeal under subsection (1)(c) or(2) (other than an order directing that an application be re-heard by a court of summary jurisdiction) is for the purposes of section 108(7) or 109(6) (respectively) to be treated as if it were an order of the court from which the appeal was brought (and not an order of the county court).”63 (1) Section 113 of that Act (offence: breach of SOPO or interim SOPO) is amended as follows.(2) In the heading, at the end there is inserted “etc”.(3) In subsection (1), in paragraph (d) the words “2, 2A or” and “in England and Wales and” are omitted.(4) After that subsection there is inserted—(2) 
258	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(1ZA) A person commits an offence if, without reasonable excuse, he contravenes a prohibition imposed by—(a) a sexual harm prevention order, or  (b) an interim sexual harm prevention order, other than a prohibition on foreign travel.”64 In the cross-heading before section 114 of that Act (foreign travel orders: applications and grounds), after “orders” there is inserted “ (Scotland and Northern Ireland) ”.65 (1) Section 117A of that Act (foreign travel orders: surrender of passports) is amended as follows.(2) For the heading there is substituted “ Surrender of passports: Northern Ireland ”.(3) In subsection (2), after “at a police station” there is inserted “ in Northern Ireland ”.(4) In subsection (3), at the end there is inserted “(unless the person is subject to an equivalent prohibition under another order)”.66 In section 117B of that Act (surrender of passports: Scotland), at the end of subsection (3) there is inserted “(unless the person is subject to an equivalent prohibition under another order)”.67 (1) Section 119 of that Act (foreign travel orders: appeals) is amended as follows.(2) For the heading there is substituted “ Appeals in relation to foreign travel orders: Northern Ireland ”.(3) In subsection (1), for “the Crown Court” there is substituted “ a county court ”.(4) In subsection (2), for “the Crown Court” there is substituted “ the county court ”.(5) For subsection (3) there is substituted—“(3) Any order made by a county court on an appeal under subsection (1)(a) (other than an order directing that an application be re-heard by a court of summary
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
259
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesjurisdiction) is for the purposes of section 118(5) to be treated as if it were an order of the court from which the appeal was brought (and not an order of the county court).”68 (1) Section 122 (offence: breach of foreign travel order) is amended as follows.(2) In the heading, at the end there is inserted “etc”.(3) In subsection (1)—(a) for “excuse, he” there is substituted “excuse—(a) he”;(b) at the end there is inserted “, or(b) he contravenes a prohibition on foreign travel imposed by a sexual harm prevention order.”(4) In subsection (1B)(a) the words “England and Wales and” are omitted.69 In the cross-heading before section 123 of that Act, after “orders” there is inserted “ (Northern Ireland) ”.70 (1) Section 123 of that Act (risk of sexual harm orders: application, grounds and effect) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1)—(a) for “A chief officer of police” there is substituted “ The Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland ”;(b) for “a magistrates' court” there is substituted “ a court of summary jurisdiction ”;(c) for “his police area” (in both places) there is substituted “ Northern Ireland ”;(d) for “the chief officer” (in both places) there is substituted “ the Chief Constable ”.(3) Subsection (2) is repealed.71 (1) Section 125 (RSHOs: variation, renewals and discharges) is amended as follows.44 
260	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) In subsection (2), for paragraphs (b) to (d) there is substituted—“(b)	the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland.”(3) In subsection (3), for “and (if they wish to be heard) the other persons mentioned in subsection (2)” there is substituted “ , and the other person mentioned in subsection (2) (if that person wishes to be heard) ”.(4) In subsection (5), for the words after “without the consent of the defendant and” there is substituted “ the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland ”.(5) In subsection (7), for paragraphs (b) and (c) there is substituted—“(b)	a court of summary jurisdiction for the petty sessions district which includes the area where the defendant resides;(c) where the application is made by the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland, any court of summary jurisdiction.”72 In section 126 (interim RSHOs), in subsection (2)(b), for “the person who has made that application” there is substituted “ the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland ”.73 (1) Section 127 (RSHOs and interim RSHOs) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1), for “the Crown Court” there is substituted “ a county court ”.(3) In subsection (2), for “the Crown Court” there is substituted “ the county court ”.(4) For subsection (3) there is substituted—“(3) Any order made by a county court on an appeal under subsection (1)(a) or(b) (other than an order directing that an application be re-heard by a court of summary jurisdiction) is for the purposes of section 125(7) or 126(5) (respectively) to be treated as if it were an order of the court from which the appeal was brought (and not an order of the county court).”74 (1) Section 128 (offence: breach of RSHO or interim RSHO) is amended as follows.(2) In the heading, after “interim RSHO” there is inserted “ etc ”.(3) For subsections (1) and (1A) there is substituted—“(1) A person who, without reasonable excuse, does anything that the person is prohibited from doing by—
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
261
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(a) a risk of sexual harm order,(b) an interim risk of sexual harm order,(c) a sexual risk order,(d) an interim sexual risk order,(e) an order under section 2 of the Protection of Children and Prevention of Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2005 (risk of sexual harm orders in Scotland), or(f) an order under section 5 of that Act (interim risk of sexual harm orders in Scotland),commits an offence.”75 (1) Section 129 (effect of conviction etc of an offence under section 128) is amended as follows.(2) In the heading, after “section 128” there is inserted “ etc ”.(3) In subsection (1A)(a), after “an offence under section” there is inserted “ 122H or ”.(4) For subsection (5) there is substituted—“(5) In this section “relevant order” means—(a) where the conviction, finding or caution within subsection (1) is in respect of a breach of a risk of sexual harm order or a sexual risk order, that order;(b) where the conviction, finding or caution within subsection (1) is in respect of a breach of an interim risk of sexual harm order or an interim sexual risk order, any risk of sexual harm order or sexual risk order made on the hearing of the application to which the interim order relates or, if no such order is made, the interim order.(6) In subsection (5)—  “risk of sexual harm order” includes an order under section 2 of the Protection of Children and Prevention of Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2005;  “interim risk of sexual harm order” includes an order under section 5 of that Act.”76 (1) Section 133 of that Act (Part 2: general interpretation) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1), at the appropriate places there is inserted—““interim sexual harm prevention order” has the meaning given by section 103F(2);”;““interim sexual risk order” has the meaning given by section 122E(2);”;
262	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes““prohibition on foreign travel” has the meaning given by section 103D(2) or 122C(2);”;““sexual	harm	prevention	order”	has	the	meaning	given	by section 103A(1);”;““sexual risk order” has the meaning given by section 122A(1);”.77 In section 136 of that Act (Part 2: Northern Ireland), for subsection (8) there is substituted—“(8) The reference in section 101 to the Crown Court is to be read as a reference to a county court.”Protection of Children and Prevention of Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2005 (asp 9)F12578	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F12679	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006 (c. 38)80 In section 56 of the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006 (cross-border provisions relating to sexual offences), subsection (2) is repealed.
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
263
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesArmed Forces Act 2006 (c. 52)81 In Schedule 3A to the Armed Forces Act 2006 (Court Martial sentencing powers where election for trial by that court instead of CO), paragraph 13(2) and (3) (service sexual offences prevention orders) is repealed.Armed Forces Act 2011 (c. 18)82 (1) Section 17 of the Armed Forces Act 2011 (service sexual offences prevention orders) is repealed.(2) In Schedule 4 to that Act (consequential amendments), paragraph 3(3) is repealed.PART 3AMENDMENTS RELATING TO PART 11House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975 (c. 24)83 In Part 2 of Schedule 1 to the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975. (bodies of which all members are disqualified) at the appropriate place there is inserted— “ The Police Remuneration Review Body. ”Police Pensions Act 1976 (c. 35)84 In section 7 of the Police Pensions Act 1976 (payment of pensions and contributions), for paragraph (f) of subsection (2) there is substituted—“(f) a person to whom section 100A of the Police Act 1996 applies (senior police officer appointed as member of staff of College of Policing);”.85 (1) Section 11 of that Act (interpretation) is amended as follows.(2) For paragraph (e) of subsection (1) there is substituted—(2) 
264	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(e)	service, by a person to whom section 100A of the Police Act 1996 applies, as a member of the staff of the College of Policing;”.(3) In subsection (2A)(i) the words “the body known as” are omitted.(4) In subsection (8A), for “the Chief Executive of the body known as” there is substituted “ a member of the staff of ”.Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c. 60)86 (1) Schedule 2A to the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (fingerprinting and samples: power to require attendance at police station) is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph 1 (fingerprinting: persons arrested and released)—(a) in sub-paragraph (2), for “section 61(5A)(b)” there is substituted “ section 61(5A)(b)(i) ”;(b) after sub-paragraph (3) there is inserted—“(4) The power under sub-paragraph (1) above may not be exercised in a case falling within section 61(5A)(b)(ii) (fingerprints destroyed where investigation interrupted) after the end of the period of six months beginning with the day on which the investigation was resumed.”(3) In paragraph 2 (fingerprinting: persons charged etc)—(a) in sub-paragraph (2)(b), for “section 61(5B)(b)” there is substituted “ section 61(5B)(b)(i) ”;(b) at the end of sub-paragraph (2) there is inserted “, or(c) in a case falling within section 61(5B)(b)(ii) (fingerprints destroyed where investigation interrupted), the day on which the investigation was resumed.”(4) In paragraph 9 (non-intimate samples: persons arrested and released)—(a) in sub-paragraph (2), for “within section 63(3ZA)(b)” there is substituted “ within section 63(3ZA)(b)(i) or (ii) ”;(b) after sub-paragraph (3) there is inserted—“(4) The power under sub-paragraph (1) above may not be exercised in a case falling within section 63(3ZA)(b)(iii) (sample, and any DNA profile, destroyed where investigation interrupted) after the end of the period of six months beginning with the day on which the investigation was resumed.”(5) In paragraph 10 (non-intimate samples: persons charged etc)—(a) in sub-paragraph (3), for “within section 63(3A)(b)” there is substituted “ within section 63(3A)(b)(i) or (ii) ”;(b) after sub-paragraph (4) there is inserted—(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
265
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes“(5) The power under sub-paragraph (1) above may not be exercised in a case falling within section 63(3A)(b)(iii) (sample, and any DNA profile, destroyed where investigation interrupted) after the end of the period of six months beginning with the day on which the investigation was resumed.”Police Act 1996 (c. 16)87 In section 36 of the Police Act 1996 (general duty of Secretary of State), in subsection (2)(c), the words “(other than sections 61 and 62)” are omitted.88 In section 97 of that Act (police officers engaged on service outside their force), in subsection (1)(i) the words “the body known as” are omitted.89 In section 105 of that Act (extent), in subsection (3), for “sections 61 and 62” there is substituted “ Part 3A ”.Police (Northern Ireland) Act 2000 (c. 32)91 In section 49 of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 2000 (severance arrangements), for subsection (4) there is substituted—“(4) Sections 25(8) and 26(6) of the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (requirement to consult the Board and the Police Association before making
266	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesregulations) shall not apply in relation to regulations made by virtue of this section.”Freedom of Information Act 2000 (c. 36)92 In Part 6 of Schedule 1 to the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (public authorities), the following entries are inserted at the appropriate places— “ The College of Policing. ”“ The Police Remuneration Review Body. ”Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)93 (1) Section 29 of the Police Reform Act 2002 (interpretation of Part 2) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1), in the definition of “serving with the police”, for “12(7)” there is substituted “ 12(7) to (10) ”.(3) In subsection (1A), for “12(7)” there is substituted “ 12(7) to (10) ”.94 In section 39 (police powers for contracted-out staff), subsections (9) to (11) are repealed.95 (1) Schedule 3 to that Act (handling of complaints and conduct matters etc) is amended as follows.F127(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F127(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F127(4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F127(5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .F128(6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
267
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(7) In paragraph 24A(3), after “a report” there is inserted “ to the Commission ”.(8) In paragraph 24C—(a) in sub-paragraph (1), for “If” there is substituted “ This paragraph applies where ”;(b) the words in that sub-paragraph from “it shall make” to the end are omitted;(c) sub-paragraph (2) is repealed.(9) In paragraph 27—(a) in the heading, after “disciplinary proceedings” there is inserted “ etc ”;(b) in sub-paragraph (7), after “disciplinary” there is inserted “ or other ”;(c) in sub-paragraph (9)(a), after “sub-paragraph (1)(b)” there is inserted “ or(c) ”.Equality Act 2010 (c. 15)96 In Part 1 of Schedule 19 to the Equality Act 2010 (authorities subject to public sector equality duty), at the appropriate place under the heading “Police” there is inserted— “ The College of Policing. ”Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (c. 13)97 In section 7 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (police and crime plans), for paragraph (f) of subsection (1) there is substituted—“(ea) the services which are to be provided by virtue of section 143 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014;(f) any grants which the elected local policing body is to make under that section, and the conditions (if any) subject to which any such grants are to be made.”
268	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes98 Section 9 of that Act (crime and disorder reduction grants) is repealed.99 In Schedule 2 to that Act (chief constables), paragraph 7(3) is repealed.100 In Schedule 4 to that Act (Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis), paragraph 4(3) is repealed.Repeal or revocation of spent provisions etc102 The following provisions are repealed or revoked—Title and reference	Extent of repeal or revocationPolice Act 1996 (c. 16)	In Schedule 7, paragraph 28.Police (Northern Ireland) Act 1998 (c. 32)	Section 34.Greater London Authority Act 1999 (c. 29) In Schedule 27, paragraph 92(2).
Scotland Act 1998 (Cross-Border Public Authorities) (Specification) Order 1999 (S.I. 1999/1319)
In the Schedule, the entry for the Police Negotiating Board for the United Kingdom.
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
269
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes
Scotland Act 1998 (Cross-Border Public Authorities) (Adaptation of Functions etc.) Order 1999 (S.I. 1999/1747)Scotland Act 1998 (Consequential Modifications) (No. 2) Order 1999 (S.I. 1999/1820)
In Schedule 1, the entry for the Police Negotiating Board for the United Kingdom.Schedule 21.In Schedule 2, paragraph 124.
Police (Northern Ireland) Act 2000 (c. 32)	In Schedule 6, paragraph 12(2).Freedom of Information Act 2000 (c. 36)	In Part 6 of Schedule 1, the entry forthe Police Negotiating Board.Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)	In Schedule 4, in paragraph 1(2),the word “and” at the end of paragraph (ca).Police and Justice Act 2006 (c. 48)	In Schedule 4, paragraphs 3 and 10.
Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006 (asp 10)
In Schedule 6, paragraph 5(3) and (4).
Policing and Crime Act 2009 (c. 26)	Section 12(3).
Northern Ireland Act 1998 (Devolution of Policing and Justice Functions) Order 2010 (S.I. 2010/976)Police Reform and Social Responsibility
In Schedule 3, paragraphs 5 to 7.Section 24(2)(a).
Act 2011 (c. 13)	In Schedule 16, paragraphs 30(3),35(3) and 38.
Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012 (asp 8)Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012 (Consequential Provisions and Modifications) Order 2013 (S.I. 2013/602)
In Schedule 7, paragraph 13(4).In Schedule 1, paragraph 5(4) to (6).

270	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changesPART 4AMENDMENTS RELATING TO PART 12Prison Act (Northern Ireland) 1953 (c. 18)103 In section 38 of the Prison Act (Northern Ireland) 1953 (arrest, etc, of persons unlawfully at large), in subsection (4), for “the last foregoing sub-section” there is substituted “ subsection (2) ”.Extradition Act 2003 (c. 41)104 In section 11 of the Extradition Act 2003 (bars to extradition), in subsection (1A), for “by reason of forum only” there is substituted “by reason of—(a) absence of prosecution decision, or(b) forum,only ”.105 (1) Section 21 of that Act (human rights) is amended as follows.(2) For the heading there is substituted “ Person unlawfully at large: human rights ”.(3) In subsection (1) the words “11 or” are omitted.106 In section 26 of that Act (appeal against extradition order: category 1 territory), in subsection (4), for “Notice of an appeal” there is substituted “ Notice of application for leave to appeal ”.107 In section 28 of that Act (appeal against discharge at extradition hearing: category 1 territory), in subsection (5), for “Notice of an appeal” there is substituted “ Notice of application for leave to appeal ”.102 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
271
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes108 In section 35 of that Act (extradition where there is no appeal), after subsection (4) there is inserted—“(4A) If the day referred to in paragraph (a) of subsection (4) is earlier than the earliest day on which, by reason of an order under section 36B or 36C, the extradition order may be carried out (“the postponed date”), that paragraph has effect as if it referred instead to the postponed date.”109 In section 36 of that Act (extradition following appeal), after subsection (3) there is inserted—“(3A) If the day referred to in paragraph (a) of subsection (3) is earlier than the earliest day on which, by reason of an order under section 36B or 36C, the extradition order may be carried out (“the postponed date”), that paragraph has effect as if it referred instead to the postponed date.”110 In section 66 of that Act (supplementary provision for the purposes of sections 64 and 65), in subsection (1), for “(2)” there is substituted “ (1A) ”.111 In section 103 of that Act (appeal where case sent to Secretary of State), in subsection (9), for “Notice of an appeal” there is substituted “ Notice of application for leave to appeal ”.112 In section 105 of that Act (appeal against discharge at extradition hearing: category 2 territory), in subsection (5), for “Notice of an appeal” there is substituted “ Notice of application for leave to appeal ”.102 
272	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes113 (1) Section 108 of that Act (appeal against extradition order: category 2 territory) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (4), for the words before “is 14 days” there is substituted“Notice of application for leave to appeal under this section must be given—(a) in accordance with rules of court, and(b) subject to subsections (5) and (7A), before the end of the permitted period, which”.(3) In subsection (5)—(a) for “But notice of an appeal” there is substituted “ Notice of application for leave to appeal ”(b) after “if it is an” there is inserted “ application for leave to ”.(4) In subsection (6), for the words before “before the person is extradited” there is substituted “ Notice of application for leave to appeal on human rights grounds given after the end of the permitted period must be given ”.(5) In subsection (7)—(a) for “notice of an appeal” there is substituted “ notice of application for leave to appeal ”;(b) for “consider the appeal” there is substituted “ grant leave ”;(c) for “to consider the appeal” there is substituted “ for the appeal to be heard ”.(6) In subsection (8), for “ “appeal on human rights grounds” means an appeal” there is substituted “ “to appeal on human rights grounds” means to appeal ”.114 In section 110 of that Act (appeal against discharge by Secretary of State), in subsection (5), for “Notice of an appeal” there is substituted “ Notice of application for leave to appeal ”.115 In section 117 of that Act (extradition where there is no appeal), in subsection (2), for the words after “28 days” there is substituted “starting with—(a) the day on which the Secretary of State makes the extradition order, or(b) if an order is made under section 118C or 118D, the earliest day on which the extradition order may be carried out.”(a) 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
273
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes116 In section 118 of that Act (extradition following appeal), after subsection (2) there is inserted—“(2A) But if the day referred to in paragraph (a) or (b) of subsection (3) is earlier than the earliest day on which, by reason of an order under section 118C or 118D, the extradition order may be carried out (“the postponed date”), the required period is 28 days beginning with the postponed date.”117 In section 137 (definition of extradition offence for the purposes of Part 2 of the Act: person not sentenced for offence) subsection (9) is repealed.118 In section 138 (definition of extradition offence for the purposes of Part 2 of the Act: person sentenced for offence) subsection (9) is repealed.119 (1) Section 197 of that Act (custody) is amended as follows.(2) In subsection (1), at the end there is inserted—“This is subject to the power to order the temporary transfer of a person under section 21B.”(3) After subsection (6) there is inserted—“(6A) An order for a person's temporary transfer under section 21B is sufficient authority for an appropriate person—(a) to receive him;(b) to keep him in custody until he is transferred in accordance with the order;(c) to convey him to and from the territory to which he is to be transferred;(d) on his return from that territory, to keep him in custody until he is brought back to the institution to which he was committed.”120 (1) Section 204 of that Act (warrant issued by category 1 territory: transmission by electronic means) is amended as follows.102 
274	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendmentsDocument Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes(2) In subsections (1)(c) and (2)(c), for “a qualifying form” there is substituted “ a form in which it is intelligible and which is capable of being used for subsequent reference ”.(3) In subsection (6)—(a) at the end of paragraph (a) there is inserted “and”;(b) paragraph (c) and the word “and” before it are omitted.121 (1) Section 216 of that Act (interpretative provisions) is amended as set out in sub- paragraphs (2) and (3).(2) After subsection (10) there is inserted—“(10A) Human Rights Convention” has the meaning given to “the Convention” by section 21(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998.”(3) After subsection (12) there is inserted—“(12A) Refugee Convention” means the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees done at Geneva on 28 July 1951 and the Protocol to the Convention.”(4) The following provisions of that Act are repealed in consequence of sub-paragraphs(2) and (3)—(a) the definition of “the Refugee Convention” in section 40(4);(b) section 70(2A);(c) section 153D(3).123 In section 226 of that Act (extent), in subsection (2), after “Sections” there is inserted “ 151B, ”.123 
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12) SCHEDULE 11 – Minor and consequential amendments Document Generated: 2024-05-19Status: This version of this Act contains provisions that are prospective.
275
Changes to legislation: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 is up to date with all changes known to be in force on or before 19 May 2024. There are changes that may be brought into force at a future date. Changes that have been made appear in the content and are referenced with annotations. (See end of Document for details) View outstanding changes124 In Part 1 of Schedule 1 to that Act (re-extradition: category 1 territories), in paragraph 3, after “21(3)” there is inserted “ and section 21A(5) ”.PART 5AMENDMENTS CONSEQUENTIAL ON ESTABLISHMENT OF POLICE SERVICE OF SCOTLANDTerrorism Act 2000 (c. 11)125 (1) Schedule 8 to the Terrorism Act 2000 (detention) is amended as follows.(2) In paragraph 20B(10), for paragraph (b) of the definition of “a specified chief officer of police” there is substituted—“(b)	the chief constable of the Police Service of Scotland, where—(i) the person who provided the material, or from whom it was taken, resides in Scotland, or(ii) the chief constable believes that the person is in, or is intending to come to, Scotland.”(3) In paragraph 20J—(a) for paragraphs (d) and (e) of the definition of “police force” there is substituted—“(d)  the Police Service of Scotland;(e) the Scottish Police Authority;”;(b) in the second of the three definitions of “responsible chief officer of police”, for the words after “the chief constable of” there is substituted “ the Police Service of Scotland ”.Counter-Terrorism Act 2008 (c. 28)126 (1) In section 18D of the Counter-Terrorism Act 2008 (use of retained material), in subsection (2) for “the Scottish Police Services Authority” there is substituted “ the Scottish Police Authority ”.(2) In section 18E(1) of that Act (interpretation of sections 18 to 18E), for paragraph (d) of the definition of “police force” there is substituted—“(d)	the Police Service of Scotland;”.
276	Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 (c. 12)Document Generated: 2024-05-19
24/03/2025 Acid and corrosive substances https://www.college.police.uk/app/investigation/acid-and-corrosive-substances PageAcid and corrosive substancesThis page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published21 January 2019 Updated7 March 2024Written by College of Policing Investigation1 min readThe following resources provide advice and guidance when responding to or investigating offences involving corrosive substances. General advice for investigators and CSIs on College Learn  Packaging advice guidance (PDF, 876KB) First response – Remove, Remove, Remove Campaign resources, including posters and leaflets  Victim care advice (PDF, 66KB) Response car suggested equipment purchasing list (PDF, 338KB)  Kit instructions (PDF, 132KB) Video briefing on College Learn NHS infographic: In the event of an acid attack    Home Office (2022) Statutory guidance: Offensive Weapons Act 2019, part 1 Back to Investigation overviewTagsIntelligence