Template v8WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICYUse of ForceDate of Publication: September 2022 Version:	1.0Next Review Date:	September 2024
POLICY STATEMENTWiltshire Police complies with Authorised Professional Practice (APP) which contains information to assist policing activity across a range of different areas such as Public Order and Firearms. Wiltshire Police also provides additional guidance to Police Officers on a local level where it is considered necessary to do so.The Force’s purpose is to attack criminality, reduce crime, protect the vulnerable and provide reassurance. This is to ensure that the people of Wiltshire can go about their everyday lives in a peaceful environment. In order to achieve this it is accepted that during every day policing trained officers may be required to use force when resolving the incidents they are dealing with.This policy explains the circumstances when force can be used, how to resolve conflict, how to present evidence as well as how the National Decision Model (NDM) is applicable when deciding on using force.Recordingï A record must be completed as soon as practicable and preferably within the tour of duty the force was used. It must be completed before any periods of leave.ï Body worn video should be used in accordance with training to capture instances where force has been or is likely to be used.ï Where force has been used the officer is to complete the USE OF FORCE FORM (Electronic Form on Niche). It is the responsibility of the officer to complete their own use of force record. One must be completed every time force is used on a person. If force is used on more than one person, a new report must be completed for each person on whom force was used.ï A record must be completed for all situations where force has been used over a period of time against person(s) not subsequently apprehended, for example public order. It is accepted that there may be occasions where there is a lack of detail in such circumstances.ï In situations where the subject of the use of force is not identified or is unknown, the process detailed in appendix A will be used.ï Where the incident doesn’t occur in the officers home force area, they must still complete their own Forces records.ï A record must be created when one of the following techniques or tactics are used:o Handcuffing (compliant and non-compliant);o Unarmed skills (including pressure points, strikes, restraints and takedowns);o Use of dogs;o Drawing or use of baton;o Drawing or use of irritant spray;o Limb/Body restraints;o Spit guard;o Shield;o Conductive Energy Device (C.E.D currently TASER); Drawing or use of the Taser;o AEP: drawn or discharged;o Firearms: drawn or discharged; oro Other/improvisedï This includes force applied by custody staff.ï 
Conflict ResolutionIn order to resolve conflict the following should be considered:ï The persons behaviour and their level of resistance;ï If the person is not compliant, the impact factors which apply to both parties;ï The appropriate level of response in accordance with the reasonable officer response options and in conjunction with the NDM;ï The persons level of resistance affects their behaviour:o Compliance: The person offers no resistance and complies with requests;o Verbal and Gestures: The person refuses verbally to comply or exhibits body language indicating non-compliance;o Passive: The person sits or stands still and will not cooperate;o Active: The person pulls away from or pushes. There is no deliberate attempt to strike or cause injury;o Aggressive: The person physically fights back; oro Serious or Aggravated: Any assault where there exists the possibility of great bodily harm or death. This includes production of a weapon by the person.ï The term ‘impact factors’ relates to the officers assessment of the situation, own ability to deal with the incident and the threat posed. The factors that may influence assessment include:o relative strength, skill level, exhaustion, alcohol or drugs, imminent danger, mental derangement and own perception of willingness to resist. These factors aren’t mandatory to consider and there isn’t an exhaustive list;o the possibility that the person is suffering (or believed to be suffering) from Acute Behaviour Disorder (ABD). Any ABD should be treated as a medical emergency and the subject be transported to hospital.o officers and staff must be mindful when considering the use of force on persons perceived to be vulnerable due to medical conditions, mental health history or age.Reasonable Officer Response OptionsThe NDM has been adopted for the police service and is designed to assist operational officers, commanders, planners and advisors manage their response to a situation in a reasonable and proportionate way. The NDM provides a simple logical and evidence based approach to making decisions whether an incident is spontaneous or planned.The NDM should be adopted when considering the use of force. It can be adopted for situations where use of force may have been considered but not needed, allowing for a reassessment where required.Using the NDM, any of the reasonable officer responses can be considered as ‘tactical options’.ï Officer Presence: Example includes method of approach, uniform or plainclothes.ï Tactical Communications: Can be verbal and non-verbal, with or without batons.ï Primary Control Skills: Can be use of empty hand skills, escort position, arm and wrist locks, compliance techniques, use of handcuffs or use of baton for restraint techniques.ï Defensive Tactics: Blocks, strikes and takedowns. Empty hands and batons followed by control techniques.ï Secondary Control Techniques: An example being PAVA spray and if and when available CED (Taser).ï Deadly Force: Any action which may cause serious bodily injury.ï 
Reporting UseIt’s important that all officers inform the custody officer, when the detainee is initially brought into the custody area, about the type and level of force used.A pocket notebook entry must be made about the use of force as soon as possible after the incident as well as completion of the use of force form.An MG 6C (non-sensitive material) and a use of force form, if used, must be attached to any subsequent file.Actions may need to be defended in both the criminal and the civil courts.Once a PAVA irritant spray has been used it must be removed from circulation, double bagged, exhibited and booked into SPR through NICHE. The canister will be forwarded to Force Operations and may be disposed of after a period of 28 days subject to any civil action or complaint against police relating to its use.Once a spit and bite guard has been used, it should be disposed of as Bio-Hazardous waste, unless needed as evidence. A replacement spit and bite guard can be obtained from custody or the HQ Supplies department. See Spit and Bite Guard Procedure for more information.Once a CED (Taser) has been used the TASER X2 or TASER X26 Standard Operating Procedure should be referred to and the post deployment of Taser procedure adhered to.POLICY AIMThe aim of this policy is to ensure that there is an efficient and consistent approach adopted across Wiltshire Police in regard to the use of force.The Code of Ethics published in 2014 by the College of Policing requires all officers and staff to do the right thing in the right way. It also recognises that the use of discretion in Policing is necessary but in using discretion, states that you should, "take into account any relevant policing codes, guidance, policies and procedures into consideration."APPLICABILITYThis policy applies to all Police Officers, Special Constables, Police Community Support Officers (PCSOs), Detention Officers (DOs), Local Crime Investigators (LCIs), Enquiry Officers and Prisoner Transport Teams.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEThe Criminal Law Act 1967, Section 117 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, Common Law and Section 76(7) of the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 must be adhered to and referred to when making decisions on use of force.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSSpit and Bite Guard ProcedureTASER X2 Standard Operating Procedure TASER X26 Standard Operating Procedure Dogs Standard Operating Procedure Firearms Standard Operating Procedures
AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEOperations Public OrderArmed Policing > Use of Force National Decision ModelDetention and Custody > Risk Assessment > 3.7 Acute Behavioural DisorderDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWThis policy will be reviewed every two years in the light of any national policy or procedural change or due to changes to law or Force strategy or at such other times as may become necessary.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Head of HQ Operations and Contact Management is responsible for this policy. All queries relating to this policy should be directed to the Head HQ Operations and Contact Management or the Force Policy Officer.
Appendix AAdding a Use of Force form where offenders details are unknownWhen adding a Use of force form for an unknown offender, either open the Pre-Planned event: (e.g. Football match) occurrence or for Non Planned events: an occurrence must be created by one of the officers involved.Create person record as per the Niche Data Quality Minimum standards for Unknown Suspect.Please see Niche RMS Minimum Data Quality Standards for full details.Link the created person record to the occurrence.Then open the person record within the occurrence and go to the occurrence events/reports. Right click in the grey area, click New, then scroll and find the Use of Force report and click on it, this will bring up the report for you to complete.
Once this has been completed then go back to the occurrence scroll along the tabs to the Events tab, right click in the grey area and click on New occurrence retention assessment.Which will bring up this box.Then complete the Outcome severity by selecting Group 3, add the date of the Use of force form in the Assessment time and enter Use of force in the Remarks box as below.Ensure that you have added yourself as the OIC in the current officer tab, or the officer that has completed the form.Then close.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	HQ Operations and Contact Management Policy Owner/Author:	Supt. Gavin WILLIAMS / Insp. Martyn SWEET Technical Author:	Andrew IRVING / Graham McLAUGHLIN Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: ACC Local Policing and PartnershipsRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes19.09.20221.0Schedule review. No changes required.Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team18.03.20201.0Chief Constable17.03.20201.0JNCC (Not required for all policies)By email March 20201.0Distribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionSarah SOMERS, Paul DREVER, Police Federation, UNISON20.05.20190.2IAG’s (Via Peter FOSTER, Dan GREEN, David TIPPETTS, Lucy THORN, Caroline BURT,20.05.20190.2Emma SLADE, Molly DUFFY, Martyn SWEET and Zoe TURRELL12.02.2020App AImplications of the Policy: Training RequirementsWiltshire Police staff receive regular Personal Safety Training in line with the College of Policing requirement for officers and identified police staff.IT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure is required to implement this policy.
Template v5       WILTSHIRE POLICE & POLICE AND CRIME COMMISSIONERAcceptable Use Policy(Force Assets, Systems, Email and Telephone)Date of Publication: June 2021 Version:	3.0Next Review Date:	June 2023
TABLE OF CONTENTS1. ACCEPTABLE USE POLICY STATEMENT	4APPLICABILITY	42. ACCEPTABLE USE OF FORCE SYSTEMS	43. GENERAL PRINCIPLES	54. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES	55. ACCEPTABLE USE OF ASSETS	56. USER IDENTIFICATION, ACCESS AND MONITORING	67. INFORMATION CLASSIFICATION, LABELLING AND HANDLING	68. SECURE HANDLING OF MEDIA AND DOCUMENTATION	69. DATA PROTECTION LEGISLATION AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL INFORMATION	710. COMPUTER MISUSE LEGISLATION	711. SITE SECURITY	712. REMOVAL OF PROPERTY AND SECURITY OF EQUIPMENT OFF-PREMISES	713. PASSWORD SECURITY	714. CLEAR DESK AND CLEAR SCREEN POLICY	815. REMOTE WORKING	816. REPORTING INFORMATION SECURITY INCIDENTS	817. SECURE DISPOSAL AND RE-USE OF EQUIPMENT	918. PROTECTION AGAINST MALICIOUS CODE	919. SECURITY EDUCATION AWARENESS & TRAINING	1020. SECURITY OPERATING PROCEDURES (SYOPS)	1021. INCIDENT REPORTING	1022. USE OF SPECIFIC SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT	1022.1 Law Enforcement Applications (PNC, NICHE, Storm etc.)	1022.2 E-Mail/Messaging Security and Secure Internet Access	1122.3 Information Security in Conversations and with the Use of (Mobile and Fixed) Telephone and recording Equipment	1322.4 Airwave Radios	1323. ACCESS CONTROL LEVEL (ACL) OF NICHE AND OTHER RECORDS	1424. MONITORING, INTERCEPTION AND AUDIT	1525. BREACH OF POLICY ESCALATION PROCEDURES	1626. AUTOMATED RESTRICTIONS	17POLICY AIM	17LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCE	17
RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	18AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE	18DATA PROTECTION	18FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	18MONITORING AND REVIEW OF THIS POLICY	18WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICY	18DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	19
1. ACCEPTABLE USE POLICY STATEMENTThis policy is required to assist all Wiltshire Police Officers, Police and OPCC Staff, Special Constables, Volunteers and all contracted third parties identify what they can and cannot do when accessing Wiltshire Police/OPCC systems, and to provide clear guidance around what constitutes Law Enforcement Purposes.This policy supports the organisations values and behaviours, in particular acting with impartiality, integrity, public service and transparency at all times.This policy sits alongside the Microsoft Office 365 Acceptable Use Procedure which governs and provides advice on the use of Microsoft Office 365, Teams and One Note.What is Information Security? Information security is the preservation of the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information:a. Confidentiality - Protecting sensitive or personal information from unauthorised disclosure, both to outsiders, and to staff who have no requirement to access such information in the course of their duties;b. Integrity - Safeguarding the accuracy and completeness of information and information processing methods;c. Availability - Ensuring that information and associated services are available to meet the needs of the Force.Information security is required during the entire lifecycle of a piece of information, from the moment it is collected or created, throughout its usage, through to ultimate disposal. Appropriate measures need to be applied to ensure that information security is maintained. Information security promotes trust and confidence in the Force’s services, practices and IT infrastructure and systems.The achievement of information security needs a combination of policies, standards, procedures, guidelines, appropriate organisational structure, physical security considerations, and measures to safeguard the ICT network infrastructure and information systems. This policy contains a summary of the expectations from all users of the Force’s systems and applications. Where relevant, links to more detailed guidance will be provided. This Acceptable Use Policy (AUP) is part of a wider Information Security Policy Framework (ISPF) which governs the security principles that applies to the use of the Force’s systems and the ISPF should be read in conjunction with this document.APPLICABILITYThis policy is applicable to all systems and applications used by Wiltshire Police and the OPCC and applies to all Police Officers, Police and OPCC Staff, Special Constables, Volunteers and all contracted third parties, whether they are working from Wiltshire Police/OPCC premises, Shared (Partner) premises, any office, remote location, home address, or whilst working remotely.2. ACCEPTABLE USE OF FORCE SYSTEMSThe standards of behaviour and the integrity of those who work within the police service are constantly under close scrutiny. It is imperative that Wiltshire Police Officers and Wiltshire Police/OPCC Staff conduct their business in a way which maintains public confidence. Information is provided to Wiltshire Police and the OPCC via a number of sources and there is a legal requirement that this information will be treated confidentially and only accessed for a legitimate reason: Law Enforcement Purposes or purposes covered by other policies or legal requirements.Law Enforcement Purposes are defined as: prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security.
Where police officers or Wiltshire Police/OPCC staff abuse their position and view confidential information without a legitimate Law Enforcement Purpose, this serves not only to undermine the trust of the public, but could also be a breach of the Data Protection Act 2018, the Computer Misuse Act 1990, the Code of Ethics, Standards of Professional Behaviour, and Force Policy.3. GENERAL PRINCIPLESPersonnel are able to use the Wiltshire Police/OPCC IT and telephony systems for Wiltshire Police and OPCC business use and appropriate personal use as described throughout this document.The general principles are that users must:ï Use the facility in a responsible manner by adhering to the Code of Ethics, the Standards of Professional Behaviour;ï Comply with all existing Information Systems and Information Security policies;ï Ensure they are aware of their personal responsibilities;ï Not access unsuitable material;ï Not use the systems for non-work related issues during working time, except during refreshment or other authorised breaks.Permission to use the systems for personal use may be withdrawn if personal use adversely affects official use. This will be determined by Line Managers measured against any adverse impact on official use.4. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIESThe Force Information Security Policy Framework (ISPF) contains detailed information of the various role and responsibilities that are associated with the management of information security within the Force.5. ACCEPTABLE USE OF ASSETSAll IT devices to be used in connection with the Wiltshire Police/OPCC information must be formally configured and authorised by the ICT Department and approved by relevant information asset owners or line managers before use.Staff must follow the Agile Working and Mobile Computing Policy and must not use personally owned (e.g. bring your own devices) electronic devices to process the Force’s information or process force Information on non-police endorsed systems or software.All of the ICT equipment and software that you have been assigned remains the property of the Force/OPCC. You have an obligation to ensure that this equipment and software is safeguarded and only used as intended:a) You must not remove any ICT equipment from the Force’s premises without Line Managers approval;b) You must always take care of ICT equipment allocated for your use, and treat it as if it is your own;c) You must protect your ICT equipment against theft and unauthorised access;d) Where at all possible, you must not expose your IT equipment to any environmental hazard, such as extremes of temperature;e) You must not install any software or attempt to use any USB device that has not been authorised by the ICT Department. If you require any software or other devices for your work, you must consult your line manager and the ICT Department;f) You must not modify your IT equipment in any way; this includes any amendments to the hardware and software configuration;g) You must always report any IT problems to the ICT Service Desk.a) 
6. USER IDENTIFICATION, ACCESS AND MONITORINGYou must only access and use the Police/OPCC IT network, systems and applications if you are authorised to do so. If you are granted access, it is so that you are able to perform your duties efficiently.You must remember that access has been granted for your sole use by means of a unique user account and password. This applies to the different user accounts that may be granted to you for access to the Police/OPCC network, information systems and applications.You must not give details of your user account and password to anyone, including your line manager; you must not share any user account allocated to you with anyone else. Wiltshire Police and OPCC (within its legal rights) is able to track the activities of each user via their user account, and identify exactly what they have accessed and what actions have been taken. If it is your user account that is logged as attempting an unauthorised or illegal action, you may be held responsible. It is in your interests to ensure that you safeguard your user account and password details at all times.In order to ensure compliance with legislation, regulations, contracts and its information security policies, the Force reserves the right to monitor user activities.7. INFORMATION CLASSIFICATION, LABELLING AND HANDLINGThe Force’s Information Classification and Handling Policy provides you with the guidance you require to be able to do your job in a secure and responsible manner. The Information Management Policy applies to all information irrespective of its form, including electronic information, e.g. databases and files, computer media based information, e.g. stored on CDs, DVDs and USB devices, and paper based documents.All information that is handled by the Wiltshire Police and OPCC has a classification to determine the level of security it requires and the way in which it must be handled.For every document you produce, you are personally responsible for defining its classification on behalf of the Force. When you are classifying information, you must consider its sensitivity and how much protection it needs.Appropriate safeguards must be put in place to protect personal, sensitive and/or information classified under the Government Security Classification Scheme (GSC) (see Government Security Classification Guidance Handout for details). The extent of the safeguards should be in proportion to the degree of risk posed.When using the Wiltshire Police and OPCC information, you must handle it in a secure manner based upon its classification.8. SECURE HANDLING OF MEDIA AND DOCUMENTATIONCare must be taken to protect all documentation and computer media, e.g. DVDs, CDs and USB storage devices, containing sensitive and critical information, and measures must be taken to ensure secure storage, transit, copying, reuse and disposal of computer media and documentation.When exchanging information within the Force or between other Forces/trusted organisations, it is vital to assess the sensitivity of the information and handle it in accordance with any security classification and handling requirements and the Force’s Information Management Policy.When dealing with hard copy documents, always ensure that you are aware of their security classification and handling requirements. Sensitive documents should not be left unattended on desks, printers and other equipment where they are vulnerable to unauthorised access and theft.
You must always lock sensitive computer media and documents away when left unattended.With the global messaging opportunities presented by Internet based email, users are specifically reminded that they must adhere to the Data Protection Act 2018 and UK General Data Protection Regulations (UK-GDPR) when transferring/sending personal data to a country or territory outside the European Economic Area.Personal data shall not be transmitted to a country or territory outside the UK unless that country or territory ensures an adequate level of protection for the rights and freedoms of data subjects in relation to the processing of personal data. The Force Data Protection Officer should be contacted if further information is required.9. DATA PROTECTION LEGISLATION AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL INFORMATIONAll Wiltshire Police officers/police and OPCC staff and 3rd parties must have a clear understanding of their personal responsibilities under the data protection legislation and how this affects the processing of personal data. Reference should be made to the Data Protection Policy.Wiltshire Police and OPCC will take criminal and/or disciplinary action against any category of person mentioned above who wilfully, without authority or defined policing purpose or other statutory or business purpose, accesses and/or misuses personal data held by either the Force or PCC. Any use of personal data that does not have a defined policing or other statutory or business purpose is likely to constitute a misuse.10. COMPUTER MISUSE LEGISLATIONAll users must comply with the Computer Misuse Act 1990. The Computer Misuse Act, generally aimed at computer ‘hacking’, specifies offences for any unauthorised access to internal organisational systems. The Act introduces three basic criminal acts:ï Unauthorised access;ï Unauthorised access with intent to commit a further serious offence;ï Unauthorised modification of computer material.Staff (and other authorised users) must only access systems they are authorised to use. It is an offence to knowingly gain unauthorised access to a computer system, and this could result in a fine or imprisonment.11. SITE SECURITYPhysical security involves protecting Wiltshire Police & OPCC premises, staff, information and ICT assets from unauthorised physical access and physical security threats, e.g. fire and wilful damage. All Wiltshire Police & OPCC staff must support site security requirements and adhere to the Physical Security Policy.12. REMOVAL OF PROPERTY AND SECURITY OF EQUIPMENT OFF-PREMISESAll staff are responsible for protecting authorised off-site equipment (allocated to them) against physical security threats and unauthorised access. Staff must also ensure that off-site Force information is securely handled in line with the Force’s Information Management Policy.13. PASSWORD SECURITYPasswords are a key control to maintain information security. They help ensure that only authorised persons have access to the Force’s IT network and systems.
Passwords MUST NOT be easily identifiable/guessable or contain personal information that could be easily identified by hackers (e.g. names, dates, sports teams, pet names, vehicle registration numbers). In order for your password to be effective and remain secure, you must comply with the Password Policy which details the length and composition requirements for Force passwords.You should avoid writing your passwords down, whether it’s in your mobile phone or on a post-it note. It might seem like a helpful way to remember them, but if they get into the wrong hands it could put you and your account at risk. This is even more important when working from home as the risks are greater in the family home, for example they could be seen by family members or stolen in a burglary.14. CLEAR DESK AND CLEAR SCREEN POLICYMeasures must be taken to adequately protect against unauthorised physical access to the Police and OPCC information hosted on PCs, laptops, handheld devices (e.g. tablets, mobile telephones etc.), computer media (e.g. DVDs, CDs and USB storage devices), and paper documentation. Staff must adhere to the Force’s Information Management Policy and Records Management Policy.All staff must ensure that access to their user accounts is password protected when their computer devices are left unattended, even for a small amount of time, e.g. 1 minute by locking their workstation.All staff must ensure that all mobile equipment, e.g. laptops and tablets, sensitive computer media and sensitive documentation are not left unattended and insecure, but are appropriately stored in locked areas or facilities, e.g. locked cabinets, and that access to relevant keys is controlled.At the end of a working day, you must:ï Logoff your PC or laptop;ï Clear your desk, and lock all sensitive computer media and documents away in a drawer or cabinet with suitably restricted access;ï If you are a user of a laptop or handheld device, and you are not taking it with you, you must lock it away in a drawer or cabinet with suitably restricted access.15. REMOTE WORKINGRemote workers include all users who use the Force’s information and information processing facilities whilst not located on the Force’s premises, e.g. workers who are located in other organisations’ offices, working remotely and travelling. Home workers are users who have been authorised to use the Force’s information and information processing facilities whilst based at home. All remote/home working must comply with the Agile Working and Remote Computing Policy.16. REPORTING INFORMATION SECURITY INCIDENTSIn order for Wiltshire Police and OPCC to be able to manage and deal with security incidents successfully, they must be captured and logged.If you suspect or have knowledge of a security incident or security event, or a breach of the Force’s information security policies or procedures, or a software malfunction, or a security weakness in any Force building, network or information system, you must report the concern immediately to the Information Security Officer or ICT Security Officer and/or your line manager. If out of office hours and urgent, i.e. theft of ICT device, notify the FIM immediately.Examples of a security incident include:ï Physical damage to the Force’s IT equipment;ï Compromise/loss of sensitive documents and information, e.g. personal data;ï Unauthorised use of another user’s account (masquerading of user identity);ï 
ï Divulging a password to another user without authority;ï Improper use of e-mail or the Internet, e.g. harassing e-mails, downloading or distribution of pornographic images;ï Unauthorised copying of the Force’s information;ï Damage to the Force’s property that could impact information security;ï Access to the Force’s premises without authority; andï Theft of the Force’s IT equipment.It is vital that you report all security incidents. Withholding information and failing to report an incident could result in you being held personally liable. Staff must not attempt to deal with the security incident (other than reporting the incident). If in doubt, please contact the Information Security Officer, ICT Security Officer or your line manager for advice.17. SECURE DISPOSAL AND RE-USE OF EQUIPMENTAll of the Force’s information and software must be securely wiped from Force’s IT equipment before disposal or re-use of the equipment. All equipment intended for disposal and re-use must be returned to the ICT Department who shall securely wipe Force’s information and software from the equipment.18. PROTECTION AGAINST MALICIOUS CODEComputer viruses, spyware and other forms of malicious code exploit vulnerabilities in software programs and can cause loss and damage to the Force’s and OPCC information, software and IT equipment.Wiltshire Police and OPCC use a variety of products, e.g. anti-virus and software security patches, which are constantly updated to minimise the threat from viruses and other malicious code. PCs and laptops are also protected by these controls. You must not change or remove these controls on your Police/OPCC device, otherwise the ICT network and systems will become more vulnerable to the threat from viruses and other malicious code.In addition to these controls, Wiltshire Police and the OPCC is also dependent on its staff, who must remain vigilant to protect it from malicious code. You must ensure that:ï You do not introduce a virus or malicious code into the Force’s network, by downloading unauthorised or suspect software from the Internet or from computer media, e.g. DVDs, CDs and USB storage devices onto your PC, laptop or any Police/OPCC system;ï All software and data which originates from outside the Police or OPCC must be checked for viruses and malicious software prior to it being opened or used – if you need help, contact the ICT Helpdesk;ï If you are suspicious of a virus or malicious code, you must stop using your PC or laptop immediately and contact the ICT Helpdesk;ï If you receive a suspicious e-mail, you should not open it or the attachment or any hypertext link, as this may well activate a virus or other form of malicious code. Wiltshire Police and OPCC use an enhanced filtering system which will identify and tag ‘suspect spam’ emails with either SPAM or CAUTION. If you receive an email tagged with ‘CAUTION’ it may well be a valid email. If you feel that it is not or the email is tagged with ‘SPAM’ forward it to spam@wiltshire.police.uk for evaluation / confirmation.There may also be ‘hoax’ virus messages in circulation which are not actually viruses at all, but plain e-mail messages asking you to take some sort of action, such as deleting files on your computer and forwarding the message. These messages themselves are not infected with a virus, and are spread by playing on people’s fears, and fooling them into following the instructions. If you receive a message warning you of a virus, you must immediately contact the ICT Service Desk.
19. SECURITY EDUCATION AWARENESS & TRAININGAll personnel will receive appropriate instruction with regard to information security. At present this is covered by a mandatory NCALT MLE IM - IS training course.20. SECURITY OPERATING PROCEDURES (SYOPS)SyOPs, designed to assist in the efficient operation of Information Security detail the security standard against which all Information Security will be operated, define roles and responsibilities and notify users what they can and cannot do. All Users of Information Systems are required to comply with SyOPs at all times.21. INCIDENT REPORTINGIf you believe that you have accessed any record incorrectly it is your responsibility to report this to your supervisor and to make a note of the access and time it was reported. At this point, any further access of the relevant record(s) must cease.Supervisors must then determine whether the access was necessary for Law Enforcement Purposes.If you, as a supervisor, receive a report that any record has been accessed incorrectly (i.e. not for Law Enforcement Purposes) it is your responsibility to assess whether you believe the record was accessed incorrectly and if so, to report this to PSD or CCU.If you believe that a colleague has accessed any record without a legitimate purpose it is your responsibility to report this to either your supervisor, PSD or CCU.22. USE OF SPECIFIC SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT22.1 Law Enforcement Applications (PNC, NICHE, Storm etc.)The following conditions apply to the use of the Police National Computer (PNC), Police National Database (PND), NICHE, STORM, Tasking & Briefing Portal (TAB) and Force Data Search (FDS) but also applies to any other Wiltshire Police database or system.ï Any search or enquiry of PNC, NICHE, STORM, TAB or FDS must be justified as being for Law Enforcement Purposes; namely the investigation, prevention and detection of crime. This includes the legitimate accessing of information to supply to other agencies such as details of vulnerable victims or witnesses etc.ï The access must also be a part of your normal role. Conducting an enquiry in relation to a reported crime or incident clearly falls within the prevention and detection of crime.ï Researching PNC, NICHE, STORM or FDS out of curiosity, particularly where it involves looking at information regarding yourself, family, friends, acquaintances, neighbours or ‘celebrities’ is not permitted in any circumstances.ï If you believe you have a legitimate Law Enforcement Purpose to access details of a relative or acquaintance, then you must seek prior approval from a supervisor who will make a record of your request and make a decision as to whether it is appropriate for you to continue. You should also make a record of this request and the decision reached by your supervisor. Remember it is your responsibility to maintain your integrity.ï If you inadvertently accessed information regarding a relation or acquaintance, you have not done anything wrong, but you must cease any further research and draw this to the attention of a supervisor who may authorise your continued use providing it is for a Law Enforcement Purpose or ask for another officer or colleague to conduct the research. You should also make a record of this request, and the decision made by your supervisor.ï 
ï It is accepted that Local Crime Investigators may take an initial look at custody records relating to their assigned area at the start of their shift. This is in order to ascertain what work may be allocated to them and to assist them in organising workload priorities. Accessing custody records beyond the minimum to ascertain allocation (unless that record has been allocated to that LCI) is not permitted without prior approval from a supervisor who will make a record of that approval detailing why it is appropriate for the LCI to continue. The LCI should also make a record of this request, and the decision made by the supervisor.ï If you are a Reporting Person or Victim accessing any record on a force system (e.g. PNC, Niche RMS, Storm, FDS etc.) containing information relating to that report or incident is not permitted. If you inadvertently access information regarding or relating to that report or incident you must cease any further research, make a record of what has occurred and inform your supervisor immediately.ï Where you are a Reporting Person or Victim and a witness statement is required, it should be obtained by Investigating Officers. If you create a self-written statement it should be submitted to the Investigating Officer. Under no circumstances should you attach a statement, exhibit or any other document to the investigation.ï Where supervisors are approached to authorise a search of a Data System, the supervisor must make a considered decision as to whether it is appropriate for the staff member to continue with their enquiry. If necessary they should seek advice from CCU or PSD. A record must be made of the decision taken by the supervisor and the member of staff.ï If you are asked to search any confidential system on behalf of someone else you need to make a record of the request. This is to ensure that you can respond adequately to any later question regarding the justification for the search.All records of requests should be made in a Pocket Note Book (PNB), or some other suitable auditable system, so that if necessary it can be produced at a later date. See Pocket Notebooks and Other Notebooks Procedure.22.2 E-Mail/Messaging Security and Secure Internet AccessE-mail and the Internet are provided to you as a means of improving your communications, knowledge and effectiveness at work. Wiltshire Police/OPCC e-mail and Internet facilities are intended for business use, although limited personal use may be permitted, subject to approval by your line manager. Regardless, all usage of e-mail and Internet facilities is treated as the property of the Wiltshire Police/OPCC and must not be regarded as private.All staff must be aware that the Wiltshire Police and OPCC reserves the right to use monitoring tools to enforce Force policies and to produce periodic reports detailing use of its e-mail and Internet access facilities.Use of e-mail and Internet access introduces security threats such as malicious code attacks, e.g. viruses, unsolicited or undesirable e-mail, fraudulent attempts to acquire sensitive information such as passwords, police matters, unauthorised content, and breaches of legislation, e.g. computer misuse and copyright legislation. If you accidentally access any material which is not permitted, you must report this to your line manager and the ICT Service Desk immediately.E-mail is an insecure method of communication and messages may well be read by those who have no authority to do so. Before sending information via e-mail, you must first assess the classification and handling requirements of that information as detailed in the Government Security Classification Scheme (GSC) (see Government Security Classification Guidance Handout for details).
The following guidelines should be considered when using e-mail, the Internet and social media applications:ï Obtain confirmation of receipt of important e-mails, particularly those containing personal data;ï Wherever possible check e-mail accounts each working day;ï Reply promptly to e-mail messages requiring a response. Where prompt response is not practicable, an acknowledgement should be sent;ï When sending emails, authors should be mindful that the content of their email is consistent with the Standards of Professional Behaviour. Specifically they must demonstrate respect and courtesy towards the public and colleagues and they must treat all information with respect and disclose it only in the proper course of police duties;ï The sending of whole force email must be approved by an authorised personï Be mindful of the lines between professional and private/personal matters and the importance of keeping these separate;ï Remember that emails are records and any content containing personal opinion should be professional. Emails can be retrieved and discussed and you could be identified as the author of said opinion;ï When on annual leave or away from the office for a substantial period, the “Out of Office Assistant? should be activated. OOO messages should be succinct and should not include information detailing the reason for physical absence, duration of absence, your job title, contact information or detailed alternative contact information. Consider having one message for internal use and one for external use (see Mailbox Management Procedure).ï It is not acceptable to send emails to personal email accounts or home computers that relate to Wiltshire Police the OPCC or criminal investigations. The use of Wiltshire Police email and social media accounts should be for work purposes only;ï Regularly weed e-mail folders to ensure messages and attachments are retained no longer than necessary in line with the Mailbox Management Procedure;ï Ensure outgoing e-mail is accurately addressed;ï Unless authorised, software must not be downloaded and you must not access or use on-line computer games;ï You must not download or copy material in breach of copyright licensing;ï You must not seek, retrieve, display or download data in any format which is indecent, offensive, subversive, illegal or otherwise inappropriate and inconsistent with Force Professional Standards;ï It is not acceptable to register Force email addresses or telephone numbers with commercial websites for personal purposes;ï You must not transmit unencrypted information classified Official-Sensitive or above over the Internet, unless in line with the Government Security Classification Scheme (GSC) and the Force’s Information Management Policy;ï Excessive personal use of Internet browsing or email messaging facilities is not permitted. (To be determined by Line Managers measured against any adverse impact on official use).ï 
The above points relating to e-mail are also applicable to mobile applications and SMS messaging. Mobile applications must not be used to communicate Police/OPCC information unless these have been approved by the ICT Department.When using Social Networking Sites (either for personal or Police/OPCC business use) the Standards of Professional Behaviour for Police Officers and Police Staff should be taken into consideration.Advice and Guidance on the use of Social Networking Sites will be issued from time to time and can be found in the Force Social Media Policy.22.3 Information Security in Conversations and with the Use of (Mobile and Fixed) Telephone and recording EquipmentDue care must be taken when using telephones, voicemail, answering machines, facsimiles and recording equipment (e.g. photographic, video and audio equipment) to ensure the protection of sensitive information. All telephone users must be aware that any speech over the telephone is at risk of interception by unauthorised persons or groups. All staff must comply with the Force’s Information Management Policy and Data Protection Policy.It is important that before you conduct a telephone conversation in an open plan office area or outside of the Force’s premises, you must consider the nature of the topic you are about to discuss. If the conversation is of a sensitive nature, you must ensure that there is no possibility of eavesdropping. Remember to always be aware of who is around you when holding a confidential conversation. In addition, messages containing sensitive Policing information must not be left on voicemail and answering machines.When sending or receiving sensitive information by facsimile, you must ensure that the information is not compromised. Always check the recipient facsimile number to ensure that it is correct before sending information. Ensure that the information is collected immediately from the facsimile. Ensure that all sensitive information sent by facsimile is destroyed when no longer needed.With regard to mobile phones, the following measures must be adopted:ï The business use of mobile phones is regulated in line with this policy and the Wiltshire Police Force Laptop, Tablet and Mobile Phone Acceptable Use Agreement;ï Force issued mobile phones are provided for Wiltshire Police and OPCC business use. Excessive personal use of Force mobile phones is not permitted (to be determined by Line Managers measured against any adverse impact on official use);ï Telephones should not be left unattended and insecure;ï Mobile Phones unused for 90 days will be wiped. If the mobile phone is still required following this provision the officer/member of staff must request a new phone;ï Telephones should not be used for sensitive conversations. Where practicable, work and personal mobile telephones are forbidden from areas where highly sensitive information is discussed on a regular basis.22.4 Airwave RadiosThe conditions of use for Airwave radios is detailed in the Airwave Security Operating Procedure (SyOPs). No departure from or amendment to the SyOPs is permitted.All authorised users of Airwave radios have a personal responsibility for the preservation of the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information and information / communications systems / devices entrusted to them.
Once issued, whether on a long or short-term basis, users of Airwave radios become directly responsible for the for the physical security of the radio and any ancillary equipment. Equipment loss / compromise has the potential to endanger Wiltshire Police communications and the communications of other Airwave Service subscribers.22.4.1 User ResponsibilitiesOnce issued with an Airwave Radio, the following key responsibilities are transferred:ï In the event of a radio being lost, stolen or showing evidence of tampering, it must be reported as soon as is practicable to the Divisional Radio Custodian, or out of normal duty hours, to the Force Critical Incident Manager or Force Operations Room Supervisor. In addition to this, a 232 report must be submitted to Line Manager outlining the exact circumstances of the loss for further investigation.ï Holders must ensure that when the radio is not in use it is powered down, returned to secure storage at the end of each duty period, never left unattended and if unserviceable, returned directly to the Divisional Radio Custodian.ï Annual audits will be conducted on all personally issued radios and when requested to do so, holders must confirm they are still in possession of the asset. Failure to do so may result in the radio being disabled on the network as a security precaution.22.4.2 Supervisory ResponsibilitiesSupervisors and managers have a responsibility for ensuring all authorised users of Airwave Services comply with Infosec and other complementary policies and procedures. A proactive approach should be taken to ensure compliance with SyOPs including reporting actual or suspected instances of non-compliance or other breaches of security.Supervisors are responsible for the security and oversight of the Temporary Pool booking out process. The key to the Temporary Pool radio cabinet must be kept secure at all times and only accessible to authorised personnel.23. ACCESS CONTROL LEVEL (ACL) OF NICHE AND OTHER RECORDSRestricting access to Police databases may cause potential risk to individuals and the organisation as previous history and intelligence may not be visible to parts of the workforce. The request to restrict records will therefore need to be justified with a documented rationale balanced against the requirement to protect the integrity of an investigation.For guidance on the application/review/removal of ACL please refer to the Procedural Guide to the Application / Review / Removal of Access Control List (ACL) in NICHE RMS.23.1 Authorisation to Apply ACLAuthorisation to ACL a Niche record or entry on another type of database is to be authorised by the Senior Investigating Officer (Inspector / Police Staff equivalent or above). Such authorisation will only be given when certain circumstances apply. These will be as follows:ï A record relating to a matter which is currently subject of a covert policing operation;ï A record relating to a criminal offence where a member of a UK police force, (officer or staff) are implicated as a suspect and are currently subject of a criminal investigation;ï Exceptional circumstances – What constitutes an exceptional circumstance will be judged on a case by case basis by the SIO considering authorisation of ACL, but would need to be more serious and sensitive than the above.ï 
23.2 ACL ReviewsIt is the responsibility of the supervisor responsible for an investigation to review the decision and rationale for the ACL in line with the Hierarchical Crime Review Procedure. If the ACL is still required the rationale for continuing the ACL must be recorded on the Occurrence Enquiry Log (investigation log).If the ACL is no longer required the supervisor must notify CCU who will inform the Data Quality Team (DQT) accordingly.On closing an occurrence the supervisor must ensure that the ACL is removed by notifying CCU who will inform DQT accordingly (See Access Control Lists (ACL) in Niche RMS Procedural Guide).23.3 ACL For IntelligenceFor information on authorizing the use of intelligence ACLs, understanding the hierarchy of access to intelligence between departments, auditing access to ensure information security and the process for review and removal of intelligence ACLs please refer to the Access Control Lists (ACL) for Intelligence Policy.24. MONITORING, INTERCEPTION AND AUDITWiltshire Police and OPCC reserves the right to monitor all communications (including telecommunications) using Force communications systems and where appropriate inspect the content of Email transmissions, text messages, Internet browsing sessions and smartphone application use. Such activity is considered necessary for the purposes of:ï Protecting the network from malicious software, denial of service attacks and other external threats;ï To investigate or detect use of computers contrary to legislation, policy or procedure;ï Investigating and detecting improper use - preventing and detecting crime;ï Monitoring compliance with legal and regulatory requirements - ensuring that Staff comply with rules governing the use of communications systems;ï Quality control and training;ï Monitoring load level activity to ensure adequate technical provision of the service;ï In the interests of national security.AS SERVICES ARE PRIMARILY FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES, USERS MUST UNDERSTAND THAT THERE IS NO EXPECTATION OF PRIVACY.The Investigatory Powers Act 2016 (IPA) establishes a basic principle that communications may not be intercepted without consent and ensures compliance with ECHR and fundamental freedoms.The Investigatory Powers (Interception by Businesses etc. for Monitoring and Record-keeping Purposes) Regulations 2018 make an exception to IPA and allow businesses (including public authorities) to intercept communications transmitted across their systems without consent for certain purposes.The monitoring and recording of communications will be considered on a case by case basis and will be used:ï to ascertain compliance with regulatory or self-regulatory practices or procedures;ï for an appropriate method of ascertaining standards;ï to prevent or detect crime;ï to investigate or detect unauthorised use.ï 
Wiltshire Police Counter Corruption Unit is authorised to carry out the appropriate auditing of system use.On application, an authority to Intercept or record specific communications utilising Force communication systems must be given by the Deputy Chief Constable or the Chief Constable in their absence.Commanders and Departmental Heads are responsible for ensuring that all personnel who may use Force information and communication systems within their area of responsibility are aware of this authority and notice.In all cases, regulations require the Force to make all reasonable efforts to inform every person using or who may use the system that interception, monitoring and auditing may take place.Accordingly, all potential users of Force communication systems are informed that:ï You work within an organisation that deals with sensitive matters and information, much of which is protectively marked;ï You are required to maintain the highest professional and ethical standards;ï To ensure that these sensitivities and high standards are maintained, communications by all users using Force information and communications systems (including but not limited to telephone, radio, communications & messaging applications and E-mail) may be intercepted, monitored and recorded;ï Conversations conducted by all staff, contract employees and others who may use Force information and communication systems may not be considered to be private;ï When appropriate, recorded communications will be used in administrative, misconduct and criminal proceedings.25. BREACH OF POLICY ESCALATION PROCEDURES25.1 Purpose of ProceduresThe purpose of these procedures is to ensure proportional and uniform action is taken in response to all breaches of Force Information Security Policies and associated Security Operating Procedures. They apply to both routine random monitoring and user specific monitoring requests. All breaches will be dealt with under the Police Regulations or Police Staff Discipline Procedure.25.2 Roles and ResponsibilitiesThe Counter Corruption Unit is responsible for conducting activity and audit of Force information systems and stored data. The ICT Department will provide technical assistance as appropriate for activities requiring additional technical support.Potential policy breaches discovered by ICT Department staff during normal system administration must be reported to the Head of Information Management and Assurance in the first instance.Line managers are responsible for ensuring compliance with Force polices through routine supervision of staff use of Force information systems.The Chief Constable has authorised the Professional Standards Department to undertake routine Intelligence lead and random audit of Force systems to ensure that appropriate and proportionate compliance is in place.Requests for specific additional audit of activity of an individual member of staff’s use of Force systems must be made through formal application (Form 840).
Before the Counter Corruption Unit undertake specific auditing requests they must be authorised by the Head of the Counter Corruption Unit. Audits concerning the recovery and review of stored/Archived data are not subject to provisions under The Investigatory Powers (Interception by Businesses etc. for Monitoring and Record-keeping Purposes) Regulations 2018. See Para 2 for Monitoring and Intercept provisions and authority level.The results of audits undertaken in respect of authorised specific requests will be supplied to the requesting individual in the first instance. It is incumbent on that individual to take advice from the Head of Professional Standards or Head of Human Resources before proceeding with any form of administrative or disciplinary action.25.3 RecordsIn cases where criminal conduct is being investigated, Professional Standards will maintain monitoring records.26. AUTOMATED RESTRICTIONSTo enable the Head of ICT to provide an efficient service, automated restrictions are deployed on the network. These will include virus scanning and content checking of electronic data received from external sources and denying access to some Internet web sites. A small number of key post holders have unrestricted Internet access to fulfil intelligence gathering or other operational requirements.POLICY AIMThe primary aim of this policy is to set out the rules and conditions regulating the use of Wiltshire Police and OPCC systems including the use of the Police/OPCC telephone network and issued mobile telephones.In keeping with the objectives to inspire public confidence in the Forces ability to protect the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information assets and demonstrate commitment to maintaining professional standards, these rules and conditions are considered appropriate and necessary measures to:ï Minimise the risk of information assets being compromised;ï Minimise the risk of damage or disruption to the Force Wide Area Network;ï Ensure compliance with legislative, regulatory, contractual, organisational and ethical requirements;ï Maintain professional standards with regard to the content of electronic mail transmitted across or from the Force Wide System;ï Maintain professional standards with regard to Internet browsing;ï Maintain security and professional standards with regards to the use of the force telephone system.This Policy is issued to complement other Wiltshire Police/OPCC information security policy documents.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEExternal threats have the potential to disrupt the designed functionality of all or parts of the Force Wide System and present onward transmission risk to other users of the Criminal Justice Extranet. The following are the main references that mandate the provisions of this policy:ï HMG Security Policy Framework Tier 1-3ï Security Policy and Code of Connection for the CJXï The ACPO/ACPOS Information Systems Community Security Policyï 
ï The Data Protection Act 2018 / UK General Data Protection Regulations (UK-GDPR)ï The Computer Misuse Act 1990ï The Official Secrets Act 1911 – 1989ï The Telecommunications (Lawful Business Practice) (Interception of Communications) Regulations 2000ï The Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (RIPA)ï Investigatory Powers Act 2016ï The Investigatory Powers (Interception by Businesses etc. for Monitoring and Record- keeping Purposes) Regulations 2018RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSAccess Control Lists (ACL) for Intelligence Policy Agile Working and Mobile Computing PolicyGovernment Security Classification Guidance Handout Hierarchical Crime Review ProcedureInformation Management PolicyInformation Security Policy Framework (ISPF)Microsoft Teams Meetings Recordings Acceptable Use Procedure Password PolicyPhysical Security PolicyPocket Notebooks and Other Notebooks ProcedureProcedural Guide to the Application / Review / Removal of Access Control List (ACL) in NICHE RMSRecords Management Policy Records Retention Schedule Social Media PolicyAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEProfessional Standards Information ManagementDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEW OF THIS POLICYThe Head of Information Management and Assurance will ensure that this policy is reviewed every two years.Regular proactive and reactive audits together with analysis of staff misconduct trends will be conducted by the Professional Standards Department to establish compliance with this policy. Non- compliance will be reflected in future policy reviews.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Head of Information Management and Assurance for this policy.All queries relating to this policy should be directed to the Information Security Officer or the Force Policy Officer.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Information Management and Assurance Policy Owner/Author:	Keith LEWIS / NCC GroupTechnical Author:	Neil COWLING, Andrew IRVING Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor:	Deputy Chief ConstableRevision HistoryRevision DateVersionSummary of Changes07.06.20213.0Policy rewritten as part of the NEP.Text on: User identification, information classification, secure handling, Data Protection, site security, removal of property & security of equipment, password security, clear desk policy, remote working, reporting information security incidents, use of specific systems (including PNC, Niche, Email Telephone, mobiles & Airwave), ACL,monitoring interception and audit, breach of policy escalation and automated restictions added.17.03.20223.0Section 22.2: requirement for emails relating to on-going Inquiries into Child Sexual Abuse / Undercover Policing to be retained removed.ApprovalsThis document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team07.06.20213.0JNCC (via email)07.06.20213.0DistributionThis document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersEquality Impact AssessmentConsultationList below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc.):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionKeith LEWIS, Mark LEVITT, Laura NORTH, Neil COWLING, Jonathon JONES, Matt GIRDLESTONE11.03.20210.8Police Federation16.02.20210.8UNISON03.02.20210.8Implications of the PolicyTraining RequirementsThere are no additional training requirements for the implementation of this Policy.IT InfrastructureNo new IT infrastructure is required for the implementation of this Policy.
GuidancePreparation and planning for emergencies: responsibilities of responder agencies and othersHow the government prepares and plans for emergencies,working nationally, locally and co-operatively to ensure civil protection in the UK.From: Cabinet Office (/government/organisations/cabinet-office)Published 20 February 2013The Civil Contingencies ActThe Civil Contingencies Act (http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2004/36/contents), and accompanying non-legislative measures, delivers a single framework for civil protection in the UK. The Act is separated into 2 substantive parts: local arrangements for civil protection (Part 1); and emergency powers (Part 2).Part 1Part 1 of the Act and supporting Regulations and statutory guidance ‘Emerg ency preparedness’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency-preparedness) establish a clear set of roles and responsibilities for those involved in emergency preparation and response at the local level. The Act divides local responders into 2
categories, imposing a different set of duties on each.Those in Category 1 are organisations at the core of the response to most emergencies (the emergency services, local authorities, NHS bodies). Category 1 responders are subject to the full set of civil protection duties. They will be required to:  assess the risk of emergencies occurring and use this to inform contingency planning  put in place emergency plans  put in place business continuity management arrangements  put in place arrangements to make information available to the public about civil protection matters and maintain arrangements to warn, inform and advise the public in the event of an emergency  share information with other local responders to enhance co-ordination  co-operate with other local responders to enhance co-ordination and efficiency  provide advice and assistance to businesses and voluntary organisations aboutbusiness continuity management (local authorities only)Category 2 organisations (the Health and Safety Executive, transport and utility companies) are ‘co-operating bodies’. They are less likely to be involved in the heart of planning work, but will be heavily involved in incidents that affect their own sector. Category 2 responders have a lesser set of duties - co-operating and sharing relevant information with other Category 1 and 2 responders.Category 1 and 2 organisations come together to form ‘local resilience forums’ (based on police areas) which will help co-ordination and co-operation between responders at the local level. For more on what LRFs do and contact details for each, see the guide on ‘Local resilience forums: contact details’ (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/local-resilience-forums-contact-details).The bulk of Part 1 of the Act was brought into force in November 2005 (the duty on local authorities to provide advice and assistance to business and voluntary organisations about business continuity management commenced in May 2006).Part 2Part 2 of the Act updates the 1920 Emergency Powers Act to reflect the developments in the intervening years and the current and future risk profile. It allows for the making of temporary special legislation (emergency regulations) to help deal with the most serious of emergencies. The use of emergency powers is a last resort option and planning arrangements at the local level should not assume that emergency powers will be made available. Their use is subject to a robust set of safeguards - they can only be deployed in exceptional circumstances.
Part 2 of the Act was brought into force in December 2004. See also: Civil Contingencies Act Enhancement programme (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act-enhancement-  programme-programme-initiation-document) Category 2 Responders: overview of sectors and emerg ency planning arrangements (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act- category-2-responders-overview-of-sectors-and-emerg  ency-planning-arrangements) Examples of good practice in public sector business continuity management (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/examples-of-g ood-practice-in-public-sector- business-continuity-management-bcm-methodologies) Examples of good practice in public sector business continuity management: exercising (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/examples-of-g ood-practice-in- public-sector-business-continuity-management-exercising) Examples of good practice in public sector business continuity management - awareness and training (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/examples-of-g ood- practice-in-public-sector-business-continuity-management-bcm-awareness-and-training) Communicating with the public: the 10 step cycle (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/communicating-with-the-public-the-ten-step-  cycle) Expectations and indicators of good practice set for category 1 and 2 responders (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/expectations-and-indicators-of-g ood-practice- set-for-category-1-and-2-responders)Emergency planningThe government aims to ensure all organisations have effective, well-practiced emergency plans in place. This section outlines what we mean by emergency planning, different types of plans, the importance of exercising them and training key staff, and the kind of factors which planners should consider.What is emergency planning?Emergency planning should aim where possible to prevent emergencies occurring, and when they do occur, good planning should reduce, control or mitigate the effects of the emergency. It is a systematic and ongoing process which should evolve as lessons are learnt and circumstances change.Emergency planning should be viewed as part of a cycle of activities beginning with establishing a risk profile to help determine what should be the priorities for developing plans and ending with review and revision, which then re-starts the
whole cycle. Plans should focus on at least 3 key groupings of people - the vulnerable, victims (including survivors, family and friends) and responder personnel.Vulnerable people may be less able to help themselves in an emergency than self- reliant people. Those who are vulnerable will vary depending on the nature of the emergency, but plans should consider: those with mobility difficulties (those with physical disabilities or pregnant women); those with mental health difficulties; and others who are dependent, such as children.Victims of an emergency - which includes not only those directly affected but also those who, as family and friends, suffer bereavement or the anxiety of not knowing what has happened.Responder personnel should also be considered. Plans sometimes place unrealistic expectations on management and personnel. Organisations should ensure their plans give due consideration to the welfare of their own personnel. For instance, the emergency services have health and safety procedures which determine shift patterns and check for levels of stress.Organisations should aim to maintain plans which cover 3 different areas:Plans for preventing an emergencyIn some circumstances there will be a short period before an emergency occurs when it might be avoided by prompt or decisive actionPlans for reducing, controlling or mitigating the effects of an emergency The main bulk of planning should consider how to minimise the effects of an emergency, starting with the impact of the event (ie their alerting procedures) and looking at remedial actions that can be taken to reduce effects. For example, theemergency services may be able to stem the emergency at source by fighting fires, combating the release of toxic chemicals or the extent of floods. The evacuation of people may be a direct intervention which can mitigate the effects of some emergencies. Recovery plans should also be developed to reduce the effects of the emergency and ensure long term recovery. The National Recovery Guidance (http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/content/national-recovery-g uidance) provides more detail on recovery issues.Plans for taking other action in connection with an emergencyNot all actions to be taken in preparing for an emergency are directly concerned with controlling, reducing or mitigating its effects. Emergency planning should look beyond the immediate response and long term recovery issues and look also at secondary impacts. For example, the wave of reaction to an emergency can be quite overwhelming in terms of media attention and public response. Plans may need to consider how to handle this increased interest.As obvious as it sounds, emergency plans should include procedures for determining whether an emergency has occurred, and when to activate the plan in
response to an emergency. This should include identifying an appropriately trained person who will take the decision, in consultation with others, on when an emergency has occurred.The maintenance of plans involves more than just their preparation. Once a plan has been prepared, it must be maintained systematically to ensure it remains up-to-date and fit for purpose at any time if an emergency occurs.It may be that multiple organisations can develop a joint emergency plan where the partners agree that, for a successful combined response, they need a formal set of procedures governing them all. For example, in the event that evacuation is required, the police would need carefully pre-planned co-operation from various other organisations such as fire and ambulance services and the local authority, as well as involvement of others such as transport organisations.Types of emergency plansIt may be important for an organisation to have more than one emergency plan. It is often the case that organisations have generic plans and more specific plans.Generic plans are the core plan which enables the organisation to respond to, and recover from a wide range of possible emergencies. They should include procedures which would be used in all instances for ensuring the welfare of staff and the provision of sufficient resources for responding to the emergency.Specific plans relate either to a particular emergency or kind of emergency, or to a specific site or location. Specific plans are a detailed set of arrangements designed to go beyond the generic arrangements when they are likely to prove insufficient in a particular case. A specific plan usually builds on a generic plan. For example, organisations which deal with hazardous materials may need specific plans for responding to a chemical spillage. Some organisations may have specific plans for conducting specific functions in response to an emergency. For instance, the emergency services will have plans for mass evacuation of an urban area and mass decontamination. Organisations should use their risk assessments to decide whether specific plans are necessary or desirable.Exercising plans and training staffOrganisations should test the effectiveness of their emergency plans by carrying out exercises, and should ensure that staff involved in the planning for or response to an emergency receive appropriate training. Training plans should also consider other people who have a role in the emergency plans such as contractors and civil protection partners. The plans themselves should explicitly identify the nature and frequency of training and exercising required. The guide Emerg ency planning and preparedness: exercises and training (https://www.gov.uk/emerg ency-planning-and- preparedness-exercises-and-training) provides more information.
Emergency planning at the local levelEmergency planning is at the heart of the civil protection duty on Category 1 responders under the Civil Contingencies Act. The Act requires Category 1 responders to maintain plans for preventing emergencies; reducing, controlling or mitigating the effects of emergencies; and taking other action in the event of emergencies. These should draw on risk assessments and should have regard for the arrangements to warn, inform and advise the public at the time of an emerg ency (https://www.gov.uk/preparation-and-planning-for-emerg encies-the-capabilities- programme#warning-and-informing-the-public).The Regulations require plans to contain a procedure for determining whether an emergency has occurred; provision for training key staff; and provision for exercising the plan to ensure it is effective. Procedures should also be put in place to ensure that the plan is reviewed periodically and kept up to date.Category 1 responders should involve Category 2 responders - and other organisations which are not subject to the Act’s requirements - as appropriate throughout the planning process. Category 1 responders are specifically required to have regard to the activities of relevant voluntary organisations when developing plans. The Regulations permit Category 1 responders to collaborate with other organisations in delivering the emergency planning duty.Category 1 responders also have a statutory duty to publish their emergency plans, to the extent necessary or desirable for the purpose of dealing with an emergency.Emergency planning at the sub-national levelPlanning at a multi-LRF level is different from planning at the local level. For more information on the sub-national tier, see the Arrangements in England (https://www.gov.uk/preparation-and-planning-for-emerg encies-responsibilities-of-responder- agencies-and-others#arrangements-in-england) section.Emergency planning in the devolved administrationsIt is equally important that organisations within the devolved administrations conduct effective emergency planning. The devolved administrations section below provides more detail on the extent to which the Civil Contingencies Act duties apply and their individual emergency planning arrangements.The government works closely with the Scottish, Welsh and Northern Ireland governments to promote effective emergency planning that is, as far as possible, consistent with that of the rest of the UK.Emergency planning at the UK government level
The UK government capabilities programme is the core framework through which the government is seeking to build resilience across all parts of the UK. The programme uses risk assessment over a 5-year period to identify the generic capabilities that underpin the UK’s resilience to disruptive challenges, and ensures that each of these is developed. These capabilities include dealing with mass casualties and fatalities, response to chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear incidents, provision of essential services and warning and informing the public. A full list of the current capabilities can be found in this g uide to the capabilities programme (https://www.gov.uk/preparation-and-planning-for-emerg encies-the-capabilities- programme).The government has in place a coordinated cross-governmental exercise programme covering a comprehensive range of domestic disruptive challenges, including accidents, natural disasters and acts of terrorism. The programme is designed to test rigorously the concept of operations from the coordinated central response through the range of lead government department responsibilities and the involvement of the devolved administrations, to the sub-national tier and local responders. More information is provided in the g uide to emerg ency exercises and training (https://www.gov.uk/emerg ency-planning-and-preparedness-exercises-and-training).These national processes feed into the devolved administrations, sub-national and local levels to ensure fully integrated emergency planning at all levels throughout the UK.The role of the voluntary sector in emergency planning and responseWhere appropriate, organisations should consider at an early stage in planning whether voluntary organisations may have capabilities which could assist in responding to an emergency.The voluntary sector can provide a wide range of skills and services in responding to an emergency. These include: practical support (such as first aid, transportation, or provisions for responders); psycho-social support (such as counselling and helplines); equipment (radios, medical equipment); and information services (such as public training and communications).Existing emergency planning dutiesThe Civil Contingencies Act Regulations identify 3 pieces of legislation pre-dating this Act which were introduced separately in Britain and Northern Ireland under sector-specific legislation operated by the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) and HSE Northern Ireland. These relate to major accident hazards at industrial establishments (Control of Major Accident Hazards Regulations (COMAH)), to hazardous pipelines (Pipelines Safety Regulations) and to radiation hazards (Radiation (Emergency Preparation and Public Information) Regulations (REPPIR)). These sector-specific Regulations have established multi-agency emergency planning regimes in co-operation with the operators. To avoid duplication, the Civil
does not apply to emergencies which are dealt with by these pieces of legislation.For more information on how the Act fits with other legislation see chapter 19 of ‘Emerg ency preparedness’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency- preparedness).Important documentsEmerg ency Preparedness (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency- preparedness)  Chapter 5: “Emergency planning”  Annex 5a: “Examples of generic and specific plans”  Annex 5B: “Generic plan: emergency or major incident”  Annex 5C: “Specific plan”  Annex 5D: “Example of a plan maintenance matrix for a local authority”Chapter 7 “Communicating with the public” - Contains further detail on communicating with the vulnerable and victims in an emergency  Annex 7A: “Communicating with the public: the national context “  Annex 7B: “Lead responsibility for warning and informing the public”  Annex 7C: “Checklist of suggested protocols”Chapter 14: “The role of the voluntary sector” Annex 14A: “Examples of voluntary sector activities in support of statutory services”  Home Office document Recovery: an emerg ency management guide(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/recovery-an-emerg ency-management-g uide)  Communicating risk guidance(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/communicating-risk-g uidance) Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Policy Branch (http://www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/index/making-g overnment-work/civil-contingencies.htm) - a guide to emergency planning arrangements, risk assessment and other documentation is available on this website London’s strategic emerg ency plan (http://www.london.gov.uk/priorities/london- prepared/home)Devolved administrationsThis section describes emergency preparedness and planning arrangements in the devolved administrations, where these differ from UK government and local
and its associated Regulations apply in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. More detail on the specific duties under the Act and how they apply in the Devolved Administrations can be found in chapters 2 to 8 of the guidance document‘Emerg ency preparedness’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency- preparedness).Emergency preparedness in ScotlandIn devolved areas the Scottish government is designated as the lead on relevant issues in line with the ‘lead department’ principle at the UK level. In reserved areas the Scottish government works closely with the UK government to ensure that Scottish needs are catered for.Overall responsibility for civil protection policy in Scotland sits with the Scottish Resilience Division of the Scottish government.At the local level in Scotland, 8 strategic coordinating groups based on current police force areas promote effective planning for all types of incidents in their area, involving risk assessment, making generic and specific emergency plans, engaging with the community, training, testing, exercising and reviewing.  Scottish government civil emerg encies website(http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Justice/public-safety/emerg encies)Emergency preparedness in WalesThe Welsh government (WG) or Wales Office, depending on the subject matter, is represented on relevant committees and forums within the UK government relating to civil protection. They work closely with UK government departments to ensure that UK civil protection policy and planning is tailored to Welsh needs. A dedicated team in WG supports multi-agency co-operation in Wales and engagement with the UK government on issues relating to civil protection and emergency preparedness.As in England, local resilience forums (LRFs) are the principle mechanism for multi- agency co-operation on civil protection issues. The respective Chief Constables presently chair the LRFs in the South Wales, North Wales, Dyfed-Powys and Gwent areas. The Welsh Resilience Forum (WRF) provides a national forum for multi- agency strategic advice on civil protection and emergency planning. The forum meets quarterly and is chaired by the First Minister or the Minister for Social Justice and Regeneration. Risk assessment at a pan-Wales level is undertaken by the Wales Risk Assessment Group (WRAG) reporting to the WRF.A number of other groups provide forums for discussion and co-ordination of civil protection in Wales, including: the Joint Emergency Services Group; the Wales Media Emergency Forum; and the Welsh Borders Resilience Group.
  Welsh civil emerg encies website (https://gov.wales/wales-resilience-forum)Emergency preparedness in Northern IrelandCivil contingencies in Northern Ireland are largely a devolved matter with responsibilities lying with Northern Ireland government departments. The Northern Ireland Office (NIO) in the UK government is, however, responsible for, amongst other things, policing, criminal justice and security in Northern Ireland.The Civil Contingencies Policy Branch (CCPB) in the Office of the First Minister and Deputy First Minister (OFMDFM) promotes and co-ordinates civil protection arrangements in Northern Ireland. The Northern Ireland government would normally have oversight of civil contingencies arrangements for transferred functions. The ‘lead government department’ principle applies to Northern Ireland departments as at the UK level.The Civil Contingencies Group, Northern Ireland (CCG(NI)) is a pan-Northern Ireland multi-agency forum for the development, discussion and agreement of civil protection policy. Co-ordination at local and sub-regional levels may be facilitated by a range of organisations, with police district commanders and district council chief executives taking key roles in co-ordination. Northern Ireland has its own unique constitutional and organisational structures. Unlike in Great Britain, many services are delivered on a Northern Ireland-wide (regional) basis, either by government departments or by their agencies and NDPBs.  Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Policy Branch website(http://www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/index/making-g overnment-work/civil-contingencies.htm)The devolved administrations under the Civil Contingencies Act ScotlandPart 1 of the Civil Contingencies Act applies to Scotland, with the powers it sets out residing with Scottish Ministers in line with the devolution settlement. While civil protection in Scotland is largely a devolved matter and therefore the responsibility of the Scottish government, certain responders in Scotland are subject to Part 1 of the Act, the Regulations and guidance issued by UK ministers - the Health and Safety Executive, the Maritime and Coastguard Agency and the British Transport Police.WalesThe arrangements set out in Part 1 of the Act apply in Wales. However, there are some differences in the requirements which the Regulations place on Category 1 and 2 responders in Wales because of the unique administrative arrangements in Wales. As in England, the principal mechanism for co-operation between Category 1 and 2 responders under the Act will be the local resilience forums (LRFs). The Welsh Resilience Forum (WRF) provides a national forum for multi-agency strategic advice on civil protection and emergency planning. The forum is a non-statutory advisory body.
Northern IrelandCivil contingencies in Northern Ireland are largely a devolved matter with responsibilities lying with Northern Ireland government departments. The duties of the Act apply only to a limited number of organisations which deliver functions that are not transferred. These organisations are: the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI); the Maritime and Coastguard Agency (MCA); and telecommunications operators. Because these organisations do not represent the full spectrum of response agencies in Northern Ireland, the Regulations treat these organisations in a slightly different way. In practice, it is anticipated that the PSNI, MCA and telecommunications operators in Northern Ireland will undertake their duties under the Act, but will relate to the other public service bodies listed in the Regulations in line with the arrangements in the Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Framework and by participating in Northern Ireland co-operation, co-ordination and crisis management machinery.Further informationYou can find further details on all of the above in these documents: ‘Civil Contingencies Act 2004: devolution concordat with Scottish Ministers’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act-2004-devolution-  concordat-with-scottish-ministers) ‘Civil Contingencies Act 2004: concordat between the UK government and the Welsh government’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act- 2004-concordat-between-the-uk-g overnment-and-the-welsh-g overnment) ‘Emerg ency preparedness - chapter 10: Scotland’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61033/Chap  ter-10-Scotland-amends-10112011.pdf) ‘Chapter 11: Wales’(https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61034/Ch  apter-11-Wales-amends-10112011.pdf) ‘Chapter 12: Northern Ireland’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61035/Ch  apter-12-Northern-ireland-amends-10112011.pdf)Co-operation for emergency preparednessCo-operation between organisations is fundamental to emergency preparedness. A large number of organisations will need to co-operate when responding to emergencies, so it is right that organisations co-operate closely in preparedness and planning as well. The government aims to ensure all organisations co-operate in emergency preparedness, and robust co-operation arrangements are in place at every level. This section outlines who should co-operate, and how. It describes co- operation arrangements in place locally and points out the emphasis placed on co- operation within the Civil Contingencies Act.
Who should co-operate?Organisations will need to co-operate closely with any other organisation who would be involved in responding to and recovering from an emergency which affects that organisation.That will mean not just partner organisations, but contractors, and voluntary organisations who may be involved in the response. Organisations should consider their need to co-operate with a wide range of public (for example, local authorities, emergency services), commercial (for example, other businesses) and voluntary organisations (like charities and voluntary response organisations).What co-operation?Every-day co-operation between organisations is the lifeblood of civil protection work- through visits and seminars, phone calls and emails, and joint projects including exercises.Many organisations are well used to co-operating in both preparing for and responding to emergencies. The emergency services, for instance, obviously co- ordinate closely when responding to emergencies. They also co-operate closely in policy and planning, and undertake joint training and exercises. Likewise, utilities companies have close links with local authorities and the emergency services.Organisations should aim to co-operate bilaterally and attend multi-agency groups and forums to discuss co-ordinated and sometimes joint approaches to the essential aspects of emergency preparedness - risk assessment, emergency planning, business continuity management, and arrangements to warn and inform the public. Such forums should also consider producing multi-agency plans and other documents, including protocols and agreements, and the co-ordination of multi- agency exercises and other training events.Co-operation at the local level under the Civil Contingencies ActThe principle mechanism for multi-agency co-operation at the local level is the local resilience forum (LRF) (https://www.gov.uk/local-resilience-forums-contact-details). LRFs are generally based on local police areas, and bring together all the organisations who have a duty to co-operate under the Civil Contingencies Act, along with others who would be involved in the response.The purpose of the LRF process is to ensure effective delivery of those duties under the Act that need to be developed in a multi-agency environment.Co-operation at the sub-national level
Some co-operation and co-ordination takes place at multi-LRF level in England, which brings together representatives of local responders, and is supported by resilience advisers from DCLG-RED (https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/working- with-local-partners-to-plan-for-and-respond-to-emerg encies), to work together to address larger-scale civil protection issues.Co-operation at the devolved administration levelSimilar co-operation and co-ordination arrangements are in place in the devolved administrations. For instance, in Scotland strategic co-ordinating groups are similar to LRFs, and the Scottish Emergencies Co-ordinating Committee (SECC) provides co-ordination and determines the national strategy for the development of civil protection. In Wales the Welsh Government (WG) provides that co-ordination, and a Wales Resilience Forum brings together local responders and UK government bodies. In Northern Ireland the Civil Contingencies Group, Northern Ireland (CCG(NI)) is the forum for the development, discussion and agreement of Civil Protection Policy for the NI public services.Co-operation at the UK levelGovernment departments who are responsible for contingency planning and response within their own areas (for example, infectious diseases falls to Department of Health; fuel disruptions falls to Business Innovation and Skills), work closely together. The Civil Contingencies Secretariat (CCS) in the Cabinet Office co- ordinates their work to enhance the country’s resilience to the full range of emergencies.Central government works very closely with the devolved administrations, local authorities and emergency services. Officials attend the full range of multi-agency forums and regularly go out to visit practitioners.Arrangements in EnglandThe Department for Communities and Local Government - Resilience and Emerg encies Division (DCLG-RED) (https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/working- with-local-partners-to-plan-for-and-respond-to-emerg encies) provides the platform formulti-LRF co-operation and planning in emergency preparedness where this would add value by improving co-ordination between local and central response. This section outlines the arrangements in England for emergency preparedness at this level.Co-operation at the sub-national levelCo-operation at the sub-national level in England is a key element of the UK’s civil
protection framework. The sub-national tier is not a judgement on the local level; rather, it is a mechanism for improving co-ordination and communication into and out from the centre of government.Co-operation at the sub-national level involves the representatives of local responders and central government bodies working together to address larger-scale civil protection issues. Co-operation may take place within a multi-agency setting or directly between 2 or more responders.Role of the sub-national tierThe function of the sub-national tier is to improve co-ordination and communication between central government and local responders and other organisations and to ensure that areas are prepared to respond to events which would affect most or all of the area or which could overwhelm any locality. The successful delivery of the sub-national resilience capability rests critically on local responders and other organisations and central government working together in partnership to ensure effective and co-ordinated planning and response.Opportunities to collaborate and co-operate at a multi-LRF LevelPlanning for and responding to large-scale emergencies cannot be done in isolation in each local resilience forum (LRF). Mechanisms for cross-boundary working and relationship building are essential as some emergencies will overwhelm localities’ resources and/or boundaries.Collaboration and co-operation between localities in England is a well-established and critical way of working in civil contingencies. It is a mechanism:  for enabling pooling of resources to achieve agreed mutual aims and outcomes  for avoiding duplication of work between neighbouring LRFs or avoiding activity by an LRF that may be counter-productive to a neighbouring LRF to support planning and exercising for emergencies that cross local resilience areas or which could overwhelm a locality  that enables individual responders, local forums and central government to work together to address large-scale civil protection issuesDCLG-RED works directly with LRFs, supporting collaboration and co-operation in planning for wide-area high-impact events affecting more than one locality. RED has allocated Resilience Advisers to each LRF so that LRFs have named contacts with which to build working relationships. For more information, see chapter 16 of‘Emerg ency preparedness’(https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61039/Chapter-16-final-post-consultCCS_amends_16042012.pdf) on collaboration and co-operation between LRFs.
Published 20 February 2013All content is available under the Open GovernmentLicence v3.0, except where otherwise stated	© Crown copyright
GuidancePreparation and planning for emergencies: responsibilities of responder agencies and othersHow the government prepares and plans for emergencies,working nationally, locally and co-operatively to ensure civil protection in the UK.From: Cabinet Office (/government/organisations/cabinet-office)Published 20 February 2013The Civil Contingencies ActThe Civil Contingencies Act (http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2004/36/contents), and accompanying non-legislative measures, delivers a single framework for civil protection in the UK. The Act is separated into 2 substantive parts: local arrangements for civil protection (Part 1); and emergency powers (Part 2).Part 1Part 1 of the Act and supporting Regulations and statutory guidance ‘Emerg ency preparedness’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency-preparedness) establish a clear set of roles and responsibilities for those involved in emergency preparation and response at the local level. The Act divides local responders into 2
categories, imposing a different set of duties on each.Those in Category 1 are organisations at the core of the response to most emergencies (the emergency services, local authorities, NHS bodies). Category 1 responders are subject to the full set of civil protection duties. They will be required to:  assess the risk of emergencies occurring and use this to inform contingency planning  put in place emergency plans  put in place business continuity management arrangements  put in place arrangements to make information available to the public about civil protection matters and maintain arrangements to warn, inform and advise the public in the event of an emergency  share information with other local responders to enhance co-ordination  co-operate with other local responders to enhance co-ordination and efficiency  provide advice and assistance to businesses and voluntary organisations aboutbusiness continuity management (local authorities only)Category 2 organisations (the Health and Safety Executive, transport and utility companies) are ‘co-operating bodies’. They are less likely to be involved in the heart of planning work, but will be heavily involved in incidents that affect their own sector. Category 2 responders have a lesser set of duties - co-operating and sharing relevant information with other Category 1 and 2 responders.Category 1 and 2 organisations come together to form ‘local resilience forums’ (based on police areas) which will help co-ordination and co-operation between responders at the local level. For more on what LRFs do and contact details for each, see the guide on ‘Local resilience forums: contact details’ (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/local-resilience-forums-contact-details).The bulk of Part 1 of the Act was brought into force in November 2005 (the duty on local authorities to provide advice and assistance to business and voluntary organisations about business continuity management commenced in May 2006).Part 2Part 2 of the Act updates the 1920 Emergency Powers Act to reflect the developments in the intervening years and the current and future risk profile. It allows for the making of temporary special legislation (emergency regulations) to help deal with the most serious of emergencies. The use of emergency powers is a last resort option and planning arrangements at the local level should not assume that emergency powers will be made available. Their use is subject to a robust set of safeguards - they can only be deployed in exceptional circumstances.
Part 2 of the Act was brought into force in December 2004. See also: Civil Contingencies Act Enhancement programme (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act-enhancement-  programme-programme-initiation-document) Category 2 Responders: overview of sectors and emerg ency planning arrangements (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act- category-2-responders-overview-of-sectors-and-emerg  ency-planning-arrangements) Examples of good practice in public sector business continuity management (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/examples-of-g ood-practice-in-public-sector- business-continuity-management-bcm-methodologies) Examples of good practice in public sector business continuity management: exercising (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/examples-of-g ood-practice-in- public-sector-business-continuity-management-exercising) Examples of good practice in public sector business continuity management - awareness and training (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/examples-of-g ood- practice-in-public-sector-business-continuity-management-bcm-awareness-and-training) Communicating with the public: the 10 step cycle (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/communicating-with-the-public-the-ten-step-  cycle) Expectations and indicators of good practice set for category 1 and 2 responders (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/expectations-and-indicators-of-g ood-practice- set-for-category-1-and-2-responders)Emergency planningThe government aims to ensure all organisations have effective, well-practiced emergency plans in place. This section outlines what we mean by emergency planning, different types of plans, the importance of exercising them and training key staff, and the kind of factors which planners should consider.What is emergency planning?Emergency planning should aim where possible to prevent emergencies occurring, and when they do occur, good planning should reduce, control or mitigate the effects of the emergency. It is a systematic and ongoing process which should evolve as lessons are learnt and circumstances change.Emergency planning should be viewed as part of a cycle of activities beginning with establishing a risk profile to help determine what should be the priorities for developing plans and ending with review and revision, which then re-starts the
whole cycle. Plans should focus on at least 3 key groupings of people - the vulnerable, victims (including survivors, family and friends) and responder personnel.Vulnerable people may be less able to help themselves in an emergency than self- reliant people. Those who are vulnerable will vary depending on the nature of the emergency, but plans should consider: those with mobility difficulties (those with physical disabilities or pregnant women); those with mental health difficulties; and others who are dependent, such as children.Victims of an emergency - which includes not only those directly affected but also those who, as family and friends, suffer bereavement or the anxiety of not knowing what has happened.Responder personnel should also be considered. Plans sometimes place unrealistic expectations on management and personnel. Organisations should ensure their plans give due consideration to the welfare of their own personnel. For instance, the emergency services have health and safety procedures which determine shift patterns and check for levels of stress.Organisations should aim to maintain plans which cover 3 different areas:Plans for preventing an emergencyIn some circumstances there will be a short period before an emergency occurs when it might be avoided by prompt or decisive actionPlans for reducing, controlling or mitigating the effects of an emergency The main bulk of planning should consider how to minimise the effects of an emergency, starting with the impact of the event (ie their alerting procedures) and looking at remedial actions that can be taken to reduce effects. For example, theemergency services may be able to stem the emergency at source by fighting fires, combating the release of toxic chemicals or the extent of floods. The evacuation of people may be a direct intervention which can mitigate the effects of some emergencies. Recovery plans should also be developed to reduce the effects of the emergency and ensure long term recovery. The National Recovery Guidance (http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/content/national-recovery-g uidance) provides more detail on recovery issues.Plans for taking other action in connection with an emergencyNot all actions to be taken in preparing for an emergency are directly concerned with controlling, reducing or mitigating its effects. Emergency planning should look beyond the immediate response and long term recovery issues and look also at secondary impacts. For example, the wave of reaction to an emergency can be quite overwhelming in terms of media attention and public response. Plans may need to consider how to handle this increased interest.As obvious as it sounds, emergency plans should include procedures for determining whether an emergency has occurred, and when to activate the plan in
response to an emergency. This should include identifying an appropriately trained person who will take the decision, in consultation with others, on when an emergency has occurred.The maintenance of plans involves more than just their preparation. Once a plan has been prepared, it must be maintained systematically to ensure it remains up-to-date and fit for purpose at any time if an emergency occurs.It may be that multiple organisations can develop a joint emergency plan where the partners agree that, for a successful combined response, they need a formal set of procedures governing them all. For example, in the event that evacuation is required, the police would need carefully pre-planned co-operation from various other organisations such as fire and ambulance services and the local authority, as well as involvement of others such as transport organisations.Types of emergency plansIt may be important for an organisation to have more than one emergency plan. It is often the case that organisations have generic plans and more specific plans.Generic plans are the core plan which enables the organisation to respond to, and recover from a wide range of possible emergencies. They should include procedures which would be used in all instances for ensuring the welfare of staff and the provision of sufficient resources for responding to the emergency.Specific plans relate either to a particular emergency or kind of emergency, or to a specific site or location. Specific plans are a detailed set of arrangements designed to go beyond the generic arrangements when they are likely to prove insufficient in a particular case. A specific plan usually builds on a generic plan. For example, organisations which deal with hazardous materials may need specific plans for responding to a chemical spillage. Some organisations may have specific plans for conducting specific functions in response to an emergency. For instance, the emergency services will have plans for mass evacuation of an urban area and mass decontamination. Organisations should use their risk assessments to decide whether specific plans are necessary or desirable.Exercising plans and training staffOrganisations should test the effectiveness of their emergency plans by carrying out exercises, and should ensure that staff involved in the planning for or response to an emergency receive appropriate training. Training plans should also consider other people who have a role in the emergency plans such as contractors and civil protection partners. The plans themselves should explicitly identify the nature and frequency of training and exercising required. The guide Emerg ency planning and preparedness: exercises and training (https://www.gov.uk/emerg ency-planning-and- preparedness-exercises-and-training) provides more information.
Emergency planning at the local levelEmergency planning is at the heart of the civil protection duty on Category 1 responders under the Civil Contingencies Act. The Act requires Category 1 responders to maintain plans for preventing emergencies; reducing, controlling or mitigating the effects of emergencies; and taking other action in the event of emergencies. These should draw on risk assessments and should have regard for the arrangements to warn, inform and advise the public at the time of an emerg ency (https://www.gov.uk/preparation-and-planning-for-emerg encies-the-capabilities- programme#warning-and-informing-the-public).The Regulations require plans to contain a procedure for determining whether an emergency has occurred; provision for training key staff; and provision for exercising the plan to ensure it is effective. Procedures should also be put in place to ensure that the plan is reviewed periodically and kept up to date.Category 1 responders should involve Category 2 responders - and other organisations which are not subject to the Act’s requirements - as appropriate throughout the planning process. Category 1 responders are specifically required to have regard to the activities of relevant voluntary organisations when developing plans. The Regulations permit Category 1 responders to collaborate with other organisations in delivering the emergency planning duty.Category 1 responders also have a statutory duty to publish their emergency plans, to the extent necessary or desirable for the purpose of dealing with an emergency.Emergency planning at the sub-national levelPlanning at a multi-LRF level is different from planning at the local level. For more information on the sub-national tier, see the Arrangements in England (https://www.gov.uk/preparation-and-planning-for-emerg encies-responsibilities-of-responder- agencies-and-others#arrangements-in-england) section.Emergency planning in the devolved administrationsIt is equally important that organisations within the devolved administrations conduct effective emergency planning. The devolved administrations section below provides more detail on the extent to which the Civil Contingencies Act duties apply and their individual emergency planning arrangements.The government works closely with the Scottish, Welsh and Northern Ireland governments to promote effective emergency planning that is, as far as possible, consistent with that of the rest of the UK.Emergency planning at the UK government level
The UK government capabilities programme is the core framework through which the government is seeking to build resilience across all parts of the UK. The programme uses risk assessment over a 5-year period to identify the generic capabilities that underpin the UK’s resilience to disruptive challenges, and ensures that each of these is developed. These capabilities include dealing with mass casualties and fatalities, response to chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear incidents, provision of essential services and warning and informing the public. A full list of the current capabilities can be found in this g uide to the capabilities programme (https://www.gov.uk/preparation-and-planning-for-emerg encies-the-capabilities- programme).The government has in place a coordinated cross-governmental exercise programme covering a comprehensive range of domestic disruptive challenges, including accidents, natural disasters and acts of terrorism. The programme is designed to test rigorously the concept of operations from the coordinated central response through the range of lead government department responsibilities and the involvement of the devolved administrations, to the sub-national tier and local responders. More information is provided in the g uide to emerg ency exercises and training (https://www.gov.uk/emerg ency-planning-and-preparedness-exercises-and-training).These national processes feed into the devolved administrations, sub-national and local levels to ensure fully integrated emergency planning at all levels throughout the UK.The role of the voluntary sector in emergency planning and responseWhere appropriate, organisations should consider at an early stage in planning whether voluntary organisations may have capabilities which could assist in responding to an emergency.The voluntary sector can provide a wide range of skills and services in responding to an emergency. These include: practical support (such as first aid, transportation, or provisions for responders); psycho-social support (such as counselling and helplines); equipment (radios, medical equipment); and information services (such as public training and communications).Existing emergency planning dutiesThe Civil Contingencies Act Regulations identify 3 pieces of legislation pre-dating this Act which were introduced separately in Britain and Northern Ireland under sector-specific legislation operated by the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) and HSE Northern Ireland. These relate to major accident hazards at industrial establishments (Control of Major Accident Hazards Regulations (COMAH)), to hazardous pipelines (Pipelines Safety Regulations) and to radiation hazards (Radiation (Emergency Preparation and Public Information) Regulations (REPPIR)). These sector-specific Regulations have established multi-agency emergency planning regimes in co-operation with the operators. To avoid duplication, the Civil
does not apply to emergencies which are dealt with by these pieces of legislation.For more information on how the Act fits with other legislation see chapter 19 of ‘Emerg ency preparedness’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency- preparedness).Important documentsEmerg ency Preparedness (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency- preparedness)  Chapter 5: “Emergency planning”  Annex 5a: “Examples of generic and specific plans”  Annex 5B: “Generic plan: emergency or major incident”  Annex 5C: “Specific plan”  Annex 5D: “Example of a plan maintenance matrix for a local authority”Chapter 7 “Communicating with the public” - Contains further detail on communicating with the vulnerable and victims in an emergency  Annex 7A: “Communicating with the public: the national context “  Annex 7B: “Lead responsibility for warning and informing the public”  Annex 7C: “Checklist of suggested protocols”Chapter 14: “The role of the voluntary sector” Annex 14A: “Examples of voluntary sector activities in support of statutory services”  Home Office document Recovery: an emerg ency management guide(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/recovery-an-emerg ency-management-g uide)  Communicating risk guidance(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/communicating-risk-g uidance) Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Policy Branch (http://www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/index/making-g overnment-work/civil-contingencies.htm) - a guide to emergency planning arrangements, risk assessment and other documentation is available on this website London’s strategic emerg ency plan (http://www.london.gov.uk/priorities/london- prepared/home)Devolved administrationsThis section describes emergency preparedness and planning arrangements in the devolved administrations, where these differ from UK government and local
and its associated Regulations apply in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. More detail on the specific duties under the Act and how they apply in the Devolved Administrations can be found in chapters 2 to 8 of the guidance document‘Emerg ency preparedness’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency- preparedness).Emergency preparedness in ScotlandIn devolved areas the Scottish government is designated as the lead on relevant issues in line with the ‘lead department’ principle at the UK level. In reserved areas the Scottish government works closely with the UK government to ensure that Scottish needs are catered for.Overall responsibility for civil protection policy in Scotland sits with the Scottish Resilience Division of the Scottish government.At the local level in Scotland, 8 strategic coordinating groups based on current police force areas promote effective planning for all types of incidents in their area, involving risk assessment, making generic and specific emergency plans, engaging with the community, training, testing, exercising and reviewing.  Scottish government civil emerg encies website(http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Justice/public-safety/emerg encies)Emergency preparedness in WalesThe Welsh government (WG) or Wales Office, depending on the subject matter, is represented on relevant committees and forums within the UK government relating to civil protection. They work closely with UK government departments to ensure that UK civil protection policy and planning is tailored to Welsh needs. A dedicated team in WG supports multi-agency co-operation in Wales and engagement with the UK government on issues relating to civil protection and emergency preparedness.As in England, local resilience forums (LRFs) are the principle mechanism for multi- agency co-operation on civil protection issues. The respective Chief Constables presently chair the LRFs in the South Wales, North Wales, Dyfed-Powys and Gwent areas. The Welsh Resilience Forum (WRF) provides a national forum for multi- agency strategic advice on civil protection and emergency planning. The forum meets quarterly and is chaired by the First Minister or the Minister for Social Justice and Regeneration. Risk assessment at a pan-Wales level is undertaken by the Wales Risk Assessment Group (WRAG) reporting to the WRF.A number of other groups provide forums for discussion and co-ordination of civil protection in Wales, including: the Joint Emergency Services Group; the Wales Media Emergency Forum; and the Welsh Borders Resilience Group.
  Welsh civil emerg encies website (https://gov.wales/wales-resilience-forum)Emergency preparedness in Northern IrelandCivil contingencies in Northern Ireland are largely a devolved matter with responsibilities lying with Northern Ireland government departments. The Northern Ireland Office (NIO) in the UK government is, however, responsible for, amongst other things, policing, criminal justice and security in Northern Ireland.The Civil Contingencies Policy Branch (CCPB) in the Office of the First Minister and Deputy First Minister (OFMDFM) promotes and co-ordinates civil protection arrangements in Northern Ireland. The Northern Ireland government would normally have oversight of civil contingencies arrangements for transferred functions. The ‘lead government department’ principle applies to Northern Ireland departments as at the UK level.The Civil Contingencies Group, Northern Ireland (CCG(NI)) is a pan-Northern Ireland multi-agency forum for the development, discussion and agreement of civil protection policy. Co-ordination at local and sub-regional levels may be facilitated by a range of organisations, with police district commanders and district council chief executives taking key roles in co-ordination. Northern Ireland has its own unique constitutional and organisational structures. Unlike in Great Britain, many services are delivered on a Northern Ireland-wide (regional) basis, either by government departments or by their agencies and NDPBs.  Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Policy Branch website(http://www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/index/making-g overnment-work/civil-contingencies.htm)The devolved administrations under the Civil Contingencies Act ScotlandPart 1 of the Civil Contingencies Act applies to Scotland, with the powers it sets out residing with Scottish Ministers in line with the devolution settlement. While civil protection in Scotland is largely a devolved matter and therefore the responsibility of the Scottish government, certain responders in Scotland are subject to Part 1 of the Act, the Regulations and guidance issued by UK ministers - the Health and Safety Executive, the Maritime and Coastguard Agency and the British Transport Police.WalesThe arrangements set out in Part 1 of the Act apply in Wales. However, there are some differences in the requirements which the Regulations place on Category 1 and 2 responders in Wales because of the unique administrative arrangements in Wales. As in England, the principal mechanism for co-operation between Category 1 and 2 responders under the Act will be the local resilience forums (LRFs). The Welsh Resilience Forum (WRF) provides a national forum for multi-agency strategic advice on civil protection and emergency planning. The forum is a non-statutory advisory body.
Northern IrelandCivil contingencies in Northern Ireland are largely a devolved matter with responsibilities lying with Northern Ireland government departments. The duties of the Act apply only to a limited number of organisations which deliver functions that are not transferred. These organisations are: the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI); the Maritime and Coastguard Agency (MCA); and telecommunications operators. Because these organisations do not represent the full spectrum of response agencies in Northern Ireland, the Regulations treat these organisations in a slightly different way. In practice, it is anticipated that the PSNI, MCA and telecommunications operators in Northern Ireland will undertake their duties under the Act, but will relate to the other public service bodies listed in the Regulations in line with the arrangements in the Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Framework and by participating in Northern Ireland co-operation, co-ordination and crisis management machinery.Further informationYou can find further details on all of the above in these documents: ‘Civil Contingencies Act 2004: devolution concordat with Scottish Ministers’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act-2004-devolution-  concordat-with-scottish-ministers) ‘Civil Contingencies Act 2004: concordat between the UK government and the Welsh government’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act- 2004-concordat-between-the-uk-g overnment-and-the-welsh-g overnment) ‘Emerg ency preparedness - chapter 10: Scotland’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61033/Chap  ter-10-Scotland-amends-10112011.pdf) ‘Chapter 11: Wales’(https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61034/Ch  apter-11-Wales-amends-10112011.pdf) ‘Chapter 12: Northern Ireland’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61035/Ch  apter-12-Northern-ireland-amends-10112011.pdf)Co-operation for emergency preparednessCo-operation between organisations is fundamental to emergency preparedness. A large number of organisations will need to co-operate when responding to emergencies, so it is right that organisations co-operate closely in preparedness and planning as well. The government aims to ensure all organisations co-operate in emergency preparedness, and robust co-operation arrangements are in place at every level. This section outlines who should co-operate, and how. It describes co- operation arrangements in place locally and points out the emphasis placed on co- operation within the Civil Contingencies Act.
Who should co-operate?Organisations will need to co-operate closely with any other organisation who would be involved in responding to and recovering from an emergency which affects that organisation.That will mean not just partner organisations, but contractors, and voluntary organisations who may be involved in the response. Organisations should consider their need to co-operate with a wide range of public (for example, local authorities, emergency services), commercial (for example, other businesses) and voluntary organisations (like charities and voluntary response organisations).What co-operation?Every-day co-operation between organisations is the lifeblood of civil protection work- through visits and seminars, phone calls and emails, and joint projects including exercises.Many organisations are well used to co-operating in both preparing for and responding to emergencies. The emergency services, for instance, obviously co- ordinate closely when responding to emergencies. They also co-operate closely in policy and planning, and undertake joint training and exercises. Likewise, utilities companies have close links with local authorities and the emergency services.Organisations should aim to co-operate bilaterally and attend multi-agency groups and forums to discuss co-ordinated and sometimes joint approaches to the essential aspects of emergency preparedness - risk assessment, emergency planning, business continuity management, and arrangements to warn and inform the public. Such forums should also consider producing multi-agency plans and other documents, including protocols and agreements, and the co-ordination of multi- agency exercises and other training events.Co-operation at the local level under the Civil Contingencies ActThe principle mechanism for multi-agency co-operation at the local level is the local resilience forum (LRF) (https://www.gov.uk/local-resilience-forums-contact-details). LRFs are generally based on local police areas, and bring together all the organisations who have a duty to co-operate under the Civil Contingencies Act, along with others who would be involved in the response.The purpose of the LRF process is to ensure effective delivery of those duties under the Act that need to be developed in a multi-agency environment.Co-operation at the sub-national level
Some co-operation and co-ordination takes place at multi-LRF level in England, which brings together representatives of local responders, and is supported by resilience advisers from DCLG-RED (https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/working- with-local-partners-to-plan-for-and-respond-to-emerg encies), to work together to address larger-scale civil protection issues.Co-operation at the devolved administration levelSimilar co-operation and co-ordination arrangements are in place in the devolved administrations. For instance, in Scotland strategic co-ordinating groups are similar to LRFs, and the Scottish Emergencies Co-ordinating Committee (SECC) provides co-ordination and determines the national strategy for the development of civil protection. In Wales the Welsh Government (WG) provides that co-ordination, and a Wales Resilience Forum brings together local responders and UK government bodies. In Northern Ireland the Civil Contingencies Group, Northern Ireland (CCG(NI)) is the forum for the development, discussion and agreement of Civil Protection Policy for the NI public services.Co-operation at the UK levelGovernment departments who are responsible for contingency planning and response within their own areas (for example, infectious diseases falls to Department of Health; fuel disruptions falls to Business Innovation and Skills), work closely together. The Civil Contingencies Secretariat (CCS) in the Cabinet Office co- ordinates their work to enhance the country’s resilience to the full range of emergencies.Central government works very closely with the devolved administrations, local authorities and emergency services. Officials attend the full range of multi-agency forums and regularly go out to visit practitioners.Arrangements in EnglandThe Department for Communities and Local Government - Resilience and Emerg encies Division (DCLG-RED) (https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/working- with-local-partners-to-plan-for-and-respond-to-emerg encies) provides the platform formulti-LRF co-operation and planning in emergency preparedness where this would add value by improving co-ordination between local and central response. This section outlines the arrangements in England for emergency preparedness at this level.Co-operation at the sub-national levelCo-operation at the sub-national level in England is a key element of the UK’s civil
protection framework. The sub-national tier is not a judgement on the local level; rather, it is a mechanism for improving co-ordination and communication into and out from the centre of government.Co-operation at the sub-national level involves the representatives of local responders and central government bodies working together to address larger-scale civil protection issues. Co-operation may take place within a multi-agency setting or directly between 2 or more responders.Role of the sub-national tierThe function of the sub-national tier is to improve co-ordination and communication between central government and local responders and other organisations and to ensure that areas are prepared to respond to events which would affect most or all of the area or which could overwhelm any locality. The successful delivery of the sub-national resilience capability rests critically on local responders and other organisations and central government working together in partnership to ensure effective and co-ordinated planning and response.Opportunities to collaborate and co-operate at a multi-LRF LevelPlanning for and responding to large-scale emergencies cannot be done in isolation in each local resilience forum (LRF). Mechanisms for cross-boundary working and relationship building are essential as some emergencies will overwhelm localities’ resources and/or boundaries.Collaboration and co-operation between localities in England is a well-established and critical way of working in civil contingencies. It is a mechanism:  for enabling pooling of resources to achieve agreed mutual aims and outcomes  for avoiding duplication of work between neighbouring LRFs or avoiding activity by an LRF that may be counter-productive to a neighbouring LRF to support planning and exercising for emergencies that cross local resilience areas or which could overwhelm a locality  that enables individual responders, local forums and central government to work together to address large-scale civil protection issuesDCLG-RED works directly with LRFs, supporting collaboration and co-operation in planning for wide-area high-impact events affecting more than one locality. RED has allocated Resilience Advisers to each LRF so that LRFs have named contacts with which to build working relationships. For more information, see chapter 16 of‘Emerg ency preparedness’(https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61039/Chapter-16-final-post-consultCCS_amends_16042012.pdf) on collaboration and co-operation between LRFs.
Published 20 February 2013All content is available under the Open GovernmentLicence v3.0, except where otherwise stated	© Crown copyright
GuidancePreparation and planning for emergencies: responsibilities of responder agencies and othersHow the government prepares and plans for emergencies,working nationally, locally and co-operatively to ensure civil protection in the UK.From: Cabinet Office (/government/organisations/cabinet-office)Published 20 February 2013The Civil Contingencies ActThe Civil Contingencies Act (http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2004/36/contents), and accompanying non-legislative measures, delivers a single framework for civil protection in the UK. The Act is separated into 2 substantive parts: local arrangements for civil protection (Part 1); and emergency powers (Part 2).Part 1Part 1 of the Act and supporting Regulations and statutory guidance ‘Emerg ency preparedness’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency-preparedness) establish a clear set of roles and responsibilities for those involved in emergency preparation and response at the local level. The Act divides local responders into 2
categories, imposing a different set of duties on each.Those in Category 1 are organisations at the core of the response to most emergencies (the emergency services, local authorities, NHS bodies). Category 1 responders are subject to the full set of civil protection duties. They will be required to:  assess the risk of emergencies occurring and use this to inform contingency planning  put in place emergency plans  put in place business continuity management arrangements  put in place arrangements to make information available to the public about civil protection matters and maintain arrangements to warn, inform and advise the public in the event of an emergency  share information with other local responders to enhance co-ordination  co-operate with other local responders to enhance co-ordination and efficiency  provide advice and assistance to businesses and voluntary organisations aboutbusiness continuity management (local authorities only)Category 2 organisations (the Health and Safety Executive, transport and utility companies) are ‘co-operating bodies’. They are less likely to be involved in the heart of planning work, but will be heavily involved in incidents that affect their own sector. Category 2 responders have a lesser set of duties - co-operating and sharing relevant information with other Category 1 and 2 responders.Category 1 and 2 organisations come together to form ‘local resilience forums’ (based on police areas) which will help co-ordination and co-operation between responders at the local level. For more on what LRFs do and contact details for each, see the guide on ‘Local resilience forums: contact details’ (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/local-resilience-forums-contact-details).The bulk of Part 1 of the Act was brought into force in November 2005 (the duty on local authorities to provide advice and assistance to business and voluntary organisations about business continuity management commenced in May 2006).Part 2Part 2 of the Act updates the 1920 Emergency Powers Act to reflect the developments in the intervening years and the current and future risk profile. It allows for the making of temporary special legislation (emergency regulations) to help deal with the most serious of emergencies. The use of emergency powers is a last resort option and planning arrangements at the local level should not assume that emergency powers will be made available. Their use is subject to a robust set of safeguards - they can only be deployed in exceptional circumstances.
Part 2 of the Act was brought into force in December 2004. See also: Civil Contingencies Act Enhancement programme (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act-enhancement-  programme-programme-initiation-document) Category 2 Responders: overview of sectors and emerg ency planning arrangements (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act- category-2-responders-overview-of-sectors-and-emerg  ency-planning-arrangements) Examples of good practice in public sector business continuity management (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/examples-of-g ood-practice-in-public-sector- business-continuity-management-bcm-methodologies) Examples of good practice in public sector business continuity management: exercising (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/examples-of-g ood-practice-in- public-sector-business-continuity-management-exercising) Examples of good practice in public sector business continuity management - awareness and training (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/examples-of-g ood- practice-in-public-sector-business-continuity-management-bcm-awareness-and-training) Communicating with the public: the 10 step cycle (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/communicating-with-the-public-the-ten-step-  cycle) Expectations and indicators of good practice set for category 1 and 2 responders (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/expectations-and-indicators-of-g ood-practice- set-for-category-1-and-2-responders)Emergency planningThe government aims to ensure all organisations have effective, well-practiced emergency plans in place. This section outlines what we mean by emergency planning, different types of plans, the importance of exercising them and training key staff, and the kind of factors which planners should consider.What is emergency planning?Emergency planning should aim where possible to prevent emergencies occurring, and when they do occur, good planning should reduce, control or mitigate the effects of the emergency. It is a systematic and ongoing process which should evolve as lessons are learnt and circumstances change.Emergency planning should be viewed as part of a cycle of activities beginning with establishing a risk profile to help determine what should be the priorities for developing plans and ending with review and revision, which then re-starts the
whole cycle. Plans should focus on at least 3 key groupings of people - the vulnerable, victims (including survivors, family and friends) and responder personnel.Vulnerable people may be less able to help themselves in an emergency than self- reliant people. Those who are vulnerable will vary depending on the nature of the emergency, but plans should consider: those with mobility difficulties (those with physical disabilities or pregnant women); those with mental health difficulties; and others who are dependent, such as children.Victims of an emergency - which includes not only those directly affected but also those who, as family and friends, suffer bereavement or the anxiety of not knowing what has happened.Responder personnel should also be considered. Plans sometimes place unrealistic expectations on management and personnel. Organisations should ensure their plans give due consideration to the welfare of their own personnel. For instance, the emergency services have health and safety procedures which determine shift patterns and check for levels of stress.Organisations should aim to maintain plans which cover 3 different areas:Plans for preventing an emergencyIn some circumstances there will be a short period before an emergency occurs when it might be avoided by prompt or decisive actionPlans for reducing, controlling or mitigating the effects of an emergency The main bulk of planning should consider how to minimise the effects of an emergency, starting with the impact of the event (ie their alerting procedures) and looking at remedial actions that can be taken to reduce effects. For example, theemergency services may be able to stem the emergency at source by fighting fires, combating the release of toxic chemicals or the extent of floods. The evacuation of people may be a direct intervention which can mitigate the effects of some emergencies. Recovery plans should also be developed to reduce the effects of the emergency and ensure long term recovery. The National Recovery Guidance (http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/content/national-recovery-g uidance) provides more detail on recovery issues.Plans for taking other action in connection with an emergencyNot all actions to be taken in preparing for an emergency are directly concerned with controlling, reducing or mitigating its effects. Emergency planning should look beyond the immediate response and long term recovery issues and look also at secondary impacts. For example, the wave of reaction to an emergency can be quite overwhelming in terms of media attention and public response. Plans may need to consider how to handle this increased interest.As obvious as it sounds, emergency plans should include procedures for determining whether an emergency has occurred, and when to activate the plan in
response to an emergency. This should include identifying an appropriately trained person who will take the decision, in consultation with others, on when an emergency has occurred.The maintenance of plans involves more than just their preparation. Once a plan has been prepared, it must be maintained systematically to ensure it remains up-to-date and fit for purpose at any time if an emergency occurs.It may be that multiple organisations can develop a joint emergency plan where the partners agree that, for a successful combined response, they need a formal set of procedures governing them all. For example, in the event that evacuation is required, the police would need carefully pre-planned co-operation from various other organisations such as fire and ambulance services and the local authority, as well as involvement of others such as transport organisations.Types of emergency plansIt may be important for an organisation to have more than one emergency plan. It is often the case that organisations have generic plans and more specific plans.Generic plans are the core plan which enables the organisation to respond to, and recover from a wide range of possible emergencies. They should include procedures which would be used in all instances for ensuring the welfare of staff and the provision of sufficient resources for responding to the emergency.Specific plans relate either to a particular emergency or kind of emergency, or to a specific site or location. Specific plans are a detailed set of arrangements designed to go beyond the generic arrangements when they are likely to prove insufficient in a particular case. A specific plan usually builds on a generic plan. For example, organisations which deal with hazardous materials may need specific plans for responding to a chemical spillage. Some organisations may have specific plans for conducting specific functions in response to an emergency. For instance, the emergency services will have plans for mass evacuation of an urban area and mass decontamination. Organisations should use their risk assessments to decide whether specific plans are necessary or desirable.Exercising plans and training staffOrganisations should test the effectiveness of their emergency plans by carrying out exercises, and should ensure that staff involved in the planning for or response to an emergency receive appropriate training. Training plans should also consider other people who have a role in the emergency plans such as contractors and civil protection partners. The plans themselves should explicitly identify the nature and frequency of training and exercising required. The guide Emerg ency planning and preparedness: exercises and training (https://www.gov.uk/emerg ency-planning-and- preparedness-exercises-and-training) provides more information.
Emergency planning at the local levelEmergency planning is at the heart of the civil protection duty on Category 1 responders under the Civil Contingencies Act. The Act requires Category 1 responders to maintain plans for preventing emergencies; reducing, controlling or mitigating the effects of emergencies; and taking other action in the event of emergencies. These should draw on risk assessments and should have regard for the arrangements to warn, inform and advise the public at the time of an emerg ency (https://www.gov.uk/preparation-and-planning-for-emerg encies-the-capabilities- programme#warning-and-informing-the-public).The Regulations require plans to contain a procedure for determining whether an emergency has occurred; provision for training key staff; and provision for exercising the plan to ensure it is effective. Procedures should also be put in place to ensure that the plan is reviewed periodically and kept up to date.Category 1 responders should involve Category 2 responders - and other organisations which are not subject to the Act’s requirements - as appropriate throughout the planning process. Category 1 responders are specifically required to have regard to the activities of relevant voluntary organisations when developing plans. The Regulations permit Category 1 responders to collaborate with other organisations in delivering the emergency planning duty.Category 1 responders also have a statutory duty to publish their emergency plans, to the extent necessary or desirable for the purpose of dealing with an emergency.Emergency planning at the sub-national levelPlanning at a multi-LRF level is different from planning at the local level. For more information on the sub-national tier, see the Arrangements in England (https://www.gov.uk/preparation-and-planning-for-emerg encies-responsibilities-of-responder- agencies-and-others#arrangements-in-england) section.Emergency planning in the devolved administrationsIt is equally important that organisations within the devolved administrations conduct effective emergency planning. The devolved administrations section below provides more detail on the extent to which the Civil Contingencies Act duties apply and their individual emergency planning arrangements.The government works closely with the Scottish, Welsh and Northern Ireland governments to promote effective emergency planning that is, as far as possible, consistent with that of the rest of the UK.Emergency planning at the UK government level
The UK government capabilities programme is the core framework through which the government is seeking to build resilience across all parts of the UK. The programme uses risk assessment over a 5-year period to identify the generic capabilities that underpin the UK’s resilience to disruptive challenges, and ensures that each of these is developed. These capabilities include dealing with mass casualties and fatalities, response to chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear incidents, provision of essential services and warning and informing the public. A full list of the current capabilities can be found in this g uide to the capabilities programme (https://www.gov.uk/preparation-and-planning-for-emerg encies-the-capabilities- programme).The government has in place a coordinated cross-governmental exercise programme covering a comprehensive range of domestic disruptive challenges, including accidents, natural disasters and acts of terrorism. The programme is designed to test rigorously the concept of operations from the coordinated central response through the range of lead government department responsibilities and the involvement of the devolved administrations, to the sub-national tier and local responders. More information is provided in the g uide to emerg ency exercises and training (https://www.gov.uk/emerg ency-planning-and-preparedness-exercises-and-training).These national processes feed into the devolved administrations, sub-national and local levels to ensure fully integrated emergency planning at all levels throughout the UK.The role of the voluntary sector in emergency planning and responseWhere appropriate, organisations should consider at an early stage in planning whether voluntary organisations may have capabilities which could assist in responding to an emergency.The voluntary sector can provide a wide range of skills and services in responding to an emergency. These include: practical support (such as first aid, transportation, or provisions for responders); psycho-social support (such as counselling and helplines); equipment (radios, medical equipment); and information services (such as public training and communications).Existing emergency planning dutiesThe Civil Contingencies Act Regulations identify 3 pieces of legislation pre-dating this Act which were introduced separately in Britain and Northern Ireland under sector-specific legislation operated by the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) and HSE Northern Ireland. These relate to major accident hazards at industrial establishments (Control of Major Accident Hazards Regulations (COMAH)), to hazardous pipelines (Pipelines Safety Regulations) and to radiation hazards (Radiation (Emergency Preparation and Public Information) Regulations (REPPIR)). These sector-specific Regulations have established multi-agency emergency planning regimes in co-operation with the operators. To avoid duplication, the Civil
does not apply to emergencies which are dealt with by these pieces of legislation.For more information on how the Act fits with other legislation see chapter 19 of ‘Emerg ency preparedness’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency- preparedness).Important documentsEmerg ency Preparedness (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency- preparedness)  Chapter 5: “Emergency planning”  Annex 5a: “Examples of generic and specific plans”  Annex 5B: “Generic plan: emergency or major incident”  Annex 5C: “Specific plan”  Annex 5D: “Example of a plan maintenance matrix for a local authority”Chapter 7 “Communicating with the public” - Contains further detail on communicating with the vulnerable and victims in an emergency  Annex 7A: “Communicating with the public: the national context “  Annex 7B: “Lead responsibility for warning and informing the public”  Annex 7C: “Checklist of suggested protocols”Chapter 14: “The role of the voluntary sector” Annex 14A: “Examples of voluntary sector activities in support of statutory services”  Home Office document Recovery: an emerg ency management guide(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/recovery-an-emerg ency-management-g uide)  Communicating risk guidance(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/communicating-risk-g uidance) Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Policy Branch (http://www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/index/making-g overnment-work/civil-contingencies.htm) - a guide to emergency planning arrangements, risk assessment and other documentation is available on this website London’s strategic emerg ency plan (http://www.london.gov.uk/priorities/london- prepared/home)Devolved administrationsThis section describes emergency preparedness and planning arrangements in the devolved administrations, where these differ from UK government and local
and its associated Regulations apply in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. More detail on the specific duties under the Act and how they apply in the Devolved Administrations can be found in chapters 2 to 8 of the guidance document‘Emerg ency preparedness’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency- preparedness).Emergency preparedness in ScotlandIn devolved areas the Scottish government is designated as the lead on relevant issues in line with the ‘lead department’ principle at the UK level. In reserved areas the Scottish government works closely with the UK government to ensure that Scottish needs are catered for.Overall responsibility for civil protection policy in Scotland sits with the Scottish Resilience Division of the Scottish government.At the local level in Scotland, 8 strategic coordinating groups based on current police force areas promote effective planning for all types of incidents in their area, involving risk assessment, making generic and specific emergency plans, engaging with the community, training, testing, exercising and reviewing.  Scottish government civil emerg encies website(http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Justice/public-safety/emerg encies)Emergency preparedness in WalesThe Welsh government (WG) or Wales Office, depending on the subject matter, is represented on relevant committees and forums within the UK government relating to civil protection. They work closely with UK government departments to ensure that UK civil protection policy and planning is tailored to Welsh needs. A dedicated team in WG supports multi-agency co-operation in Wales and engagement with the UK government on issues relating to civil protection and emergency preparedness.As in England, local resilience forums (LRFs) are the principle mechanism for multi- agency co-operation on civil protection issues. The respective Chief Constables presently chair the LRFs in the South Wales, North Wales, Dyfed-Powys and Gwent areas. The Welsh Resilience Forum (WRF) provides a national forum for multi- agency strategic advice on civil protection and emergency planning. The forum meets quarterly and is chaired by the First Minister or the Minister for Social Justice and Regeneration. Risk assessment at a pan-Wales level is undertaken by the Wales Risk Assessment Group (WRAG) reporting to the WRF.A number of other groups provide forums for discussion and co-ordination of civil protection in Wales, including: the Joint Emergency Services Group; the Wales Media Emergency Forum; and the Welsh Borders Resilience Group.
  Welsh civil emerg encies website (https://gov.wales/wales-resilience-forum)Emergency preparedness in Northern IrelandCivil contingencies in Northern Ireland are largely a devolved matter with responsibilities lying with Northern Ireland government departments. The Northern Ireland Office (NIO) in the UK government is, however, responsible for, amongst other things, policing, criminal justice and security in Northern Ireland.The Civil Contingencies Policy Branch (CCPB) in the Office of the First Minister and Deputy First Minister (OFMDFM) promotes and co-ordinates civil protection arrangements in Northern Ireland. The Northern Ireland government would normally have oversight of civil contingencies arrangements for transferred functions. The ‘lead government department’ principle applies to Northern Ireland departments as at the UK level.The Civil Contingencies Group, Northern Ireland (CCG(NI)) is a pan-Northern Ireland multi-agency forum for the development, discussion and agreement of civil protection policy. Co-ordination at local and sub-regional levels may be facilitated by a range of organisations, with police district commanders and district council chief executives taking key roles in co-ordination. Northern Ireland has its own unique constitutional and organisational structures. Unlike in Great Britain, many services are delivered on a Northern Ireland-wide (regional) basis, either by government departments or by their agencies and NDPBs.  Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Policy Branch website(http://www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/index/making-g overnment-work/civil-contingencies.htm)The devolved administrations under the Civil Contingencies Act ScotlandPart 1 of the Civil Contingencies Act applies to Scotland, with the powers it sets out residing with Scottish Ministers in line with the devolution settlement. While civil protection in Scotland is largely a devolved matter and therefore the responsibility of the Scottish government, certain responders in Scotland are subject to Part 1 of the Act, the Regulations and guidance issued by UK ministers - the Health and Safety Executive, the Maritime and Coastguard Agency and the British Transport Police.WalesThe arrangements set out in Part 1 of the Act apply in Wales. However, there are some differences in the requirements which the Regulations place on Category 1 and 2 responders in Wales because of the unique administrative arrangements in Wales. As in England, the principal mechanism for co-operation between Category 1 and 2 responders under the Act will be the local resilience forums (LRFs). The Welsh Resilience Forum (WRF) provides a national forum for multi-agency strategic advice on civil protection and emergency planning. The forum is a non-statutory advisory body.
Northern IrelandCivil contingencies in Northern Ireland are largely a devolved matter with responsibilities lying with Northern Ireland government departments. The duties of the Act apply only to a limited number of organisations which deliver functions that are not transferred. These organisations are: the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI); the Maritime and Coastguard Agency (MCA); and telecommunications operators. Because these organisations do not represent the full spectrum of response agencies in Northern Ireland, the Regulations treat these organisations in a slightly different way. In practice, it is anticipated that the PSNI, MCA and telecommunications operators in Northern Ireland will undertake their duties under the Act, but will relate to the other public service bodies listed in the Regulations in line with the arrangements in the Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Framework and by participating in Northern Ireland co-operation, co-ordination and crisis management machinery.Further informationYou can find further details on all of the above in these documents: ‘Civil Contingencies Act 2004: devolution concordat with Scottish Ministers’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act-2004-devolution-  concordat-with-scottish-ministers) ‘Civil Contingencies Act 2004: concordat between the UK government and the Welsh government’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act- 2004-concordat-between-the-uk-g overnment-and-the-welsh-g overnment) ‘Emerg ency preparedness - chapter 10: Scotland’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61033/Chap  ter-10-Scotland-amends-10112011.pdf) ‘Chapter 11: Wales’(https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61034/Ch  apter-11-Wales-amends-10112011.pdf) ‘Chapter 12: Northern Ireland’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61035/Ch  apter-12-Northern-ireland-amends-10112011.pdf)Co-operation for emergency preparednessCo-operation between organisations is fundamental to emergency preparedness. A large number of organisations will need to co-operate when responding to emergencies, so it is right that organisations co-operate closely in preparedness and planning as well. The government aims to ensure all organisations co-operate in emergency preparedness, and robust co-operation arrangements are in place at every level. This section outlines who should co-operate, and how. It describes co- operation arrangements in place locally and points out the emphasis placed on co- operation within the Civil Contingencies Act.
Who should co-operate?Organisations will need to co-operate closely with any other organisation who would be involved in responding to and recovering from an emergency which affects that organisation.That will mean not just partner organisations, but contractors, and voluntary organisations who may be involved in the response. Organisations should consider their need to co-operate with a wide range of public (for example, local authorities, emergency services), commercial (for example, other businesses) and voluntary organisations (like charities and voluntary response organisations).What co-operation?Every-day co-operation between organisations is the lifeblood of civil protection work- through visits and seminars, phone calls and emails, and joint projects including exercises.Many organisations are well used to co-operating in both preparing for and responding to emergencies. The emergency services, for instance, obviously co- ordinate closely when responding to emergencies. They also co-operate closely in policy and planning, and undertake joint training and exercises. Likewise, utilities companies have close links with local authorities and the emergency services.Organisations should aim to co-operate bilaterally and attend multi-agency groups and forums to discuss co-ordinated and sometimes joint approaches to the essential aspects of emergency preparedness - risk assessment, emergency planning, business continuity management, and arrangements to warn and inform the public. Such forums should also consider producing multi-agency plans and other documents, including protocols and agreements, and the co-ordination of multi- agency exercises and other training events.Co-operation at the local level under the Civil Contingencies ActThe principle mechanism for multi-agency co-operation at the local level is the local resilience forum (LRF) (https://www.gov.uk/local-resilience-forums-contact-details). LRFs are generally based on local police areas, and bring together all the organisations who have a duty to co-operate under the Civil Contingencies Act, along with others who would be involved in the response.The purpose of the LRF process is to ensure effective delivery of those duties under the Act that need to be developed in a multi-agency environment.Co-operation at the sub-national level
Some co-operation and co-ordination takes place at multi-LRF level in England, which brings together representatives of local responders, and is supported by resilience advisers from DCLG-RED (https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/working- with-local-partners-to-plan-for-and-respond-to-emerg encies), to work together to address larger-scale civil protection issues.Co-operation at the devolved administration levelSimilar co-operation and co-ordination arrangements are in place in the devolved administrations. For instance, in Scotland strategic co-ordinating groups are similar to LRFs, and the Scottish Emergencies Co-ordinating Committee (SECC) provides co-ordination and determines the national strategy for the development of civil protection. In Wales the Welsh Government (WG) provides that co-ordination, and a Wales Resilience Forum brings together local responders and UK government bodies. In Northern Ireland the Civil Contingencies Group, Northern Ireland (CCG(NI)) is the forum for the development, discussion and agreement of Civil Protection Policy for the NI public services.Co-operation at the UK levelGovernment departments who are responsible for contingency planning and response within their own areas (for example, infectious diseases falls to Department of Health; fuel disruptions falls to Business Innovation and Skills), work closely together. The Civil Contingencies Secretariat (CCS) in the Cabinet Office co- ordinates their work to enhance the country’s resilience to the full range of emergencies.Central government works very closely with the devolved administrations, local authorities and emergency services. Officials attend the full range of multi-agency forums and regularly go out to visit practitioners.Arrangements in EnglandThe Department for Communities and Local Government - Resilience and Emerg encies Division (DCLG-RED) (https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/working- with-local-partners-to-plan-for-and-respond-to-emerg encies) provides the platform formulti-LRF co-operation and planning in emergency preparedness where this would add value by improving co-ordination between local and central response. This section outlines the arrangements in England for emergency preparedness at this level.Co-operation at the sub-national levelCo-operation at the sub-national level in England is a key element of the UK’s civil
protection framework. The sub-national tier is not a judgement on the local level; rather, it is a mechanism for improving co-ordination and communication into and out from the centre of government.Co-operation at the sub-national level involves the representatives of local responders and central government bodies working together to address larger-scale civil protection issues. Co-operation may take place within a multi-agency setting or directly between 2 or more responders.Role of the sub-national tierThe function of the sub-national tier is to improve co-ordination and communication between central government and local responders and other organisations and to ensure that areas are prepared to respond to events which would affect most or all of the area or which could overwhelm any locality. The successful delivery of the sub-national resilience capability rests critically on local responders and other organisations and central government working together in partnership to ensure effective and co-ordinated planning and response.Opportunities to collaborate and co-operate at a multi-LRF LevelPlanning for and responding to large-scale emergencies cannot be done in isolation in each local resilience forum (LRF). Mechanisms for cross-boundary working and relationship building are essential as some emergencies will overwhelm localities’ resources and/or boundaries.Collaboration and co-operation between localities in England is a well-established and critical way of working in civil contingencies. It is a mechanism:  for enabling pooling of resources to achieve agreed mutual aims and outcomes  for avoiding duplication of work between neighbouring LRFs or avoiding activity by an LRF that may be counter-productive to a neighbouring LRF to support planning and exercising for emergencies that cross local resilience areas or which could overwhelm a locality  that enables individual responders, local forums and central government to work together to address large-scale civil protection issuesDCLG-RED works directly with LRFs, supporting collaboration and co-operation in planning for wide-area high-impact events affecting more than one locality. RED has allocated Resilience Advisers to each LRF so that LRFs have named contacts with which to build working relationships. For more information, see chapter 16 of‘Emerg ency preparedness’(https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61039/Chapter-16-final-post-consultCCS_amends_16042012.pdf) on collaboration and co-operation between LRFs.
Published 20 February 2013All content is available under the Open GovernmentLicence v3.0, except where otherwise stated	© Crown copyright
GuidancePreparation and planning for emergencies: responsibilities of responder agencies and othersHow the government prepares and plans for emergencies,working nationally, locally and co-operatively to ensure civil protection in the UK.From: Cabinet Office (/government/organisations/cabinet-office)Published 20 February 2013The Civil Contingencies ActThe Civil Contingencies Act (http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2004/36/contents), and accompanying non-legislative measures, delivers a single framework for civil protection in the UK. The Act is separated into 2 substantive parts: local arrangements for civil protection (Part 1); and emergency powers (Part 2).Part 1Part 1 of the Act and supporting Regulations and statutory guidance ‘Emerg ency preparedness’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency-preparedness) establish a clear set of roles and responsibilities for those involved in emergency preparation and response at the local level. The Act divides local responders into 2
categories, imposing a different set of duties on each.Those in Category 1 are organisations at the core of the response to most emergencies (the emergency services, local authorities, NHS bodies). Category 1 responders are subject to the full set of civil protection duties. They will be required to:  assess the risk of emergencies occurring and use this to inform contingency planning  put in place emergency plans  put in place business continuity management arrangements  put in place arrangements to make information available to the public about civil protection matters and maintain arrangements to warn, inform and advise the public in the event of an emergency  share information with other local responders to enhance co-ordination  co-operate with other local responders to enhance co-ordination and efficiency  provide advice and assistance to businesses and voluntary organisations aboutbusiness continuity management (local authorities only)Category 2 organisations (the Health and Safety Executive, transport and utility companies) are ‘co-operating bodies’. They are less likely to be involved in the heart of planning work, but will be heavily involved in incidents that affect their own sector. Category 2 responders have a lesser set of duties - co-operating and sharing relevant information with other Category 1 and 2 responders.Category 1 and 2 organisations come together to form ‘local resilience forums’ (based on police areas) which will help co-ordination and co-operation between responders at the local level. For more on what LRFs do and contact details for each, see the guide on ‘Local resilience forums: contact details’ (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/local-resilience-forums-contact-details).The bulk of Part 1 of the Act was brought into force in November 2005 (the duty on local authorities to provide advice and assistance to business and voluntary organisations about business continuity management commenced in May 2006).Part 2Part 2 of the Act updates the 1920 Emergency Powers Act to reflect the developments in the intervening years and the current and future risk profile. It allows for the making of temporary special legislation (emergency regulations) to help deal with the most serious of emergencies. The use of emergency powers is a last resort option and planning arrangements at the local level should not assume that emergency powers will be made available. Their use is subject to a robust set of safeguards - they can only be deployed in exceptional circumstances.
Part 2 of the Act was brought into force in December 2004. See also: Civil Contingencies Act Enhancement programme (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act-enhancement-  programme-programme-initiation-document) Category 2 Responders: overview of sectors and emerg ency planning arrangements (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act- category-2-responders-overview-of-sectors-and-emerg  ency-planning-arrangements) Examples of good practice in public sector business continuity management (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/examples-of-g ood-practice-in-public-sector- business-continuity-management-bcm-methodologies) Examples of good practice in public sector business continuity management: exercising (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/examples-of-g ood-practice-in- public-sector-business-continuity-management-exercising) Examples of good practice in public sector business continuity management - awareness and training (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/examples-of-g ood- practice-in-public-sector-business-continuity-management-bcm-awareness-and-training) Communicating with the public: the 10 step cycle (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/communicating-with-the-public-the-ten-step-  cycle) Expectations and indicators of good practice set for category 1 and 2 responders (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/expectations-and-indicators-of-g ood-practice- set-for-category-1-and-2-responders)Emergency planningThe government aims to ensure all organisations have effective, well-practiced emergency plans in place. This section outlines what we mean by emergency planning, different types of plans, the importance of exercising them and training key staff, and the kind of factors which planners should consider.What is emergency planning?Emergency planning should aim where possible to prevent emergencies occurring, and when they do occur, good planning should reduce, control or mitigate the effects of the emergency. It is a systematic and ongoing process which should evolve as lessons are learnt and circumstances change.Emergency planning should be viewed as part of a cycle of activities beginning with establishing a risk profile to help determine what should be the priorities for developing plans and ending with review and revision, which then re-starts the
whole cycle. Plans should focus on at least 3 key groupings of people - the vulnerable, victims (including survivors, family and friends) and responder personnel.Vulnerable people may be less able to help themselves in an emergency than self- reliant people. Those who are vulnerable will vary depending on the nature of the emergency, but plans should consider: those with mobility difficulties (those with physical disabilities or pregnant women); those with mental health difficulties; and others who are dependent, such as children.Victims of an emergency - which includes not only those directly affected but also those who, as family and friends, suffer bereavement or the anxiety of not knowing what has happened.Responder personnel should also be considered. Plans sometimes place unrealistic expectations on management and personnel. Organisations should ensure their plans give due consideration to the welfare of their own personnel. For instance, the emergency services have health and safety procedures which determine shift patterns and check for levels of stress.Organisations should aim to maintain plans which cover 3 different areas:Plans for preventing an emergencyIn some circumstances there will be a short period before an emergency occurs when it might be avoided by prompt or decisive actionPlans for reducing, controlling or mitigating the effects of an emergency The main bulk of planning should consider how to minimise the effects of an emergency, starting with the impact of the event (ie their alerting procedures) and looking at remedial actions that can be taken to reduce effects. For example, theemergency services may be able to stem the emergency at source by fighting fires, combating the release of toxic chemicals or the extent of floods. The evacuation of people may be a direct intervention which can mitigate the effects of some emergencies. Recovery plans should also be developed to reduce the effects of the emergency and ensure long term recovery. The National Recovery Guidance (http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/content/national-recovery-g uidance) provides more detail on recovery issues.Plans for taking other action in connection with an emergencyNot all actions to be taken in preparing for an emergency are directly concerned with controlling, reducing or mitigating its effects. Emergency planning should look beyond the immediate response and long term recovery issues and look also at secondary impacts. For example, the wave of reaction to an emergency can be quite overwhelming in terms of media attention and public response. Plans may need to consider how to handle this increased interest.As obvious as it sounds, emergency plans should include procedures for determining whether an emergency has occurred, and when to activate the plan in
response to an emergency. This should include identifying an appropriately trained person who will take the decision, in consultation with others, on when an emergency has occurred.The maintenance of plans involves more than just their preparation. Once a plan has been prepared, it must be maintained systematically to ensure it remains up-to-date and fit for purpose at any time if an emergency occurs.It may be that multiple organisations can develop a joint emergency plan where the partners agree that, for a successful combined response, they need a formal set of procedures governing them all. For example, in the event that evacuation is required, the police would need carefully pre-planned co-operation from various other organisations such as fire and ambulance services and the local authority, as well as involvement of others such as transport organisations.Types of emergency plansIt may be important for an organisation to have more than one emergency plan. It is often the case that organisations have generic plans and more specific plans.Generic plans are the core plan which enables the organisation to respond to, and recover from a wide range of possible emergencies. They should include procedures which would be used in all instances for ensuring the welfare of staff and the provision of sufficient resources for responding to the emergency.Specific plans relate either to a particular emergency or kind of emergency, or to a specific site or location. Specific plans are a detailed set of arrangements designed to go beyond the generic arrangements when they are likely to prove insufficient in a particular case. A specific plan usually builds on a generic plan. For example, organisations which deal with hazardous materials may need specific plans for responding to a chemical spillage. Some organisations may have specific plans for conducting specific functions in response to an emergency. For instance, the emergency services will have plans for mass evacuation of an urban area and mass decontamination. Organisations should use their risk assessments to decide whether specific plans are necessary or desirable.Exercising plans and training staffOrganisations should test the effectiveness of their emergency plans by carrying out exercises, and should ensure that staff involved in the planning for or response to an emergency receive appropriate training. Training plans should also consider other people who have a role in the emergency plans such as contractors and civil protection partners. The plans themselves should explicitly identify the nature and frequency of training and exercising required. The guide Emerg ency planning and preparedness: exercises and training (https://www.gov.uk/emerg ency-planning-and- preparedness-exercises-and-training) provides more information.
Emergency planning at the local levelEmergency planning is at the heart of the civil protection duty on Category 1 responders under the Civil Contingencies Act. The Act requires Category 1 responders to maintain plans for preventing emergencies; reducing, controlling or mitigating the effects of emergencies; and taking other action in the event of emergencies. These should draw on risk assessments and should have regard for the arrangements to warn, inform and advise the public at the time of an emerg ency (https://www.gov.uk/preparation-and-planning-for-emerg encies-the-capabilities- programme#warning-and-informing-the-public).The Regulations require plans to contain a procedure for determining whether an emergency has occurred; provision for training key staff; and provision for exercising the plan to ensure it is effective. Procedures should also be put in place to ensure that the plan is reviewed periodically and kept up to date.Category 1 responders should involve Category 2 responders - and other organisations which are not subject to the Act’s requirements - as appropriate throughout the planning process. Category 1 responders are specifically required to have regard to the activities of relevant voluntary organisations when developing plans. The Regulations permit Category 1 responders to collaborate with other organisations in delivering the emergency planning duty.Category 1 responders also have a statutory duty to publish their emergency plans, to the extent necessary or desirable for the purpose of dealing with an emergency.Emergency planning at the sub-national levelPlanning at a multi-LRF level is different from planning at the local level. For more information on the sub-national tier, see the Arrangements in England (https://www.gov.uk/preparation-and-planning-for-emerg encies-responsibilities-of-responder- agencies-and-others#arrangements-in-england) section.Emergency planning in the devolved administrationsIt is equally important that organisations within the devolved administrations conduct effective emergency planning. The devolved administrations section below provides more detail on the extent to which the Civil Contingencies Act duties apply and their individual emergency planning arrangements.The government works closely with the Scottish, Welsh and Northern Ireland governments to promote effective emergency planning that is, as far as possible, consistent with that of the rest of the UK.Emergency planning at the UK government level
The UK government capabilities programme is the core framework through which the government is seeking to build resilience across all parts of the UK. The programme uses risk assessment over a 5-year period to identify the generic capabilities that underpin the UK’s resilience to disruptive challenges, and ensures that each of these is developed. These capabilities include dealing with mass casualties and fatalities, response to chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear incidents, provision of essential services and warning and informing the public. A full list of the current capabilities can be found in this g uide to the capabilities programme (https://www.gov.uk/preparation-and-planning-for-emerg encies-the-capabilities- programme).The government has in place a coordinated cross-governmental exercise programme covering a comprehensive range of domestic disruptive challenges, including accidents, natural disasters and acts of terrorism. The programme is designed to test rigorously the concept of operations from the coordinated central response through the range of lead government department responsibilities and the involvement of the devolved administrations, to the sub-national tier and local responders. More information is provided in the g uide to emerg ency exercises and training (https://www.gov.uk/emerg ency-planning-and-preparedness-exercises-and-training).These national processes feed into the devolved administrations, sub-national and local levels to ensure fully integrated emergency planning at all levels throughout the UK.The role of the voluntary sector in emergency planning and responseWhere appropriate, organisations should consider at an early stage in planning whether voluntary organisations may have capabilities which could assist in responding to an emergency.The voluntary sector can provide a wide range of skills and services in responding to an emergency. These include: practical support (such as first aid, transportation, or provisions for responders); psycho-social support (such as counselling and helplines); equipment (radios, medical equipment); and information services (such as public training and communications).Existing emergency planning dutiesThe Civil Contingencies Act Regulations identify 3 pieces of legislation pre-dating this Act which were introduced separately in Britain and Northern Ireland under sector-specific legislation operated by the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) and HSE Northern Ireland. These relate to major accident hazards at industrial establishments (Control of Major Accident Hazards Regulations (COMAH)), to hazardous pipelines (Pipelines Safety Regulations) and to radiation hazards (Radiation (Emergency Preparation and Public Information) Regulations (REPPIR)). These sector-specific Regulations have established multi-agency emergency planning regimes in co-operation with the operators. To avoid duplication, the Civil
does not apply to emergencies which are dealt with by these pieces of legislation.For more information on how the Act fits with other legislation see chapter 19 of ‘Emerg ency preparedness’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency- preparedness).Important documentsEmerg ency Preparedness (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency- preparedness)  Chapter 5: “Emergency planning”  Annex 5a: “Examples of generic and specific plans”  Annex 5B: “Generic plan: emergency or major incident”  Annex 5C: “Specific plan”  Annex 5D: “Example of a plan maintenance matrix for a local authority”Chapter 7 “Communicating with the public” - Contains further detail on communicating with the vulnerable and victims in an emergency  Annex 7A: “Communicating with the public: the national context “  Annex 7B: “Lead responsibility for warning and informing the public”  Annex 7C: “Checklist of suggested protocols”Chapter 14: “The role of the voluntary sector” Annex 14A: “Examples of voluntary sector activities in support of statutory services”  Home Office document Recovery: an emerg ency management guide(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/recovery-an-emerg ency-management-g uide)  Communicating risk guidance(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/communicating-risk-g uidance) Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Policy Branch (http://www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/index/making-g overnment-work/civil-contingencies.htm) - a guide to emergency planning arrangements, risk assessment and other documentation is available on this website London’s strategic emerg ency plan (http://www.london.gov.uk/priorities/london- prepared/home)Devolved administrationsThis section describes emergency preparedness and planning arrangements in the devolved administrations, where these differ from UK government and local
and its associated Regulations apply in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. More detail on the specific duties under the Act and how they apply in the Devolved Administrations can be found in chapters 2 to 8 of the guidance document‘Emerg ency preparedness’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency- preparedness).Emergency preparedness in ScotlandIn devolved areas the Scottish government is designated as the lead on relevant issues in line with the ‘lead department’ principle at the UK level. In reserved areas the Scottish government works closely with the UK government to ensure that Scottish needs are catered for.Overall responsibility for civil protection policy in Scotland sits with the Scottish Resilience Division of the Scottish government.At the local level in Scotland, 8 strategic coordinating groups based on current police force areas promote effective planning for all types of incidents in their area, involving risk assessment, making generic and specific emergency plans, engaging with the community, training, testing, exercising and reviewing.  Scottish government civil emerg encies website(http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Justice/public-safety/emerg encies)Emergency preparedness in WalesThe Welsh government (WG) or Wales Office, depending on the subject matter, is represented on relevant committees and forums within the UK government relating to civil protection. They work closely with UK government departments to ensure that UK civil protection policy and planning is tailored to Welsh needs. A dedicated team in WG supports multi-agency co-operation in Wales and engagement with the UK government on issues relating to civil protection and emergency preparedness.As in England, local resilience forums (LRFs) are the principle mechanism for multi- agency co-operation on civil protection issues. The respective Chief Constables presently chair the LRFs in the South Wales, North Wales, Dyfed-Powys and Gwent areas. The Welsh Resilience Forum (WRF) provides a national forum for multi- agency strategic advice on civil protection and emergency planning. The forum meets quarterly and is chaired by the First Minister or the Minister for Social Justice and Regeneration. Risk assessment at a pan-Wales level is undertaken by the Wales Risk Assessment Group (WRAG) reporting to the WRF.A number of other groups provide forums for discussion and co-ordination of civil protection in Wales, including: the Joint Emergency Services Group; the Wales Media Emergency Forum; and the Welsh Borders Resilience Group.
  Welsh civil emerg encies website (https://gov.wales/wales-resilience-forum)Emergency preparedness in Northern IrelandCivil contingencies in Northern Ireland are largely a devolved matter with responsibilities lying with Northern Ireland government departments. The Northern Ireland Office (NIO) in the UK government is, however, responsible for, amongst other things, policing, criminal justice and security in Northern Ireland.The Civil Contingencies Policy Branch (CCPB) in the Office of the First Minister and Deputy First Minister (OFMDFM) promotes and co-ordinates civil protection arrangements in Northern Ireland. The Northern Ireland government would normally have oversight of civil contingencies arrangements for transferred functions. The ‘lead government department’ principle applies to Northern Ireland departments as at the UK level.The Civil Contingencies Group, Northern Ireland (CCG(NI)) is a pan-Northern Ireland multi-agency forum for the development, discussion and agreement of civil protection policy. Co-ordination at local and sub-regional levels may be facilitated by a range of organisations, with police district commanders and district council chief executives taking key roles in co-ordination. Northern Ireland has its own unique constitutional and organisational structures. Unlike in Great Britain, many services are delivered on a Northern Ireland-wide (regional) basis, either by government departments or by their agencies and NDPBs.  Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Policy Branch website(http://www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/index/making-g overnment-work/civil-contingencies.htm)The devolved administrations under the Civil Contingencies Act ScotlandPart 1 of the Civil Contingencies Act applies to Scotland, with the powers it sets out residing with Scottish Ministers in line with the devolution settlement. While civil protection in Scotland is largely a devolved matter and therefore the responsibility of the Scottish government, certain responders in Scotland are subject to Part 1 of the Act, the Regulations and guidance issued by UK ministers - the Health and Safety Executive, the Maritime and Coastguard Agency and the British Transport Police.WalesThe arrangements set out in Part 1 of the Act apply in Wales. However, there are some differences in the requirements which the Regulations place on Category 1 and 2 responders in Wales because of the unique administrative arrangements in Wales. As in England, the principal mechanism for co-operation between Category 1 and 2 responders under the Act will be the local resilience forums (LRFs). The Welsh Resilience Forum (WRF) provides a national forum for multi-agency strategic advice on civil protection and emergency planning. The forum is a non-statutory advisory body.
Northern IrelandCivil contingencies in Northern Ireland are largely a devolved matter with responsibilities lying with Northern Ireland government departments. The duties of the Act apply only to a limited number of organisations which deliver functions that are not transferred. These organisations are: the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI); the Maritime and Coastguard Agency (MCA); and telecommunications operators. Because these organisations do not represent the full spectrum of response agencies in Northern Ireland, the Regulations treat these organisations in a slightly different way. In practice, it is anticipated that the PSNI, MCA and telecommunications operators in Northern Ireland will undertake their duties under the Act, but will relate to the other public service bodies listed in the Regulations in line with the arrangements in the Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Framework and by participating in Northern Ireland co-operation, co-ordination and crisis management machinery.Further informationYou can find further details on all of the above in these documents: ‘Civil Contingencies Act 2004: devolution concordat with Scottish Ministers’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act-2004-devolution-  concordat-with-scottish-ministers) ‘Civil Contingencies Act 2004: concordat between the UK government and the Welsh government’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act- 2004-concordat-between-the-uk-g overnment-and-the-welsh-g overnment) ‘Emerg ency preparedness - chapter 10: Scotland’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61033/Chap  ter-10-Scotland-amends-10112011.pdf) ‘Chapter 11: Wales’(https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61034/Ch  apter-11-Wales-amends-10112011.pdf) ‘Chapter 12: Northern Ireland’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61035/Ch  apter-12-Northern-ireland-amends-10112011.pdf)Co-operation for emergency preparednessCo-operation between organisations is fundamental to emergency preparedness. A large number of organisations will need to co-operate when responding to emergencies, so it is right that organisations co-operate closely in preparedness and planning as well. The government aims to ensure all organisations co-operate in emergency preparedness, and robust co-operation arrangements are in place at every level. This section outlines who should co-operate, and how. It describes co- operation arrangements in place locally and points out the emphasis placed on co- operation within the Civil Contingencies Act.
Who should co-operate?Organisations will need to co-operate closely with any other organisation who would be involved in responding to and recovering from an emergency which affects that organisation.That will mean not just partner organisations, but contractors, and voluntary organisations who may be involved in the response. Organisations should consider their need to co-operate with a wide range of public (for example, local authorities, emergency services), commercial (for example, other businesses) and voluntary organisations (like charities and voluntary response organisations).What co-operation?Every-day co-operation between organisations is the lifeblood of civil protection work- through visits and seminars, phone calls and emails, and joint projects including exercises.Many organisations are well used to co-operating in both preparing for and responding to emergencies. The emergency services, for instance, obviously co- ordinate closely when responding to emergencies. They also co-operate closely in policy and planning, and undertake joint training and exercises. Likewise, utilities companies have close links with local authorities and the emergency services.Organisations should aim to co-operate bilaterally and attend multi-agency groups and forums to discuss co-ordinated and sometimes joint approaches to the essential aspects of emergency preparedness - risk assessment, emergency planning, business continuity management, and arrangements to warn and inform the public. Such forums should also consider producing multi-agency plans and other documents, including protocols and agreements, and the co-ordination of multi- agency exercises and other training events.Co-operation at the local level under the Civil Contingencies ActThe principle mechanism for multi-agency co-operation at the local level is the local resilience forum (LRF) (https://www.gov.uk/local-resilience-forums-contact-details). LRFs are generally based on local police areas, and bring together all the organisations who have a duty to co-operate under the Civil Contingencies Act, along with others who would be involved in the response.The purpose of the LRF process is to ensure effective delivery of those duties under the Act that need to be developed in a multi-agency environment.Co-operation at the sub-national level
Some co-operation and co-ordination takes place at multi-LRF level in England, which brings together representatives of local responders, and is supported by resilience advisers from DCLG-RED (https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/working- with-local-partners-to-plan-for-and-respond-to-emerg encies), to work together to address larger-scale civil protection issues.Co-operation at the devolved administration levelSimilar co-operation and co-ordination arrangements are in place in the devolved administrations. For instance, in Scotland strategic co-ordinating groups are similar to LRFs, and the Scottish Emergencies Co-ordinating Committee (SECC) provides co-ordination and determines the national strategy for the development of civil protection. In Wales the Welsh Government (WG) provides that co-ordination, and a Wales Resilience Forum brings together local responders and UK government bodies. In Northern Ireland the Civil Contingencies Group, Northern Ireland (CCG(NI)) is the forum for the development, discussion and agreement of Civil Protection Policy for the NI public services.Co-operation at the UK levelGovernment departments who are responsible for contingency planning and response within their own areas (for example, infectious diseases falls to Department of Health; fuel disruptions falls to Business Innovation and Skills), work closely together. The Civil Contingencies Secretariat (CCS) in the Cabinet Office co- ordinates their work to enhance the country’s resilience to the full range of emergencies.Central government works very closely with the devolved administrations, local authorities and emergency services. Officials attend the full range of multi-agency forums and regularly go out to visit practitioners.Arrangements in EnglandThe Department for Communities and Local Government - Resilience and Emerg encies Division (DCLG-RED) (https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/working- with-local-partners-to-plan-for-and-respond-to-emerg encies) provides the platform formulti-LRF co-operation and planning in emergency preparedness where this would add value by improving co-ordination between local and central response. This section outlines the arrangements in England for emergency preparedness at this level.Co-operation at the sub-national levelCo-operation at the sub-national level in England is a key element of the UK’s civil
protection framework. The sub-national tier is not a judgement on the local level; rather, it is a mechanism for improving co-ordination and communication into and out from the centre of government.Co-operation at the sub-national level involves the representatives of local responders and central government bodies working together to address larger-scale civil protection issues. Co-operation may take place within a multi-agency setting or directly between 2 or more responders.Role of the sub-national tierThe function of the sub-national tier is to improve co-ordination and communication between central government and local responders and other organisations and to ensure that areas are prepared to respond to events which would affect most or all of the area or which could overwhelm any locality. The successful delivery of the sub-national resilience capability rests critically on local responders and other organisations and central government working together in partnership to ensure effective and co-ordinated planning and response.Opportunities to collaborate and co-operate at a multi-LRF LevelPlanning for and responding to large-scale emergencies cannot be done in isolation in each local resilience forum (LRF). Mechanisms for cross-boundary working and relationship building are essential as some emergencies will overwhelm localities’ resources and/or boundaries.Collaboration and co-operation between localities in England is a well-established and critical way of working in civil contingencies. It is a mechanism:  for enabling pooling of resources to achieve agreed mutual aims and outcomes  for avoiding duplication of work between neighbouring LRFs or avoiding activity by an LRF that may be counter-productive to a neighbouring LRF to support planning and exercising for emergencies that cross local resilience areas or which could overwhelm a locality  that enables individual responders, local forums and central government to work together to address large-scale civil protection issuesDCLG-RED works directly with LRFs, supporting collaboration and co-operation in planning for wide-area high-impact events affecting more than one locality. RED has allocated Resilience Advisers to each LRF so that LRFs have named contacts with which to build working relationships. For more information, see chapter 16 of‘Emerg ency preparedness’(https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61039/Chapter-16-final-post-consultCCS_amends_16042012.pdf) on collaboration and co-operation between LRFs.
Published 20 February 2013All content is available under the Open GovernmentLicence v3.0, except where otherwise stated	© Crown copyright
GuidancePreparation and planning for emergencies: responsibilities of responder agencies and othersHow the government prepares and plans for emergencies,working nationally, locally and co-operatively to ensure civil protection in the UK.From: Cabinet Office (/government/organisations/cabinet-office)Published 20 February 2013The Civil Contingencies ActThe Civil Contingencies Act (http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2004/36/contents), and accompanying non-legislative measures, delivers a single framework for civil protection in the UK. The Act is separated into 2 substantive parts: local arrangements for civil protection (Part 1); and emergency powers (Part 2).Part 1Part 1 of the Act and supporting Regulations and statutory guidance ‘Emerg ency preparedness’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency-preparedness) establish a clear set of roles and responsibilities for those involved in emergency preparation and response at the local level. The Act divides local responders into 2
categories, imposing a different set of duties on each.Those in Category 1 are organisations at the core of the response to most emergencies (the emergency services, local authorities, NHS bodies). Category 1 responders are subject to the full set of civil protection duties. They will be required to:  assess the risk of emergencies occurring and use this to inform contingency planning  put in place emergency plans  put in place business continuity management arrangements  put in place arrangements to make information available to the public about civil protection matters and maintain arrangements to warn, inform and advise the public in the event of an emergency  share information with other local responders to enhance co-ordination  co-operate with other local responders to enhance co-ordination and efficiency  provide advice and assistance to businesses and voluntary organisations aboutbusiness continuity management (local authorities only)Category 2 organisations (the Health and Safety Executive, transport and utility companies) are ‘co-operating bodies’. They are less likely to be involved in the heart of planning work, but will be heavily involved in incidents that affect their own sector. Category 2 responders have a lesser set of duties - co-operating and sharing relevant information with other Category 1 and 2 responders.Category 1 and 2 organisations come together to form ‘local resilience forums’ (based on police areas) which will help co-ordination and co-operation between responders at the local level. For more on what LRFs do and contact details for each, see the guide on ‘Local resilience forums: contact details’ (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/local-resilience-forums-contact-details).The bulk of Part 1 of the Act was brought into force in November 2005 (the duty on local authorities to provide advice and assistance to business and voluntary organisations about business continuity management commenced in May 2006).Part 2Part 2 of the Act updates the 1920 Emergency Powers Act to reflect the developments in the intervening years and the current and future risk profile. It allows for the making of temporary special legislation (emergency regulations) to help deal with the most serious of emergencies. The use of emergency powers is a last resort option and planning arrangements at the local level should not assume that emergency powers will be made available. Their use is subject to a robust set of safeguards - they can only be deployed in exceptional circumstances.
Part 2 of the Act was brought into force in December 2004. See also: Civil Contingencies Act Enhancement programme (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act-enhancement-  programme-programme-initiation-document) Category 2 Responders: overview of sectors and emerg ency planning arrangements (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act- category-2-responders-overview-of-sectors-and-emerg  ency-planning-arrangements) Examples of good practice in public sector business continuity management (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/examples-of-g ood-practice-in-public-sector- business-continuity-management-bcm-methodologies) Examples of good practice in public sector business continuity management: exercising (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/examples-of-g ood-practice-in- public-sector-business-continuity-management-exercising) Examples of good practice in public sector business continuity management - awareness and training (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/examples-of-g ood- practice-in-public-sector-business-continuity-management-bcm-awareness-and-training) Communicating with the public: the 10 step cycle (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/communicating-with-the-public-the-ten-step-  cycle) Expectations and indicators of good practice set for category 1 and 2 responders (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/expectations-and-indicators-of-g ood-practice- set-for-category-1-and-2-responders)Emergency planningThe government aims to ensure all organisations have effective, well-practiced emergency plans in place. This section outlines what we mean by emergency planning, different types of plans, the importance of exercising them and training key staff, and the kind of factors which planners should consider.What is emergency planning?Emergency planning should aim where possible to prevent emergencies occurring, and when they do occur, good planning should reduce, control or mitigate the effects of the emergency. It is a systematic and ongoing process which should evolve as lessons are learnt and circumstances change.Emergency planning should be viewed as part of a cycle of activities beginning with establishing a risk profile to help determine what should be the priorities for developing plans and ending with review and revision, which then re-starts the
whole cycle. Plans should focus on at least 3 key groupings of people - the vulnerable, victims (including survivors, family and friends) and responder personnel.Vulnerable people may be less able to help themselves in an emergency than self- reliant people. Those who are vulnerable will vary depending on the nature of the emergency, but plans should consider: those with mobility difficulties (those with physical disabilities or pregnant women); those with mental health difficulties; and others who are dependent, such as children.Victims of an emergency - which includes not only those directly affected but also those who, as family and friends, suffer bereavement or the anxiety of not knowing what has happened.Responder personnel should also be considered. Plans sometimes place unrealistic expectations on management and personnel. Organisations should ensure their plans give due consideration to the welfare of their own personnel. For instance, the emergency services have health and safety procedures which determine shift patterns and check for levels of stress.Organisations should aim to maintain plans which cover 3 different areas:Plans for preventing an emergencyIn some circumstances there will be a short period before an emergency occurs when it might be avoided by prompt or decisive actionPlans for reducing, controlling or mitigating the effects of an emergency The main bulk of planning should consider how to minimise the effects of an emergency, starting with the impact of the event (ie their alerting procedures) and looking at remedial actions that can be taken to reduce effects. For example, theemergency services may be able to stem the emergency at source by fighting fires, combating the release of toxic chemicals or the extent of floods. The evacuation of people may be a direct intervention which can mitigate the effects of some emergencies. Recovery plans should also be developed to reduce the effects of the emergency and ensure long term recovery. The National Recovery Guidance (http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/content/national-recovery-g uidance) provides more detail on recovery issues.Plans for taking other action in connection with an emergencyNot all actions to be taken in preparing for an emergency are directly concerned with controlling, reducing or mitigating its effects. Emergency planning should look beyond the immediate response and long term recovery issues and look also at secondary impacts. For example, the wave of reaction to an emergency can be quite overwhelming in terms of media attention and public response. Plans may need to consider how to handle this increased interest.As obvious as it sounds, emergency plans should include procedures for determining whether an emergency has occurred, and when to activate the plan in
response to an emergency. This should include identifying an appropriately trained person who will take the decision, in consultation with others, on when an emergency has occurred.The maintenance of plans involves more than just their preparation. Once a plan has been prepared, it must be maintained systematically to ensure it remains up-to-date and fit for purpose at any time if an emergency occurs.It may be that multiple organisations can develop a joint emergency plan where the partners agree that, for a successful combined response, they need a formal set of procedures governing them all. For example, in the event that evacuation is required, the police would need carefully pre-planned co-operation from various other organisations such as fire and ambulance services and the local authority, as well as involvement of others such as transport organisations.Types of emergency plansIt may be important for an organisation to have more than one emergency plan. It is often the case that organisations have generic plans and more specific plans.Generic plans are the core plan which enables the organisation to respond to, and recover from a wide range of possible emergencies. They should include procedures which would be used in all instances for ensuring the welfare of staff and the provision of sufficient resources for responding to the emergency.Specific plans relate either to a particular emergency or kind of emergency, or to a specific site or location. Specific plans are a detailed set of arrangements designed to go beyond the generic arrangements when they are likely to prove insufficient in a particular case. A specific plan usually builds on a generic plan. For example, organisations which deal with hazardous materials may need specific plans for responding to a chemical spillage. Some organisations may have specific plans for conducting specific functions in response to an emergency. For instance, the emergency services will have plans for mass evacuation of an urban area and mass decontamination. Organisations should use their risk assessments to decide whether specific plans are necessary or desirable.Exercising plans and training staffOrganisations should test the effectiveness of their emergency plans by carrying out exercises, and should ensure that staff involved in the planning for or response to an emergency receive appropriate training. Training plans should also consider other people who have a role in the emergency plans such as contractors and civil protection partners. The plans themselves should explicitly identify the nature and frequency of training and exercising required. The guide Emerg ency planning and preparedness: exercises and training (https://www.gov.uk/emerg ency-planning-and- preparedness-exercises-and-training) provides more information.
Emergency planning at the local levelEmergency planning is at the heart of the civil protection duty on Category 1 responders under the Civil Contingencies Act. The Act requires Category 1 responders to maintain plans for preventing emergencies; reducing, controlling or mitigating the effects of emergencies; and taking other action in the event of emergencies. These should draw on risk assessments and should have regard for the arrangements to warn, inform and advise the public at the time of an emerg ency (https://www.gov.uk/preparation-and-planning-for-emerg encies-the-capabilities- programme#warning-and-informing-the-public).The Regulations require plans to contain a procedure for determining whether an emergency has occurred; provision for training key staff; and provision for exercising the plan to ensure it is effective. Procedures should also be put in place to ensure that the plan is reviewed periodically and kept up to date.Category 1 responders should involve Category 2 responders - and other organisations which are not subject to the Act’s requirements - as appropriate throughout the planning process. Category 1 responders are specifically required to have regard to the activities of relevant voluntary organisations when developing plans. The Regulations permit Category 1 responders to collaborate with other organisations in delivering the emergency planning duty.Category 1 responders also have a statutory duty to publish their emergency plans, to the extent necessary or desirable for the purpose of dealing with an emergency.Emergency planning at the sub-national levelPlanning at a multi-LRF level is different from planning at the local level. For more information on the sub-national tier, see the Arrangements in England (https://www.gov.uk/preparation-and-planning-for-emerg encies-responsibilities-of-responder- agencies-and-others#arrangements-in-england) section.Emergency planning in the devolved administrationsIt is equally important that organisations within the devolved administrations conduct effective emergency planning. The devolved administrations section below provides more detail on the extent to which the Civil Contingencies Act duties apply and their individual emergency planning arrangements.The government works closely with the Scottish, Welsh and Northern Ireland governments to promote effective emergency planning that is, as far as possible, consistent with that of the rest of the UK.Emergency planning at the UK government level
The UK government capabilities programme is the core framework through which the government is seeking to build resilience across all parts of the UK. The programme uses risk assessment over a 5-year period to identify the generic capabilities that underpin the UK’s resilience to disruptive challenges, and ensures that each of these is developed. These capabilities include dealing with mass casualties and fatalities, response to chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear incidents, provision of essential services and warning and informing the public. A full list of the current capabilities can be found in this g uide to the capabilities programme (https://www.gov.uk/preparation-and-planning-for-emerg encies-the-capabilities- programme).The government has in place a coordinated cross-governmental exercise programme covering a comprehensive range of domestic disruptive challenges, including accidents, natural disasters and acts of terrorism. The programme is designed to test rigorously the concept of operations from the coordinated central response through the range of lead government department responsibilities and the involvement of the devolved administrations, to the sub-national tier and local responders. More information is provided in the g uide to emerg ency exercises and training (https://www.gov.uk/emerg ency-planning-and-preparedness-exercises-and-training).These national processes feed into the devolved administrations, sub-national and local levels to ensure fully integrated emergency planning at all levels throughout the UK.The role of the voluntary sector in emergency planning and responseWhere appropriate, organisations should consider at an early stage in planning whether voluntary organisations may have capabilities which could assist in responding to an emergency.The voluntary sector can provide a wide range of skills and services in responding to an emergency. These include: practical support (such as first aid, transportation, or provisions for responders); psycho-social support (such as counselling and helplines); equipment (radios, medical equipment); and information services (such as public training and communications).Existing emergency planning dutiesThe Civil Contingencies Act Regulations identify 3 pieces of legislation pre-dating this Act which were introduced separately in Britain and Northern Ireland under sector-specific legislation operated by the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) and HSE Northern Ireland. These relate to major accident hazards at industrial establishments (Control of Major Accident Hazards Regulations (COMAH)), to hazardous pipelines (Pipelines Safety Regulations) and to radiation hazards (Radiation (Emergency Preparation and Public Information) Regulations (REPPIR)). These sector-specific Regulations have established multi-agency emergency planning regimes in co-operation with the operators. To avoid duplication, the Civil
does not apply to emergencies which are dealt with by these pieces of legislation.For more information on how the Act fits with other legislation see chapter 19 of ‘Emerg ency preparedness’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency- preparedness).Important documentsEmerg ency Preparedness (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency- preparedness)  Chapter 5: “Emergency planning”  Annex 5a: “Examples of generic and specific plans”  Annex 5B: “Generic plan: emergency or major incident”  Annex 5C: “Specific plan”  Annex 5D: “Example of a plan maintenance matrix for a local authority”Chapter 7 “Communicating with the public” - Contains further detail on communicating with the vulnerable and victims in an emergency  Annex 7A: “Communicating with the public: the national context “  Annex 7B: “Lead responsibility for warning and informing the public”  Annex 7C: “Checklist of suggested protocols”Chapter 14: “The role of the voluntary sector” Annex 14A: “Examples of voluntary sector activities in support of statutory services”  Home Office document Recovery: an emerg ency management guide(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/recovery-an-emerg ency-management-g uide)  Communicating risk guidance(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/communicating-risk-g uidance) Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Policy Branch (http://www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/index/making-g overnment-work/civil-contingencies.htm) - a guide to emergency planning arrangements, risk assessment and other documentation is available on this website London’s strategic emerg ency plan (http://www.london.gov.uk/priorities/london- prepared/home)Devolved administrationsThis section describes emergency preparedness and planning arrangements in the devolved administrations, where these differ from UK government and local
and its associated Regulations apply in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. More detail on the specific duties under the Act and how they apply in the Devolved Administrations can be found in chapters 2 to 8 of the guidance document‘Emerg ency preparedness’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emerg ency- preparedness).Emergency preparedness in ScotlandIn devolved areas the Scottish government is designated as the lead on relevant issues in line with the ‘lead department’ principle at the UK level. In reserved areas the Scottish government works closely with the UK government to ensure that Scottish needs are catered for.Overall responsibility for civil protection policy in Scotland sits with the Scottish Resilience Division of the Scottish government.At the local level in Scotland, 8 strategic coordinating groups based on current police force areas promote effective planning for all types of incidents in their area, involving risk assessment, making generic and specific emergency plans, engaging with the community, training, testing, exercising and reviewing.  Scottish government civil emerg encies website(http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Justice/public-safety/emerg encies)Emergency preparedness in WalesThe Welsh government (WG) or Wales Office, depending on the subject matter, is represented on relevant committees and forums within the UK government relating to civil protection. They work closely with UK government departments to ensure that UK civil protection policy and planning is tailored to Welsh needs. A dedicated team in WG supports multi-agency co-operation in Wales and engagement with the UK government on issues relating to civil protection and emergency preparedness.As in England, local resilience forums (LRFs) are the principle mechanism for multi- agency co-operation on civil protection issues. The respective Chief Constables presently chair the LRFs in the South Wales, North Wales, Dyfed-Powys and Gwent areas. The Welsh Resilience Forum (WRF) provides a national forum for multi- agency strategic advice on civil protection and emergency planning. The forum meets quarterly and is chaired by the First Minister or the Minister for Social Justice and Regeneration. Risk assessment at a pan-Wales level is undertaken by the Wales Risk Assessment Group (WRAG) reporting to the WRF.A number of other groups provide forums for discussion and co-ordination of civil protection in Wales, including: the Joint Emergency Services Group; the Wales Media Emergency Forum; and the Welsh Borders Resilience Group.
  Welsh civil emerg encies website (https://gov.wales/wales-resilience-forum)Emergency preparedness in Northern IrelandCivil contingencies in Northern Ireland are largely a devolved matter with responsibilities lying with Northern Ireland government departments. The Northern Ireland Office (NIO) in the UK government is, however, responsible for, amongst other things, policing, criminal justice and security in Northern Ireland.The Civil Contingencies Policy Branch (CCPB) in the Office of the First Minister and Deputy First Minister (OFMDFM) promotes and co-ordinates civil protection arrangements in Northern Ireland. The Northern Ireland government would normally have oversight of civil contingencies arrangements for transferred functions. The ‘lead government department’ principle applies to Northern Ireland departments as at the UK level.The Civil Contingencies Group, Northern Ireland (CCG(NI)) is a pan-Northern Ireland multi-agency forum for the development, discussion and agreement of civil protection policy. Co-ordination at local and sub-regional levels may be facilitated by a range of organisations, with police district commanders and district council chief executives taking key roles in co-ordination. Northern Ireland has its own unique constitutional and organisational structures. Unlike in Great Britain, many services are delivered on a Northern Ireland-wide (regional) basis, either by government departments or by their agencies and NDPBs.  Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Policy Branch website(http://www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/index/making-g overnment-work/civil-contingencies.htm)The devolved administrations under the Civil Contingencies Act ScotlandPart 1 of the Civil Contingencies Act applies to Scotland, with the powers it sets out residing with Scottish Ministers in line with the devolution settlement. While civil protection in Scotland is largely a devolved matter and therefore the responsibility of the Scottish government, certain responders in Scotland are subject to Part 1 of the Act, the Regulations and guidance issued by UK ministers - the Health and Safety Executive, the Maritime and Coastguard Agency and the British Transport Police.WalesThe arrangements set out in Part 1 of the Act apply in Wales. However, there are some differences in the requirements which the Regulations place on Category 1 and 2 responders in Wales because of the unique administrative arrangements in Wales. As in England, the principal mechanism for co-operation between Category 1 and 2 responders under the Act will be the local resilience forums (LRFs). The Welsh Resilience Forum (WRF) provides a national forum for multi-agency strategic advice on civil protection and emergency planning. The forum is a non-statutory advisory body.
Northern IrelandCivil contingencies in Northern Ireland are largely a devolved matter with responsibilities lying with Northern Ireland government departments. The duties of the Act apply only to a limited number of organisations which deliver functions that are not transferred. These organisations are: the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI); the Maritime and Coastguard Agency (MCA); and telecommunications operators. Because these organisations do not represent the full spectrum of response agencies in Northern Ireland, the Regulations treat these organisations in a slightly different way. In practice, it is anticipated that the PSNI, MCA and telecommunications operators in Northern Ireland will undertake their duties under the Act, but will relate to the other public service bodies listed in the Regulations in line with the arrangements in the Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Framework and by participating in Northern Ireland co-operation, co-ordination and crisis management machinery.Further informationYou can find further details on all of the above in these documents: ‘Civil Contingencies Act 2004: devolution concordat with Scottish Ministers’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act-2004-devolution-  concordat-with-scottish-ministers) ‘Civil Contingencies Act 2004: concordat between the UK government and the Welsh government’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-contingencies-act- 2004-concordat-between-the-uk-g overnment-and-the-welsh-g overnment) ‘Emerg ency preparedness - chapter 10: Scotland’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61033/Chap  ter-10-Scotland-amends-10112011.pdf) ‘Chapter 11: Wales’(https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61034/Ch  apter-11-Wales-amends-10112011.pdf) ‘Chapter 12: Northern Ireland’ (https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61035/Ch  apter-12-Northern-ireland-amends-10112011.pdf)Co-operation for emergency preparednessCo-operation between organisations is fundamental to emergency preparedness. A large number of organisations will need to co-operate when responding to emergencies, so it is right that organisations co-operate closely in preparedness and planning as well. The government aims to ensure all organisations co-operate in emergency preparedness, and robust co-operation arrangements are in place at every level. This section outlines who should co-operate, and how. It describes co- operation arrangements in place locally and points out the emphasis placed on co- operation within the Civil Contingencies Act.
Who should co-operate?Organisations will need to co-operate closely with any other organisation who would be involved in responding to and recovering from an emergency which affects that organisation.That will mean not just partner organisations, but contractors, and voluntary organisations who may be involved in the response. Organisations should consider their need to co-operate with a wide range of public (for example, local authorities, emergency services), commercial (for example, other businesses) and voluntary organisations (like charities and voluntary response organisations).What co-operation?Every-day co-operation between organisations is the lifeblood of civil protection work- through visits and seminars, phone calls and emails, and joint projects including exercises.Many organisations are well used to co-operating in both preparing for and responding to emergencies. The emergency services, for instance, obviously co- ordinate closely when responding to emergencies. They also co-operate closely in policy and planning, and undertake joint training and exercises. Likewise, utilities companies have close links with local authorities and the emergency services.Organisations should aim to co-operate bilaterally and attend multi-agency groups and forums to discuss co-ordinated and sometimes joint approaches to the essential aspects of emergency preparedness - risk assessment, emergency planning, business continuity management, and arrangements to warn and inform the public. Such forums should also consider producing multi-agency plans and other documents, including protocols and agreements, and the co-ordination of multi- agency exercises and other training events.Co-operation at the local level under the Civil Contingencies ActThe principle mechanism for multi-agency co-operation at the local level is the local resilience forum (LRF) (https://www.gov.uk/local-resilience-forums-contact-details). LRFs are generally based on local police areas, and bring together all the organisations who have a duty to co-operate under the Civil Contingencies Act, along with others who would be involved in the response.The purpose of the LRF process is to ensure effective delivery of those duties under the Act that need to be developed in a multi-agency environment.Co-operation at the sub-national level
Some co-operation and co-ordination takes place at multi-LRF level in England, which brings together representatives of local responders, and is supported by resilience advisers from DCLG-RED (https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/working- with-local-partners-to-plan-for-and-respond-to-emerg encies), to work together to address larger-scale civil protection issues.Co-operation at the devolved administration levelSimilar co-operation and co-ordination arrangements are in place in the devolved administrations. For instance, in Scotland strategic co-ordinating groups are similar to LRFs, and the Scottish Emergencies Co-ordinating Committee (SECC) provides co-ordination and determines the national strategy for the development of civil protection. In Wales the Welsh Government (WG) provides that co-ordination, and a Wales Resilience Forum brings together local responders and UK government bodies. In Northern Ireland the Civil Contingencies Group, Northern Ireland (CCG(NI)) is the forum for the development, discussion and agreement of Civil Protection Policy for the NI public services.Co-operation at the UK levelGovernment departments who are responsible for contingency planning and response within their own areas (for example, infectious diseases falls to Department of Health; fuel disruptions falls to Business Innovation and Skills), work closely together. The Civil Contingencies Secretariat (CCS) in the Cabinet Office co- ordinates their work to enhance the country’s resilience to the full range of emergencies.Central government works very closely with the devolved administrations, local authorities and emergency services. Officials attend the full range of multi-agency forums and regularly go out to visit practitioners.Arrangements in EnglandThe Department for Communities and Local Government - Resilience and Emerg encies Division (DCLG-RED) (https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/working- with-local-partners-to-plan-for-and-respond-to-emerg encies) provides the platform formulti-LRF co-operation and planning in emergency preparedness where this would add value by improving co-ordination between local and central response. This section outlines the arrangements in England for emergency preparedness at this level.Co-operation at the sub-national levelCo-operation at the sub-national level in England is a key element of the UK’s civil
protection framework. The sub-national tier is not a judgement on the local level; rather, it is a mechanism for improving co-ordination and communication into and out from the centre of government.Co-operation at the sub-national level involves the representatives of local responders and central government bodies working together to address larger-scale civil protection issues. Co-operation may take place within a multi-agency setting or directly between 2 or more responders.Role of the sub-national tierThe function of the sub-national tier is to improve co-ordination and communication between central government and local responders and other organisations and to ensure that areas are prepared to respond to events which would affect most or all of the area or which could overwhelm any locality. The successful delivery of the sub-national resilience capability rests critically on local responders and other organisations and central government working together in partnership to ensure effective and co-ordinated planning and response.Opportunities to collaborate and co-operate at a multi-LRF LevelPlanning for and responding to large-scale emergencies cannot be done in isolation in each local resilience forum (LRF). Mechanisms for cross-boundary working and relationship building are essential as some emergencies will overwhelm localities’ resources and/or boundaries.Collaboration and co-operation between localities in England is a well-established and critical way of working in civil contingencies. It is a mechanism:  for enabling pooling of resources to achieve agreed mutual aims and outcomes  for avoiding duplication of work between neighbouring LRFs or avoiding activity by an LRF that may be counter-productive to a neighbouring LRF to support planning and exercising for emergencies that cross local resilience areas or which could overwhelm a locality  that enables individual responders, local forums and central government to work together to address large-scale civil protection issuesDCLG-RED works directly with LRFs, supporting collaboration and co-operation in planning for wide-area high-impact events affecting more than one locality. RED has allocated Resilience Advisers to each LRF so that LRFs have named contacts with which to build working relationships. For more information, see chapter 16 of‘Emerg ency preparedness’(https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61039/Chapter-16-final-post-consultCCS_amends_16042012.pdf) on collaboration and co-operation between LRFs.
Published 20 February 2013All content is available under the Open GovernmentLicence v3.0, except where otherwise stated	© Crown copyright
Guidance999 and 112: the UK's national emergency numbers999 and 112 is the national emergency response service in theUK. 112 is the pan-European equivalent to 999 and can be used in the UK.From: Department for Science, Innovation and Technology  (/government/organisations/department-for-science-innovation-and-technology), Department of Health and Social Care (/government/organisations/department-of-health and-social-care) and Home Office (/government/organisations/home-office)Published 12 August 2021Last updated 24 October 2024 —Calling for assistanceCalls made using 999 or 112 are identified and prioritised by the communications providers and forwarded to, and then answered by, call handling agents in one of 7 call-handling centres. The call-handling centres are owned by BT Plc, who operate the service on behalf of all the communications providers (mobile, fixed line and broadband). An agent at one of the BT Plc call-handling centres responds with “emergency, which service?”. The geographic location of the caller, which is normally automatically available, enables the call to be transferred to the relevant geographically located emergency service control room.Ofcom, the independent communications regulator, oversees regulation of the
telecommunications aspects of the 999-112 service through the General Conditions of Entitlement (https://www.ofcom.org .uk/phones-telecoms-and-internet/information-for- industry/telecoms-competition-regulation/general-conditions-of-entitlement).The statistics - 202341.9 million999/112 calls a year, of which:79%from mobile15%from landline134,000eCalls (included in mobile %)Service	Percentage of callsPolice	57%Ambulance	40%Fire	3%Coastguard	<1%7 BT call centres.142 local emergency services control rooms.
The 999-112 Liaison CommitteeTechnical and operational oversight of the Service is provided by the 999-112 Liaison Committee, hosted by the Department for Science Innovation and Technology (DSIT), previously Department for Digital, Culture Media & Sport (DCMS).The Committee represents all organisations that have a role to play in delivering and managing the 999-112 service, these include: The Home Office, Department for Health & Social Care, the emergency services, Ofcom as the telecommunications regulatory body and the fixed and mobile communications providers.The Committee also oversees sub-groups responsible for specific areas such as access to the service by vulnerable members of society, such as those with hearing impairments and the role played by emergency calls activated by smartphones. The Committee also has responsibility for the Code of Practice for the Public Emergency Call Service (PECS) between communications providers and the emergency services. This document outlines the key roles and responsibilities of stakeholders involved in the conveyance of emergency calls from caller to the relevant emergency service.Who to contact for more informationEnquiries regarding Police and Fire - please contact the Home Office: public.enquiries@homeoffice.gov.ukEnquiries regarding Ambulance - please contact the Department of Health & Social Care: dhsc.publicenquiries@dhsc.gov.ukEnquiries regarding HM Coastguard - please contact the Department for Transport via this form (https://www.smartsurvey.co.uk/s/contact-department-for-transport/).Enquiries regarding 999/112 connections or BT Call Handler queries - please contact the Department for Science Innovation and Technology: correspondence@dsit.gov.uk.Published 12 August 2021Last updated 24 October 2024 + show all updates
All content is available under the Open GovernmentLicence v3.0, except where otherwise stated	© Crown copyright
offices and shops
  Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:Online www.tsoshop.co.ukMail, Telephone, Fax & E-mailTSOPO Box 29, Norwich, NR3 1GNTelephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522Fax orders: 0870 600 5533E-mail: customer.services@tso.co.uk Textphone: 0870 240 3701TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited AgentsPublished for HM Government under licence from the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.© Crown Copyright 2006 All rights reserved.ISBN 978 185112815 0You may re-use this document/publication (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/ doc/open-government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 4DU; or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.Originally published by the Department for Communities and Local Government, reprinted (from previous artwork supplied) by The Stationery Office, January 2015This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/publications rinted in the United Kingdom for The Stationery OfficeJ3026738  C1  04/15
ContentsHow to use this guide	2Preface	3Introduction	4Part 1 Fire risk assessment	9Step 1 Identify fire hazards	12Step 2 Identify people at risk	14Step 3 Evaluate, remove, reduce and protect from risk	15Step 4 Record, plan, inform, instruct and train	30Step 5 Review	36Part 2 Further guidance on fire risk assessment and fire precautions	39Section 1 Further guidance on fire risks and preventative measures	40Section 2 Further guidance on fire-detection and warning systems	53Section 3 Further guidance on firefighting equipment and facilities	57Section 4 Further guidance on escape routes	63Section 5 Further guidance on emergency escape lighting	100Section 6 Further guidance on signs and notices	102Section 7 Further guidance on recording, planning, informing,instructing and training	105Section 8 Quality assurance of fire protection equipment and installation	113Appendix A Example fire safety maintenance checklist	114Appendix B Technical information on fire-resisting separation, fire doorsand door fastenings118Appendix C Historic buildings126Appendix D Glossary128References133Further reading137Index1391
How to use this guideThis guide is divided into two parts:ï Part 1 Explains what fire risk assessment is and how you might go about it. Fire risk assessment should be the foundation for all the fire precautions in your premises.ï Part 2 Provides further guidance on fire precautions. The information is provided for you and others to dip into during your fire risk assessment or when you are reviewing your precautions.The appendices provide example checklists, some detailed technical information on fire-resisting elements and advice on historic buildings.This guide is one of a series of guides listed on the back cover. The rest of this introduction explains how the law applies.Technical terms are explained in the glossary and references to other publications listed at the end of the publication are identified by a superscript number in the text.In this guide reference is made to British Standards and standards provided by other bodies. The standards referred to are intended for guidance only and other standards could be used. Reference to any particular standard is not intended to confer a presumption of conformity with the requirements of the Regulatory Reform (Fire Safety) Order 2005 (the Order)1.The level of necessary safety (or service) must be dictated by the findings of your risk assessment so you may need to do more or less than that specified in any particular standard referred to. You must be prepared to show that what you have done complies with any requirements or prohibitions of the Order1 irrespective of whether you have relied on a particular standard.A full list of references, e.g.1, can be found at the back of this book.2
PrefaceThis guidance gives advice on how to avoid fires and how to ensure people’s safety if a fire does start. Why should you read it? Because:ï Fire kills. In 2004 (England and Wales) fire and rescue services attended over 33,400 fires in non-domestic buildings. These fires killed 38 people and injured over 1,300.ï Fire costs money. The costs of a serious fire can be high and afterwards many businesses do not reopen. In 2004, the costs as a consequence of fire, including property damage, human casualties and lost business, were estimated at£2.5 billion.This guide applies to England and Wales only. It does not set prescriptive standards, but provides recommendations and guidance for use when assessing the adequacy of fire precautions in offices and shops. Other fire risk assessment methods may be equally valid to comply with fire safety law. The guide also provides recommendations for the fire safety management of the premises.Your existing fire safety arrangements may not be the same as the recommendations used in this guide but, as long as you can demonstrate that they meet an equivalent standard of fire safety, they are likely to be acceptable. If you decide that your existing arrangements are not satisfactory there may be other ways to comply with fire safety law. This means there is no obligation to adopt any particular solution in this guide if you prefer to meet the relevant requirement in some other way.Where the building has been recently constructed or significantly altered, the fire detection and warning arrangements, escape routes and facilities for the fire and rescue service should have been designed, constructed and installed in accordance with current building regulations. In such cases, it is likely that these measures will be satisfactory as long as they are being properly maintained and no significant increase in risk has been introduced.In addition, earlier legislation, including local authorities acts may have imposed additional requirements for fire precautions in large offices and shops.This guide should not be used to design fire safety in new buildings. Where alterations are proposed to existing offices and shops, they may be subject to building regulations. However, it can be used to develop the fire safety strategy for the building.3
IntroductionWHO SHOULD USE THIS GUIDE?This guide is for all employers, managers, occupiers and owners of offices and shops. Details of other guides in the series are listed on the back cover. It tells you about how you might comply with fire safety law, helps you to carry out a fire risk assessment and identify the general fire precautions you need to have in place.This guide is intended for premises where the main use of the building or partof the building is an office or shop. It may also be suitable for the individual units within other complexes, although consultation with the other managers will be necessary as part of an integrated risk assessment for the complex.Also, where you handle and store flammable materials and substances, it will help you take account of these in your risk assessment and help you determine the necessary precautions to take to minimise the likelihood of them being involvedin a fire.It has been written to provide guidance for a responsible person, to help them to carry out a fire risk assessment in less complex offices and shops. If you read the guide and decide that you are unable to apply the guidance, then you should seek expert advice from a competent person. More complex premises will probably need to be assessed by a person who has comprehensive training or experience in fire risk assessment. However this guide can be used for multi-occupied buildings to address fire safety issues within their individual occupancies.It may also be useful for:ï employees;ï employee-elected representatives;ï trade union-appointed health and safety representatives;ï enforcing authorities; andï all other people who have a role in ensuring fire safety in offices and shops.If your premises are listed as of historic interest, also see Appendix C.Fire safety is only one of many safety issues with which management must concern themselves to minimise the risk of injury or death to staff or the public. Unlike most of the other safety concerns, fire has the potential to injure or kill large numbers of people very quickly. This guidance is concerned only with fire safety but many of the measures discussed here will impact upon other safety issues, and vice versa. It is recognised that these various differing safety demands can sometimes affect one another and managerment should consult other interested agencies (e.g. Health & Safety Executive (HSE)) where necessary to confirm that they are not contravening other legislation/guidance.4
You can get advice about minimising fire losses from your insurer.THE FIRE SAFETY ORDERPrevious general fire safety legislationThe Order1 replaces previous fire safety legislation. Any fire certificate issued under the Fire Precautions Act 19712 will cease to have any effect. If a fire certificate has been issued in respect of your premises or the premises were built to recent building regulations, as long as you have made no material alterations and all the physical fire precautions have been properly maintained, then it is unlikely you will need to make any significant improvements to your existing physical fire protection arrangements to comply with the Order.1 However, you must still carry out a fire risk assessment and keep it up to date to ensure that all the fire precautions in your premises remain current and adequate.If you have previously carried out a fire risk assessment under the Fire Precautions (Workplace) Regulations 1997,3 as amended 1999,4 and this assessment has been regularly reviewed then all you will need to do now is revise that assessment taking account of the wider scope of the Order1 as described in this guide.Your premises may also be subject to the provisions of a licence or registration (e.g. under the Licensing Act 200378) of the case, and the fire authority may wish to review your risk assessment as part of the licensing approval process. Fire safety conditions within your licence should not be set by a licensing authority where the Order1 applies.BackgroundThe Order1 applies in England and Wales. It covers general fire precautions and other fire safety duties which are needed to protect ‘relevant persons’ in case of fire in and around most ‘premises’. The Order requires fire precautions to be put in place ‘where necessary’ and to the extent that it is reasonable and practicable in the circumstances of the case.Responsibility for complying with the Order1 rests with the ‘responsible person’. In a workplace, this is the employer and any other person who may have control of any part of the premises, e.g. the occupier or owner. In all other premises the person or people in control of the premises will be responsible. If there is more than one responsible person in any type of premises (e.g. a multi-occupied complex), all must take all reasonable steps to co-operate and co-ordinate with each other.If you are the responsible person you must carry out a fire risk assessment which must focus on the safety in case of fire of all ‘relevant persons’. It should pay particular attention to those at special risk, such as disabled people, those who you know have special needs and young persons and must include consideration of any dangerous substance liable to be on the premises. Your fire risk assessment will help you identify risks that can be removed or reduced and to decide the nature and extent of the general fire precautions you need to take.5
If your organisation employs five or more people, your premises are licensed or an alterations notice is in force, you must record the significant findings of the assessment. It is good practice to record your significant findings in any case.There are some other fire safety duties you need to comply with:ï You must appoint one or more competent persons, depending on the size and use of your premises, to carry out any of the preventive and protective measures required by the Order1 (you can nominate yourself for this purpose). A competent person is someone with enough training and experience or knowledge and other qualities to be able to implement these measures properly.ï You must provide your employees with clear and relevant information on the risks to them identified by the fire risk assessment, about the measures you have taken to prevent fires, and how these measures will protect them if a fire breaks out.ï You must consult your employees (or their elected representatives) about nominating people to carry out particular roles in connection with fire safety and about proposals for improving the fire precautions.ï You must, before you employ a child, provide a parent with clear and relevant information on the risks to that child identified by the risk assessment, the measures you have put in place to prevent/protect them from fire and inform any other responsible person of any risks to that child arising from their undertaking.ï You must inform non-employees, such as temporary or contract workers, of the relevant risks to them, and provide them with information about who are thenominated competent persons, and about the fire safety procedures for the premises.ï You must co-operate and co-ordinate with other responsible persons who also have premises in the building, inform them of any significant risks you find and how you will seek to reduce/control those risks which might affect the safety of their employees.ï You must provide the employer of any person from an outside organisation who is working in your premises (e.g. an agency providing temporary staff) withclear and relevant information on the risks to those employees and the preventive and protective measures taken. You must also provide those employees with appropriate instructions and relevant information about the risks to them.ï If you are not the employer but have any control of premises which contain more than one workplace, you are also responsible for ensuring that the requirementsof the Order1 are complied with in those parts over which you have control.ï You must consider the presence of any dangerous substances and the risk this presents to relevant persons from fire.ï You must establish a suitable means of contacting the emergency services and provide them with any relevant information about dangerous substances.6
ï You must provide appropriate information, instruction and training to your employees, during their normal working hours, about the fire precautions in your workplace, when they start working for you, and from time to time throughout the period they work for you.ï You must ensure that the premises and any equipment provided in connection with firefighting, fire detection and warning, or emergency routes and exits are covered by a suitable system of maintenance and are maintained by a competent person in an efficient state, in efficient working order and in good repair.ï Your employees must co-operate with you to ensure the workplace is safe from fire and its effects, and must not do anything that will place themselves or other people at risk.The above examples outline some of the main requirements of the Order.1 The rest of this guide will explain how you might meet these requirements.Who enforces the Fire Safety Order?The local fire and rescue authority (the fire and rescue service) will enforce the Order1 in most premises. The exceptions are:ï Crown-occupied/owned premises where Crown fire inspectors will enforce;ï premises within armed forces establishments where the defence fire and rescue service will enforce;ï certain specialist premises including construction sites, ships (under repair or construction) and nuclear installations, where the HSE will enforce; andï sports grounds and stands designated as needing a safety certificate by the local authority, where the local authority will enforce.The enforcing authority will have the power to inspect your premises to check that you are complying with your duties under the Order.1 They will look for evidence that you have carried out a suitable fire risk assessment and acted upon the significant findings of that assessment. If you are required to record the outcome of the assessment they will expect to see a copy.If the enforcing authority is dissatisfied with the outcome of your fire risk assessment or the action you have taken, they may issue an enforcement notice that requires you to make certain improvements or, in extreme cases, a prohibition notice that restricts the use of all or part of your premises until improvements are made.If your premises are considered by the enforcing authority to be or have potential to be high risk, they may issue an alterations notice that requires you to inform them before you make any changes to your premises or the way they are used.Failure to comply with any duty imposed by the Order1 or any notice issued by the enforcing authority is an offence. You have a right of appeal to a magistrates court against any notice issued. Where you agree that there is a need for improvements to your fire precautions but disagree with the enforcing authority on the technical solution to be used (e.g. what type of fire alarm system is needed) you may agree to refer this for independent determination.7
If having read this guide you are in any doubt about how fire safety law applies to you, contact the fire safety office at your local fire and rescue service.If your premises were in use before 2006, then they may have been subject to the Fire Precautions Act2 and the Fire Precautions (Workplace) Regulations.3,4 Where the layout (means of escape) and other fire precautions have been assessed by the fire and rescue service to satisfy the guidance that was then current, then it is likely that your premises already conform to many of the recommendations here, providing you have undertaken a fire risk assessment as required by the Fire Precautions (Workplace) Regulations.3,4New buildings or significant building alterations should be designed to satisfy current building regulations24 (which address fire precautions).However, you will still need to carry out a fire risk assessment, or review your existing assessment (and act on your findings), to comply with the Order.18
Part 1 Fire risk assessmentMANAGING FIRE SAFETYGood management of fire safety is essential to ensure that fires are unlikely to occur; that if they do occur they are likely to be controlled or contained quickly, effectively and safely; or that, if a fire does occur and grow, everyone in your premises is able to escape to a place of total safety easily and quickly.The risk assessment that you must carry out will help you ensure that your fire safety procedures, fire prevention measures, and fire precautions (plans, systems and equipment) are all in place and working properly, and the risk assessment should identify any issues that need attention. Further information on managing fire safety is available in Part 2 on page 39.WHAT IS A FIRE RISK ASSESSMENT?A fire risk assessment is an organised and methodical look at your premises, the activities carried on there and the likelihood that a fire could start and cause harm to those in and around the premises.The aims of the fire risk assessment are:ï To identify the fire hazards.ï To reduce the risk of those hazards causing harm to as low as reasonably practicable.ï To decide what physical fire precautions and management arrangements are necessary to ensure the safety of people in your premises if a fire does start.The term ‘where necessary’ (see Glossary) is used in the Order,1 therefore when deciding what fire precautions and management arrangements are necessary you will need to take account of this definition.The terms ‘hazard’ and ‘risk’ are used throughout this guide and it is important that you have a clear understanding of how these should be used.ï Hazard: anything that has the potential to cause harm.ï Risk: the chance of that harm occurring.If your organisation employs five or more people, or your premises are licensed or an alterations notice requiring it is in force, then the significant findings of the fire risk assessment, the actions to be taken as a result of the assessment and details of anyone especially at risk must be recorded. You will probably find it helpful to keep a record of the significant findings of your fire risk assessment even if you are not required to do so.HOW DO YOU CARRY OUT A FIRE RISK ASSESSMENT?A fire risk assessment will help you determine the chances of a fire starting and the dangers from fire that your premises present for the people who use them and any
person in the immediate vicinity. The assessment method suggested in this guide shares the same approach as that used in general health and safety legislation and can be carried out either as part of a more general risk assessment or as a separate exercise. As you move through the steps there are checklists to help you.Before you start your fire risk assessment, take time to prepare, and read through the rest of Part 1 of this guide.Much of the information for your fire risk assessment will come from the knowledge your employees, colleagues and representatives have of the premises, as well as information given to you by people who have responsibility for other parts of the building. A tour of your premises will probably be needed to confirm, amend or add detail to your initial views.It is important that you carry out your fire risk assessment in a practical and systematic way and that you allocate enough time to do a proper job. It must take the whole of your premises into account, including outdoor locations and any rooms and areas that are rarely used. If your premises are small you may be able to assess them as a whole. In larger premises you may find it helpful to divide them into rooms or a series of assessment areas using natural boundaries, e.g. process areas (such as bakeries and cooking facilities in shops), offices, stores, as well as corridors, stairways and external routes.If your premises are in a multi-use complex then the information on hazard and risk reduction will still be applicable to you. However, any alterations to the use or structure of your individual unit will need to take account of the overall fire safety arrangements in the building.Your premises may be simple, with few people present or with a limited degree of business activity, but if it forms part of a building with different occupancies, then the measures provided by other occupiers may have a direct effect on the adequacy of the fire safety measures in your premises.Under health and safety law (enforced by the HSE or the local authority) you are required to carry out a risk assessment in respect of any work processes in your workplace and to take or observe appropriate special, technical or organisational measures. If your health and safety risk assessment identifies that these processes are likely to involve the risk of fire or the spread of fire then you will need to take this into account during your fire risk assessment under the Order,1 and prioritise actions based on the level of risk.You need to appoint one or more competent persons (this could be you) to carry out any of the preventive and protective measures needed to comply with the Order.1 This person could be you, or an appropriately trained, employee or, where appropriate, a third party.Your fire risk assessment should demonstrate that, as far as is reasonable, you have considered the needs of all relevant persons, including disabled people.Figure 1 shows the five steps you need to take to carry out a fire risk assessment.10
FIRE SAFETY RISK ASSESSMENT1Identify fire hazardsIdentify:Sources of ignition Sources of fuel Sources of oxygen2Identify people at riskIdentify:People in and around the premises People especially at risk3Evaluate, remove, reduce and protect from riskEvaluate the risk of a fire occurringEvaluate the risk to people from fire Remove or reduce fire hazards Remove or reduce the risks to peopleï Detection and warningï Fire-fightingï Escape routesï Lightingï Signs and noticesï Maintenance4Record, plan, inform, instruct and trainRecord significant finding and action takenPrepare an emergency planInform and instruct relevant people; co-operate and co-ordinate with others Provide training5 ReviewKeep assessment under reviewRevise where necessaryRemember to keep to your fire risk assessment under review.Figure 1: The five steps of a fire risk assessment
For a fire to start, three things are needed:ï a source of ignition;ï fuel; andï oxygen.If any one of these is missing, a fire cannot start. Taking measures to avoid the three coming together will therefore reduce the chances of a fire occurring.
The remainder of this step will advise on how to identify potential ignition sources, the materials that might fuel a fire and the oxygen supplies that will help it burn.
Figure 2: The fire triangle
1.1 Identify sources of ignitionYou can identify the potential ignition sources in your premises by looking for possible sources of heat which could get hot enough to ignite material found in your premises. These sources could include:ï smokers’ material, e.g. cigarettes, matches and lighters;ï naked flames, e.g. candles or gas or liquid-fuelled open-flame equipment;ï electrical, gas or oil-fired heaters (fixed or portable);ï hot processes, e.g. welding by contractors or shrink wrapping;ï cooking equipment;ï faulty or misused electrical equipment;ï lighting equipment, e.g. halogen lamps or display lighting too close to stored products;ï hot surfaces and obstruction of equipment ventilation, e.g. office equipment; andï arson.
Indications of ‘near-misses’, such as scorch marks on furniture or fittings, discoloured or charred electrical plugs and sockets, cigarette burns etc.,can help you identify hazards which you may not otherwise notice.
Figure 3: Sources of ignition
12
1.2 Identify sources of fuelAnything that burns is fuel for a fire. You need to look for the things that will burn reasonably easily and are in enough quantity to provide fuel for a fire or cause it to spread to another fuel source. Some of the most common ‘fuels’ found in offices and shops are:ï flammable-liquid-based products, such as paints, varnishes, thinners and adhesives;ï flammable liquids and solvents, such as white spirit, methylated spirit, cooking oils and disposable cigarette lighters;ï flammable chemicals, such as certain cleaning products, photocopier chemicals and dry cleaning that uses hydrocarbon solvents;ï packaging materials, stationery, advertising material and decorations;ï plastics and rubber, such as video tapes, polyurethane foam-filled furniture and polystyrene-based display materials;ï textiles and soft furnishings, such as hanging curtains and clothing displays;ï waste products, particularly finely divided items such as shredded paper and wood shavings, off cuts, and dust; andï flammable gases such as liquefied petroleum gas (LPG).You should also consider the materials used to line walls and ceilings, e.g. polystyrene or carpet tiles, the fixtures and fittings, and how they might contribute to the spread of fire. Further information is available in Part 2, Section 1.1.3 Identify sources of oxygenThe main source of oxygen for a fire is in the air around us. In an enclosed building this is provided by theventilation system in use. This generally falls into one of two categories: natural airflow through doors, windows and other openings; or mechanical air conditioning systems and air handling systems. In many buildings there will be a combination of systems, which will be capable of introducing/extracting air to and from the building.
Additional sources of oxygen can sometimes be found in materials used or stored at premises such as:ï some chemicals (oxidising materials), which can provide a fire with additional
Figure 4: Label on oxidising materials
oxygen and so help it burn. These chemicals should be identified on their container (and Control of Substances Hazardous to Health data sheet, see Figure 4) by the manufacturer or supplier who can advise as to their safe use and storage;
ï oxygen supplies from cylinder storage and piped systems, e.g. oxygen used in welding processes; andï pyrotechnics (fireworks), which contain oxidising materials and need to be treated with great care.As part of your fire risk assessment, you need to identify those at risk if there is a fire. To do this you need to identify where you have people working, either at permanent workstations or at occasional locations around the premises, and to consider who else may be at risk, such as customers, visiting contractors etc., and where these people are likely to be found.You must consider all the people who use the premsies but you should pay particular attention to people who may be especially at risk such as:ï employees who work alone and/or in isolated areas, e.g. cleaners, security staff;ï people who are unfamiliar with the premises, e.g. seasonal workers, contractors, visitors and customers;ï people with disabilities14* or those who may have some other reason for not being able to leave the premises quickly, e.g. elderly customers or parents with children;ï other persons in the immediate vicinity of the premises; andï people with language difficulties.In evaluating the risk to people with disabilities you may need to discuss their individual needs with them. In larger buildings used extensively by the public you may need to seek professional advice.Further guidance on people with special needs is given in Part 2, Section 1.* Visit the Disability Rights Commission website on www.drc-gb.org for more information.14
The management of the premises and the way people use it will have an effect on your evaluation of risk. Management may be your responsibility alone or there may be others, such as the building owners or managing agents, who also have responsibilities. In multi-occupied buildings all those with some control mustco-operate and you need to consider the risk generated by others in the building.3.1 Evaluate the risk of a fire occuringThe chances of a fire starting will be low if your premises has few ignition sources and combustible materials are kept away from them.In general, fires start in one of three ways:ï accidentally, such as when smoking materials are not properly extinguished or when lighting displays are knocked over;ï by act or omission, such as when electrical office equipment is not properly maintained, or when waste packaging is allowed to accumulate near to a heat source; andï deliberately, such as an arson attack involving setting fire to external rubbish bins placed too close to the building.Look critically at your premises and try to identify any accidents waiting to happen and any acts or omissions which might allow a fire to start. You should also look for any situation that may present an opportunity for an arsonistFurther guidance in Part 2, Section 1 on evaluating the risk of a fire starting.3.2 Evaluate the risk to peopleIn Step 2 you identified the people likely to be at risk should a fire start anywhere in the premises and earlier in Step 3 you identified the chances of a fire occurring. It is unlikely that you will have concluded that there is no chance of a fire starting anywhere in your premises so you now need to evaluate the actual risk to those people should a fire start and spread from the various locations that you have identified.While determining the possible incidents, you should also consider the likelihood of any particular incident; but be aware that some very unlikely incidents can put many people at risk.To evaluate the risk to people in your premises, you will need to understand the way fire can spread. Fire is spread by three methods:ï convection;ï conduction; andï radiation.ï 
ConvectionFire spread by convection is the most dangerous and causes the largest number of injuries and deaths. When fires start in enclosed spaces such as buildings,the smoke rising from the fire gets trapped by the ceiling and then spreads in all directions to form an ever-deepening layer over the entire room space. The smoke will pass through any holes or gaps inthe walls, ceiling and floor into other parts of the building. The heat from the fire gets trapped in the building and the temperature rises.ConductionSome materials, such as metal shutters and ducting, can absorb heat and transmit it to the next room, where it can set fire to combustible items that are in contact with the heated material.
RadiationRadiation heats the air in the same way as an electric bar heater heats a room. Any material close to a fire will absorb the heat until the item starts to smoulder and then burn.
Figure 5: Smoke moving through a building
Smoke produced by a fire also contains toxic gases which are harmful to people. A fire in a building with modern fittings and materials generates smoke that is thick and black, obscures vision, causes great difficulty in breathing and can block the escape routes.It is essential that the means of escape and other fire precautions are adequate to ensure that everyone can make their escape to a place of total safety before the fire and its effects can trap them in the building.In evaluating this risk to people you will need to consider situations such as:ï fire starting on a lower floor affecting the only escape route for people on upper floors or the only escape route for people with disabilities;ï fire developing in an unoccupied space that people have to pass by to escape from the building;ï fire or smoke spreading through a building via routes such as vertical shafts, service ducts, ventilation systems, poorly installed, poorly maintained or damaged walls, partitions and ceilings affecting people in remote areas;ï fire starting in a service room and affecting hazardous materials;ï fire spreading rapidly through the building because of combustible structural elements and/or large quantities of combustible goods;16	• rapid vertical fire spread in racked displays;
ï fire and smoke spreading through a building due to poor installation of fire precautions, e.g. incorrectly installed fire doors (see Appendix B2 for more information on fire doors) or incorrectly installed services penetrating fire walls; andï fire and smoke spreading through the building due to poorly maintained and damaged fire doors or fire doors being wedged open.Further guidance on fire risks is given in Part 2, Section 1.3.3 Remove or reduce the hazardsHaving identified the fire hazards in Step 1, you now need to remove those hazards if reasonably practicable to do so. If you cannot remove the hazards, you need to take reasonable steps to reduce them if you can. This is an essential part of fire risk assessment and as a priority this must take place before any other actions.Ensure that any actions you take to remove or reduce fire hazards or risk are not substituted by other hazards or risks. For example, if you replace a flammable substance with a toxic or corrosive one, you must consider whether this might cause harm to people in other ways.Remove or reduce sources of ignitionThere are various ways that you can reduce the risk caused by potential sources of ignition, for example:ï Wherever possible replace a potential ignition source by a safer alternative.ï Replace naked flame and radiant heaters with fixed convector heaters or a central heating system. Restrict the movement of and guard portable heating appliances.ï Seperate ignition hazards and combustibles e.g. ensure sufficient clear space between lights and combustibles.ï Operate a safe smoking policy in designated smoking areas and prohibit smoking elsewhere.ï Ensure electrical and mechanical and gas equipment is installed, used, maintained and protected in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.ï Check all areas where hot work (e.g. welding) has been carried out to ensure that no ignition has taken place or any smouldering materials remain that may cause of fire.ï Ensure that no-one carrying out work on gas fittings which involves exposing pipes that contain or have contained flammable gas uses any source of ignition such as blow-lamps or hot-air guns.ï Take precautions to avoid arson.Remove or reduce sources of fuelThere are various ways that you can reduce the risks caused by materials and substances which burn, for example:ï Reduce stocks of flammable materials, liquids and gases on display in public areas to a minimum. Keep remaining stock in dedicated storerooms or storage areas where the public are not allowed to go, and keep the minimum required for the operation of the business.ï 
ï Ensure flammable materials, liquids and gases, are kept to a minimum, and are stored properly with adequate separation distances between them.ï Keep areas containing flammable gasses ventilated.ï Do not keep flammable solids, liquids and gases together.ï Remove, or treat large areas of highly combustible wall and ceiling linings, e.g. polystyrene or carpet tiles, to reduce the rate of flame spread across the surface.ï Develop a formal system for the control of combustible waste by ensuring that waste materials and rubbish are not allowed to build up and are carefully stored until properly disposed of, particularly at the end of the day.ï Take action to avoid storage areas being vulnerable to arson or vandalism.ï 
ï Check all areas where hot work(e.g. welding) has been carried out to ensure that no ignition has taken
Figure 6: Storage of flammables
  place and no smouldering or hot materials remain that may cause a fire later. Further guidance on removing and reducing hazards is given in Part 2, Section 1.Remove or reduce sources of oxygenYou can reduce the potential source of oxygen supplied to a fire by:ï closing all doors, windows and other openings not required for ventilation, particularly out of working hours;ï shutting down ventilation systems which are not essential to the function of the premises;ï not storing oxidising materials near or with any heat source or flammable materials; andï controlling the use and storage of oxygen cylinders, ensuring that they are not leaking, are not used to ‘sweeten’ the atmosphere, and that where they are located is adequately ventilated.18
3.4 Remove or reduce the risks to peopleHaving evaluated and addressed the risk of fire occuring and the risk to people (preventative measures) it is unlikely that you will be able to conclude that no risk remains of fire starting and presenting a risk to people in your premises.You now need to reduce any remaining fire risk to people to as low as reasonably practicable, by ensuring that adequate fire precautions are in place to warn people in the event of a fire and allow them to safely escape.The rest of this step describes the fire protection measures you may wish to adopt to reduce the remaining fire risk to people (see Steps 3.4.1 to 3.4.6).The level of fire protection you need to provide will depend on the level of risk that remains in the premises after you have removed or reduced the hazards andrisks. Part 2, Section 4.1 can help you decide the level of risk that you may still have.Flexibility of fire protection measuresFlexibility will be required when applying this guidance, the level of fire protection should be proportional to the risk posed to the safety of the people in the premises. Therefore, the objective should be to reduce the remaining risk to a level as low as reasonably practicable. The higher the risk of fire and risk to life, the higher the standards of fire protection will need to be.Your premises may not exactly fit the solutions suggested in this guide and they may need to be applied in a flexible manner without compromising the safety of the occupants.For example, if the travel distance is in excess of the norm for the level of riskyou have determined, (see Part 2, Table 2 on page 68), it may be necessary to do any one or a combination of the following to compensate:ï Provide earlier warning of fire using automatic fire detection.ï Revise the layout to reduce travel distances.ï Reduce the fire risk by removing or reducing combustible materials and/or ignition sources.ï Control the number of people in the premises.ï Limit the area to trained staff only (no public).ï Increase staff training and awareness.Note: The above list is not exhaustive and is only used to illustrate some examples of trade-offs to provide safe premises.If you decide to significantly vary away from the benchmarks in this guidance then you should seek expert advice before doing so.
3.4.1 Fire-detection and warning systemsIn some small, open-plan, single-storey offices and shops, a fire may be obvious to everyone as soon as it starts. In these cases, where the number and position of exits and the travel distance to them is adequate, a simple shout of ‘fire’ or a simple manually operated device, such as a gong or air horn that can be heard byeverybody when operated from any single point within the building, may be all that is needed. Where a simple shout or manually operated device is not adequate, it is likely that an electrical fire warning system will be required.
In larger premises, particularly those with more than one floor, where an alarm given from any single pointis unlikely to be heard throughout the building an electrical system incorporating sounders and manually operated call points (break-glass boxes) is likely to be required.This type of system is likely to be acceptable where all parts of the building are occupied at the same time and it is unlikely that a firecould start without somebody noticing it quickly.
Figure 7: Fire detection and warning system
However, where there are unoccupied areas, or common corridors and circulation spaces in multi-occupied premises, in which a fire could develop to the extent that escape routes could be affected before the fire is discovered, an automatic fire detection system may be necessary.You may need to consider special arrangements for times when people are working alone, are disabled, or when your normal occupancy patterns are different,e.g. when maintenance staff or other contractors are working at the weekend.In large or complex premises, particularly those accommodating large numbers of people, such as department stores and multi-storey office blocks, it is likely that a more sophisticated form of warning and evacuation, possibly phased, should be provided.False alarms from electrical fire warning systems are a major problem (e.g. malicious activation of manual call points) and result in many unwanted calls to the fire and rescue service every year. To help reduce the number of false alarms, the design and location of activation devices should be reviewed against the way the premises are currently used.If you are not sure whether your current arrangements are adequate, see the additional guidance on fire warning systems in Part 2, Section 2.20
3.4.2 Firefighting equipment and facilitiesFirefighting equipment can reduce the risk of a small fire, e.g. a fire in a waste-paper bin, developing into a large one. The safe use of an appropriate fire extinguisher to control a fire in its early stages can also significantly reduce the risk to other people in the premises by allowing people to assist others who are at risk.This equipment will usually comprise enough portable extinguishers that must be suitable for the risk.Main types of portable extinguishers, their uses and colour codingWATERFor wood, paper, textile and solid material firesPOWDERFor liquid and electrical firesFOAMFor use on liquid firesCARBON DIOXIDE (CO2 )For liquid and electrical firesDO NOT USE on liquid, electrical or metal firesDO NOT USEon metal firesDO NOT USE onelectrical or metal firesDO NOT USE onmetal firesThe contents of an extinguisher is indicated by a zone of colour on the red body.Halon extinguishers are not shown since no new Halon production is permitted in the UKFigure 8: Types of fire extinguishersIn small premises, having one or two portable extinguishers of the appropriate type, readily available for use, may be all that is necessary. In larger, more complex premises, a number of portable extinguishers may be required and they should be sited in suitable locations, e.g. on the escape routes at each floor level. It may also be necessary to indicate the location of extinguishers by suitable signs.
Some premises will also have permanently installed firefighting equipment such as hose reels for use by trained staff or firefighters.People with no training should not be expected to attempt to extinguish a fire. However, all staff should be familiar with the location and basic operating procedures for the equipment provided, in case they need to use it. If your fire strategy means that certain people, e.g. fire marshals, will be expected to take a more active role, then they should be provided with more comprehensive training.Other fixed installations and facilities to assist firefighters, such as dry rising mains and access for fire engines, or automatically operated, fixed fire suppression systems such as sprinklers and gas or foam flooding systems may also have been provided.Where these have been required by law, e.g. the Building Regulations or local Acts, such equipment and facilities must be maintained.Similarly, if provided for other reasons, e.g. insurance, it is good practice to ensure that they are properly maintained.In most cases it will be necessary to consult a competent service engineer. Keeping records of the maintenance carried out will help you demonstrate to the enforcing authority that you have complied with fire safety law.Appendix A.1 provides a sample fire safety maintenance checklist you can use.For further guidance on portable fire extinguishers see Part 2, Section 3.1, for fixed firefighting installations, Part 2, Section 3.2 and other facilities (including those for firefighters) see Part 2, Section 3.3.22
3.4.3 Escape routesOnce a fire has started, been detected and a warning given, everyone in your premises should be able to escape to a place of total safety unaided and without the help of the fire and rescue service. However, some people with disabilities and others with special needs may need from staff who will need to be designated for the purpose.Escape routes should be designed to ensure, as far as possible, that any person confronted by fire anywhere in the building, should be able to turn away from it and escape to a place of reasonable safety, e.g. a protected stairway. From there they will be able to go directly to a place of total safety away from the building.In offices those who require special assistance (e.g. very young children in a creche and some people with disabilities) could be accommodated on the same level as the final exit from the premises to facilitate escape. Where they need assistanceto evacuate, you should make sure that there are sufficient staff to ensure a speedy evacuation.The level of fire protection that should be given to escape routes will vary depending on the level of risk of fire within the premises and other related factors. Generally, premises that are simple, consisting of a single storey, will require fairly simple measures to protect the escape routes, compared to a large multi-storey building, which would require a more complex and inter-related system of fire precautions.When determining whether your premises have adequate escape routes, you need to consider a number of factors, including:ï the type and number of people using the premises;ï escape time;ï the age and construction of the premises;ï the number and complexity of escape routes and exits;ï whether lifts can or need to be used;ï the use of phased or delayed alarm evacuation; andï assisted means of escape/personal evacuation plans (PEEPS).The type and number of people using the premisesThe people present in your premises will sometimes just be employees, but most of the time will be a mixture of employees and members of the public. Employees can reasonably be expected to have an understanding of the layout of the premises, while members of the public will be unlikely to have knowledge of alternative escape routes.The number and capability of people present will influence your assessment of the escape routes. You must ensure that your existing escape routes are sufficient and capable of safely evacuating all the people likely to use your premises at any time, including events such as sales. If necessary you may need either to increase the capacity of the escape routes or restrict the number of people in the premises.
Escape timeIn the event of a fire, it is important to evacuate people as quickly as possible from the premises. Escape routes in a building should be designed so that people can escape quickly enough to ensure they are not placed in any danger from fire. The time available will depend on a number of factors, including how quickly the fire is detected and the alarm raised, the number of escape routes available, the nature of the occupants and the speed of fire growth. For simplicity the travel distances in Part 2, Table 2 on page 68 takes these factors into account. Part 2, Section 4.1 will help you decide the level of risk in your premises for escape purposes.The age and construction of the premisesOlder buildings may comprise different construction materials from newer buildings, and may be in a poorer state of repair. The materials from which your premises are constructed and the quality of building work and state of repair could contribute to the speed with which any fire may spread, and potentially affect the escape routes the occupants will need to use. A fire starting in a building constructed mainly from combustible material will spread faster than one where fire-resisting construction materials have been used.If you wish to construct internal partitions or walls in your premises, perhaps to create a sales area or to divide up an office area, you should ensure that any new partition or wall does not obstruct any escape routes or fire exits, extend travel distances or reduce the sound levels of the fire alarm system. Any walls that affect the means of escape should be constructed of appropriate material. (Further technical information is provided in Appendix B.)Depending on the findings of your fire risk assessment, it may be necessary to protect the escape routes against fire and smoke by upgrading the construction of the floors, ceiling and walls to a fire-resisting standard. You should avoid having combustible wall and ceiling linings in your escape routes. For further information see Appendix B. You may need to seek advice from a competent person. Any structural alterations may require building regulation approval.The number of escape routes and exitsIn general there should normally be at least two escape routes from all parts ofthe premises but a single escape route may be acceptable in some circumstances (e.g. part of your premises accommodating less than 60 people or where travel distances are limited).Where two escape routes are necessary and to further minimise the risk of people becoming trapped, you should ensure that the escape routes are completely independent of each other. This will prevent a fire affecting more than one escape route at the same time.When evaluating escape routes, you may need to build in a safety factor by discounting the largest exit from your escape plan, then determine whether the remaining escape routes from a room, floor or building will be sufficient to evacuate all the occupants within a reasonable time. Escape routes that provide escape in a single direction only may need additional fire precautions to be regarded as adequate.24
Exit doors on escape routes and final exit doors should normally open in the direction of travel, and be quickly and easily openable without the need for a key. Checks should be made to ensure final exits are wide enough to accommodate the number of people who may use the escape routes they serve.Management of escape routesIt is essential that escape routes, and the means provided to ensure they are used safely, are managed and maintained to ensure that they remain usable and available at all times when the premises are occupied. Inform staff in training sessions about the escape routes within the premises.
Corridors and stairways that form part of escape routes should be kept clear and hazard free at all times. Items that may be a source of fuel or pose an ignition risk should not normally be located on any corridor or stairway that will be used as an escape route. Further guidance is available in Part 2, Section 4.
            Figure 9: A blocked corridor with incorrect signage            
Emergency evacuation of persons with mobility impairmentThe means of escape you provide must be suitable for the evacuation of everyove likely to be in your premises. This may require additional planning and allocation of staff roles – with appropriate training. Provsions for the emergency evacuation of disabled persons may include:ï stairways;ï evacuation lifts;ï firefighting lifts;ï horizontal evacuation;ï refuges; andï ramps.Use of these facilities will need to be linked to effective management arrangements as part of your emergency plan. The plan should not rely on fire and rescue service involvement for it to be effective.Further guidance on escape routes is given in Part 2, Section 4.
Checklistï Is your building constructed, particularly in the case of multi-storey buildings, so that, if there is a fire, heat and smoke will not spread uncontrolled through the building to the extent that that people are unable to use the escape routes?	ï Are any holes or gaps in walls, ceilings and floors properly sealed, e.g. where services such as ventilation ducts and electrical cables pass through them?	ï Can all the occupants escape to a place of total safety in a reasonable time?	ï Are the existing escape routes adequate for the numbers and type of people that may need to use them, e.g. staff, members of the public, young children, and disabled people?ï Are the exits in the right place and do the escape routes lead as directly as possible to a place of total safety?ï If there is a fire, could all available exits be affected or will at least one route from any part of the premises remain available?ï Are the escape routes and final exits kept clear at all times?ï Do the doors on escape routes open in the direction of escape?ï Can all final exit doors be opened easily and immediately if there is an emergency? ï Will everybody be able to safely use the escape routes from your premises?	ï Are the people who work in the building aware of the importance of maintaining the safety of the escape routes, e.g. by ensuring that fire doors are not wedged open and that combustible materials are not stored within escape routes?ï Are there any particular or unusual issues to consider?3.4.4 Emergency escape lightingPeople in your premises must be able to find their way to a place of total safety if there is a fire by using escape routes that have enough lighting. Where anyescape routes are internal and without windows, or your premises are used during periods of darkness, including early darkness on winter days, then some form of backup to the normal escape route lighting (emergency escape lighting) is likely to be required.In small premises, where the escape routes are simple and straightforward, borrowed lighting, e.g. from street lamps where they illuminate escape routes, may be acceptable. Where borrowed lighting is not available, suitably placed torches may be acceptable for use by trained staff.In larger, more complex premises it is likely that a more comprehensive system of electrical automatic emergency escape lighting will be needed to illuminate all the escape routes.26
Where people have difficulty seeing conventional signs, a ‘way-guidance’ system may need to be considered.Further guidance on emergency escape lighting is given in Part 2, Section 5.3.4.5 Signs and noticesSignsSigns must be used, where necessary, to help people identify escape routes, find firefighting equipment and emergency fire telephones. These signs are required under the Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations 19965,6 and must comply with the provisions of those Regulations.A fire risk assessment that determines that no escape signs are required (because, for example, trained staff will always be available to help members of the publicto escape routes), is unlikely to be acceptable to an enforcing authority other than in the smallest and simplest of premises where the exits are in regular use and familiar to employees and visitors.For a sign to comply with these Regulations it must be in pictogram form (see Figure 10). The pictogram can be supplemented by text if this is considered necessary to make the sign more easily understood, but you must not have a safety sign that uses only text.Where the locations of escape routes and firefighting equipment are readily apparent and the firefighting equipment is visible at all times, then signs are not necessary. In all other situations it is likely that the fire risk assessment will indicate that signs will be necessary.Figure 10: Typical fire exit sign
NoticesNotices must be used, where necessary, to provide the following:ï instructions on how to use any fire safety equipment;ï the actions to be taken in the event of fire; andï help for the fire and rescue service (e.g. location of sprinkler valves or electrical cut-off switches).
All signs and notices should be positioned so that they can be easily seen and understood.
Figure 11: Simple fire action notice
Further guidance on signs and notices is given in Part 2, Section 6.3.4.6 Installation, testing and maintenanceNew fire precautions should be installed by a competent person.You must keep any existing equipment, devices or facilities that are provided in your premises for the safety of people, such as fire alarms, fire extinguishers, lighting, signs, fire exits and fire doors, in effective working order and maintain fire separating elements and the prevention of smoke into escape routes.You must ensure regular checks, periodic servicing and maintenance are carried out whatever the size of your premises and any defects are put right as quickly as possible.You, or a person you have nominated, can carry out certain checks and routine maintenance work. Further maintenance may need to be carried out by a competent service engineer. Where contractors are used, third party certification is one method where a reasonable assurance of quality of work and competence can be achieved (see Part 2, Section 8).28
The following are examples of checks and tests that should be carried out. The examples of testing and maintenance given are not intended to be prescriptive and other testing regimes may be appropriate.Daily checksRemove bolts, padlocks and security devices from fire exits, ensure that doors on escape routes swing freely and close fully and check escape routes to ensure they are clear from obstructions and combustible materials. Check the fire alarm panel to ensure the system is active and fully operational. Where practicable,visually check that emergency lighting units are in good repair and working. Check that all safety signs and notices are legible. (See Appendix B3 for more details on bolts, padlocks and security devices.)Weekly tests and checksTest fire-detection and warning systems and manually-operated warning devices weekly following the manufacturer’s or installer’s instructions. Check the batteries of safety torches and that fire extinguishers and hose reels are correctly located and in apparent working order. Fire pumps and standby diesel engines should be tested for 30 minutes each week.Monthly tests and checksTest all emergency lighting systems and safety torches to make sure they have enough charge and illumination according to the manufacturer’s or supplier’s instructions. This should be at an appropriate time when, following the test, they will not be immediately required.Check that fire doors are in good working order and closing correctly and that the frames and seals are intact.Six-monthly tests and checksA competent person should test and maintain the fire-detection and warning system.Annual tests and checksThe emergency lighting and all firefighting equipment, fire alarms and other installed systems should be tested and maintained by a competent person.All structural fire protection and elements of fire compartmentation should be inspected and any remedial action carried out. Specific guidance on the maintenance of timber fire-resisting doors is given in Appendix B2.Further guidance on maintenance and testing on individual types of equipment and facilities can be found in the relevant Section in Part 2.Appendix A.1 provides an example of a fire safety maintenance checklist. You will find it of benefit to keep a log book of all maintenance and testing.
Step 3 ChecklistEvaluate, remove, reduce and protect from risks by:ï Evaluating the risk to people in your building if a fire startsï Removing or reducing the hazards that might cause a fire Have you:ñ Removed or reduced sources of ignition?ñ Removed or reduced sources of fuel?ñ Removed or reduced sources of air or oxygen?Have you removed or reduced the risks to people if a fire occurs by:ñ Considering the need for fire detection and for warning?ñ Considering the need for firefighting equipment?ñ Determining whether your escape routes are adequate?ñ Determining whether your lighting and emergency lighting are adequate?ñ Checking that you have adequate signs and notices?ñ Regularly testing and maintaining safety equipment?ñ Considering whether you need any other equipment or facilities?In Step 4 there are four further elements of the risk assessment you should focus on to address the management of fire safety in your premises. In smaller premises this could be done as part of the day-to-day management, however, as the premises or the organisation get larger it may be necessary for a formal structure and written policy to be developed. Further guidance on managing fire safety is given in Part 2, Section 7 on page 39.30
4.1 Record the significant findings and action takenIf you or your organisation employ five or more people, your premises are licensed, or an alterations notice requiring you to do so is in force, you must record the significant findings of your fire risk assessment and the actions you have taken.Significant findings should include details of:ï The fire hazards you have identified (you don’t need to include trivial things like a small tin of solvent based glue).ï The actions you have taken or will take to remove or reduce the chance of a fire occurring (preventive measures).ï Persons who may be at risk, particularly those at greatest risk.ï The actions you have taken or will take to reduce the risk to people from the spread of fire and smoke (protective measures).ï The actions people need to take in case of fire including details of any persons nominated to carry out a particular function (your emergency plan).ï The information, instruction and training you have identified that people need and how it will be given.You may also wish to record discussions you have had with staff or staff representatives (including trade unions).Even where you are not required to record the significant findings, it is good practice to do so.In some very small offices and shops, record keeping may be no more than a few sheets of paper (possibly forming part of a health and safety folder), containing details of significant findings, any action taken and a copy of the emergency plan.The record could take the form of a simple list which may be supported by a simple plan of the premises (see Figure 12).In more complex premises, it is best to keep a dedicated record including details of significant findings, any action taken, a copy of the emergency plan, maintenance of fire-protection equipment and training. There is no one ‘correct’ format specified for this. Further guidance is given in Part 2, Section 7.1.You must be able to satisfy the enforcing authority, if called upon to do so, that you have carried out a suitable and sufficient fire risk assessment. Keeping records will help you do this and will also form the basis of your subsequent reviews.If you keep records, you do not need to record all the details, only those that are significant and the action you have taken.It can be helpful to include a simple line drawing to illustrate your fire precautions (Figure 12). This can also help you check your precautions as part of your ongoing review.
Figure 12: Example of a line drawing showing general fire safety precautionsThe findings of your fire risk assessment will help you to develop your emergency plan, the instruction, information and training you need to provide, the co-operation and co-ordination arrangements you may need to have with other responsible people and the arrangements for maintenance and testing of the fire precautions.If you are required to record the significant findings of your fire risk assessment then these arrangements must also be recorded.Further guidance about fire safety records with an example is given in Part 2, Section 7.1.4.2 Emergency plansYou need to have an emergency plan for dealing with any fire situation.The purpose of an emergency plan is to ensure that the people in your premises know what to do if there is a fire and that the premises can be safely evacuated.If you or your organisation employ five or more people, or your premises are licensed or an alterations notice requiring it is in force, then details of your emergency plan must be recorded. Even if it is not required, it is good practice to keep a record.Your emergency plan should be based on the outcome of your fire risk assessment and be available for your employees, their representatives (where appointed) and the enforcing authority.In small offices and shops the emergency plan may be no more than a fire action notice.In multi-occupied, larger and more complex offices and shops, the emergency plan will need to be more detailed and compiled only after consultation with other32	occupiers and other responsible people, e.g. owners, who have control over the
building. In most cases this means that a single emergency plan covering the whole building will be necessary. It will help if you can agree on one person to co-ordinate this task.Further guidance on emergency plans is given in Part 2, Section 7.2.4.3 Inform, instruct, co-operate and co-ordinateYou must give clear and relevant information and appropriate instructions to your staff and the employers of other people working in your premises, such as contractors, about how to prevent fires and what they should do if there is a fire.Any other relevant persons should be given information about the fire safety arrangements as soon as possible.If you intend to employ a child, you must inform the parents of the significant risks you have identified and the precautions you have taken. You must also co-operate and co-ordinate with other responsible people who use any part of the premises. It is unlikely that your emergency plan will work without this.Information and instructionAll staff should be given information and instruction as soon as possible after they are appointed and regularly after that. Make sure you include staff who work outside normal working hours, such as contract cleaners or maintenance staff.The information and instructions you give must be in a form that can be used and understood. They should take account of those with disabilities such as hearing or sight impairment, those with learning difficulties and those who do not use English as their first language.The information and instruction you give should be based on your emergency plan and must include:ï the significant findings from your fire risk assessment;ï the measures that you have put in place to reduce the risk;ï what staff should do if there is a fire;ï the identity of people you have nominated with responsibilities for fire safety; andï any special arrangements for serious and imminent danger to persons from fire.ï 
In small premises, where no significant risks have been identified and there are limited numbers of staff, information and instruction may simply involve an explanation of the fire procedures and how they are to be applied. This should include showing staff the fire-protection arrangements, including the designated escape routes, the location and operation of the fire-warning system and any other fire-safety equipment provided, such as fire extinguishers. Fire action notices can complement this information and, where used, should be posted in prominent locations.In larger premises, particularly those in multi-occupied buildings, you should ensure that written instructions are given to people who have been nominated to carry out a designated safety task, such as calling the fire and rescue service or checking that exit doors are available for use at the start of each working day.Further guidance on information and instruction to staff, and on working with dangerous substances is given in Part 2, Section 7.3.Co-operation and co-ordinationIn premises that are not multi-occupied you are likely to be solely responsible. However, in buildings owned by someone else, or where there is more than one occupier, and others are responsible for different parts of the building, it is important that you liaise with them and inform them of any significant risks that you have identified. By liaising you can co-ordinate your resources to ensure that your actions and working practices do not place others at risk if there is a fire, and a co-ordinated emergency plan operates effectively.Where two or more responsible persons share premises in which an explosive atmosphere may occur, the responsible person with overall responsibility for the premises must co-ordinate any measures necessary to protect everyone from any risk that may arise. Employees also have a responsibility to co-operate with their employer so far as it is necessary to help the employer comply with any legal duty.Further information on co-operation and co-ordination is given in Part 2, Section 7.3.34
4.4 Fire safety trainingYou must provide adequate fire safety training for your staff. The type of training should be based on the particular features of your premises and should:ï take account of the findings of the fire risk assessment;ï explain your emergency procedures;ï take account of the work activity and explain the duties and responsibilities of staff;ï take place during normal working hours and be repeated periodically where appropriate;ï be easily understandable by your staff and other people who may be present; andï be tested by fire drills.In small premises this may be no more than showing new staff the fire exits and giving basic training on what to do if there is a fire. In larger premises, such as a supermarket with a high staff turnover and many shift patterns, the organisation of fire safety training will need to be planned.Your staff training should include the following:ï what to do on discovering a fire;ï how to raise the alarm and what happens then;ï what to do upon hearing the fire alarm;ï the procedures for alerting members of the public and visitors including, where appropriate, directing them to exits;ï the arrangements for calling the fire and rescue service;ï the evacuation procedures for everyone in your office or shop to reach an assembly point at a place of total safety;ï the location and, when appropriate, the use of firefighting equipment;ï the location of escape routes, especially those not in regular use;ï how to open all emergency exit doors;ï the importance of keeping fire doors closed to prevent the spread of fire, heat and smoke;ï where appropriate, how to stop machines and processes and isolate power supplies in the event of a fire;ï the reason for not using lifts (except those specifically installed or nominated, following a suitable fire risk assessment, for the evacuation of people with a disability);ï the safe use of and risks from storing or working with highly flammable and explosive substances; andï the importance of general fire safety, which includes good housekeeping.ï 
All the staff identified in your emergency plan that have a supervisory roleif there is a fire (e.g. heads of department, fire marshals or wardens and, in larger offices and shops, fire parties or teams), should be given details of your fire risk assessment and receive additional training.Further guidance on training and how to carry out a fire drill is given in Part 2, Section 7.4.You should constantly monitor what you are doing to implement the fire risk assessment to assess how effectively the risk is being controlled.If you have any reason to suspect that your fire risk assessment is no longer valid or there has been a significant change in your premises that has affected your fire precautions, you will need to review your assessment and if necessary revise it.Reasons for review could include:ï changes to work processes or the way that you organise them, including the introduction of new equipment;ï alterations to the building, including the internal layout;ï substantial changes to furniture and fixings;ï the introduction, change of use or increase in the storage of hazardous substances;ï the failure of fire precautions, e.g. fire-detection systems and alarm systems, life safety sprinklers or ventilation systems;ï significant changes to displays or quantities of stock;ï a significant increase in the number of people present; andï the presence of people with some form of disability.You should consider the potential risk of any significant change before it is introduced. It is usually more effective to minimise a risk by, for example, ensuring adequate, appropriate storage space for an item before introducing it to your premises.36
Do not amend your assessment for every trivial change, but if a change introduces new hazards you should consider them and, if significant, do whatever you need to do to keep the risks under control. In any case you should keep your assessment under review to make sure that the precautions are still working effectively. You may want to re-examine the fire prevention and protection measures at the same time as your health and safety assessment.If a fire or ‘near miss’ occurs, this could indicate that your existing assessment may be inadequate and you should carry out a re-assessment. It is good practice to identify the cause of any incident and then review and, if necessary, revise your fire risk assessment in the light of this.Records of testing, maintenance and training etc. are useful aids in a review process. See Appendix A.1 for an example.Alterations noticesIf you have been served with an ‘alterations notice’ check it to see whether you need to notify the enforcing authority about any changes you propose to make as a result of your review. If these changes include building work, you should also consult a building control body.You should now have completed the five-step fire risk assessment process, using the additional information in Part 2 where necessary. In any review you may need to revisit Steps 1 to 4.
38
Part 2 Further guidance on fire risk assessment and fire precautions
Managing fire safetyGood management of fire safety in your premises is essential to ensure that any fire safety matters that arise are always effectively addressed. In small premises this can be achieved by the manager or owner responsible for maintaining and planning fire safety in conjunction with general health and safety.In larger premises, it is good practice for a senior manager to have overall responsibility for fire safety. It may be appropriate for this responsibility to be placed with the person designated with overall responsibility for health and safety.An organisation’s fire safety policy should be flexible enough to allow modification. It should be recognised that fire safety operates at all levels within an organisation and therefore those responsible for fire safety should be able to develop, where necessary, a local action plan for their premises.The organisation’s policy should be set out in writing and may cover such things as:ï who will hold the responsibility for fire safety at board level;ï who will be the responsible person for each of their premises (this will be the person who has overall control usually the manager);ï the arrangement whereby those responsible for fire safety will, where necessary, nominate in writing specific people to carry out particular tasks if there is a fire; andï arrangements to monitor and check that individual persons responsible for fire safety are meeting the requirements of the fire safety law.
You should have a plan of action to bring together all the features you have evaluated and noted from your fire risk assessment so that you can logically plan what needs to be done. It should not be confused with the emergency plan, which is a statement of what you will do if there is a fire.The plan of action should include what you intend to do to reduce the hazards and risks you have identified and to implement the necessary protection measures.You will need to prioritise these actions to ensure that any findings which identify people in immediate danger are dealt with straight away,e.g. unlocking fire exits. In other cases where people are not in immediate danger but action is still necessary, it may be acceptable to plan this over a period of time.Before admitting the public to your premises you need to ensure that all of your fire safety provisions are in place and in working order, or, if not, that alternative arrangements are in place. Constant checks are needed while the public are present, and again after they have left. Detailed recommendations are given in BS 5588-12.52The guidance in Part 2 provides additional information to:ï ensure good fire safety management by helping you establish your fire prevention measures, fire precautions and fire safety procedures (systems equipment and plans); andï assist you to carry out your fire safety risk assessment and identify any issues that need attention.ï 
Section 1 Further guidance on fire risks and preventative measures
This section provides further information on evaluating the risk of a fire and its prevention in your premises. You should spend time developing long-term workable and effective strategies to reduce hazards and the risk of a fire starting. At its simplest this means separating flammable materials from ignition sources.You should consider:ï housekeeping;ï storage;ï dangerous substances storage, display and use;ï equipment and machinery;ï electrical safety;ï smoking;ï managing building work and alterations;ï existing layout and construction;ï particular hazards in corridors and stairways used as escape routes;ï insulated core panels;ï restricting the spread of fire and smoke;ï fire-resisting structures;ï arson; andï help for people with special needs.1.1 HousekeepingGood housekeeping will lower the chances of a fire starting, so the accumulation of combustible materials in all premises should be monitored carefully. Good housekeeping is essential to reduce the chances of escape routes and fire doors being blocked or obstructed.Keep waste material in suitable containers before it is removed from the premises. If bins, particularly wheeled bins, are used outside, secure them in a compound to prevent them being moved to a position next to the building and set on fire. Never place skips against a building (Figure 13) – they should normallybe a minimum of 6m away from any part of40	the premises.
If you generate a considerable quantity of combustible waste material then you may need to develop a formal plan to manage this effectively.In higher risk areas you need to make sure arrangements are in place for close down,e.g. checking all appliances are turned off and combustible waste has been removed.Figure 13: Bins under stairway (courtesy of Cheshire fire and rescue service)1.2 StorageMany of the materials found in your premises will be combustible. If your premises have inadequate or poorly managed storage areas then the risk of fire is likely to be increased (Figure 14). The more combustible materials you store the greater the source of fuel for a fire. Poorly arranged storage could prevent equipment such as sprinklers working effectively.Combustible materials are not just those generally regarded as highly combustible, such as polystyrene, but all materials that will readily catch fire. However, by carefully considering the type of material, the quantities kept and the storage arrangements, the risks can be significantly reduced.


Figure 14: An example of poor storageIn offices, the retention of large quantities of paper records, especially if not filed away in proprietary cabinets, can increase the fire hazard. Such readily available flammable material makes the potential effect of arson more serious.Many shops will take great care to present an efficient and attractive image in the retail area, while other areas are neglected and allowed to become over-stocked or dumping areas for unsold material.To reduce the risk, store excess materials and stock in a dedicated storage area, storeroom or cupboard. Do not store excess stock in areas where the public would normally have access.Do not pile combustible material against electrical equipment or heaters, even if turned off for the summer, and do not allow smoking in areas where combustible materials are stored.
Consider how stock is displayed in shops and evaluate any additional risk of fire that it generates. For example, rugs stacked on the floor on top of each other would not present a high fire risk, but rolls of carpet storedvertically up against a wall or hung on displays present a vertical surface for fire to spread rapidly upwards. The display of large quantities of clothing on vertical hangers is also likely to increase the risk of rapid fire development.Your fire risk assessment should also consider any additional risk generated by seasonal products such as fireworks and Christmas decorations.Consider the following to reduce these risks:ï ensure storage and display areas are adequately controlled and monitored;ï use fire-resistant display materials wherever possible (suppliers should be able to provide evidence of this); andï ensure electrical lighting used as part of the display does not become a potential source of ignition.VoidsVoids (including roof voids) should not be used for the storage of combustible material. Such voids should be sealed off or kept entirely open to allow for easy access for inspection and the removal of combustible materials.Combustible waste and packagingDelivery of some goods results in large quantities of combustible waste and packaging. The sighting use and removal of these materials needs to be carefully managed to ensure that they cannot come into contact with potential ignition sources and to not cause obstructions.1.3 Dangerous substances: storage, display and useSpecific precautions are required when handling and storing dangerous substances to minimise the possibility of an incident. Your supplier should be able to provide detailed advice on safe storage and handling, however, the following principles will help you reduce the risk from fire:ï substitute highly flammable substances and materials with less flammable ones;ï reduce the quantity of dangerous substances to the smallest reasonable amount necessary for running the business or organisation;ï 
ï correctly store dangerous substances, e.g. in a fire-resisting enclosure. All flammable liquids and gases should ideally be locked away, especially when the premises are unoccupied, to reduce the chance of them being used in an arson attack; andï ensure that you and your employees are aware of the fire risk the dangerous substances present and the precautions necessary to avoid danger.Additional general fire precautions may be needed to take account of the additional risks that may be posed by the storage and use of these substances.Certain substances and materials are by their nature, highly flammable, oxidising or potentially explosive. These substances are controlled by other legislation in addition to fire safety law, in particular the Dangerous Substances and Explosive Atmospheres Regulations20027 (also see the HSE’s Approved Code of Practice and guidance8).Flammable liquidsHighly flammable liquids present a particularly high fire risk. For example, a leak from a container of flammable solvents, such as methylated spirit, will produce large quantities of heavier-than-air flammable vapours. These can travel large distances, increasing the likelihood of their reaching a source of ignition well away from the original leak, such as a basement containing heating plant and/or electrical equipment on automatic timers.The risk is reduced by ensuring the storage and use of highly flammable liquids is carefully managed, that materials contaminated with solvent are properly disposed of (Figure 15) and when not in use, they are safely stored.Up to 50 litres may be stored in a fire-resisting cabinet or bin that will contain any leaks (Figure 16).In retail premises the quantity of flammable liquids on display should be kept to the minimum to meet business needs.
Figure 15: A fire-resisting pedal bin for ragsFigure 16: A 50 litre storage bin for flammablesThere should be no potential ignition sources in areas where flammable liquids are used or stored and flammable concentrations of vapours may be present. Any electrical equipment used in these areas, including fire alarm and emergency lighting systems, needs to be suitable for use in flammable atmospheres. In such situations, it is recommended that you should seek advice from a competent person.
42

LPG storageWhere LPG in cylinders or cartridges is present, you need to take particular care to minimise the possibility of its involvement in a fire. The total amount of LPG for display or demonstration in retail areas should be kept to the minimum necessary to meet business needs. In no circumstances should it exceed 70kg and this should be reduced to 15kg if the retail premises are under residential accommodation or partof a multi-use building, unless the two are separated by a substantial partition that is imperforate and provides at least 60 minutes fire resistance.Locate cylinders and cartridges in a safe and secure place where they:ï cannot be interfered with;ï can be kept upright (with valve protection fitted);ï are away from sources of ignition and/or readily ignitable materials;ï are away from any corrosive, toxic or oxidant materials; and;ï are away from stairways, exit doors and places where they may obstruct the means of escape.Quantities of LPG in excess of the amounts indicated for retail areas should be stored in a properly designed and located storage area that is dedicated for LPG.
Bulk storage tanks for LPG should be designed, installed and located in accordance with industry guidance.Advice on the use of LPG for heating is given in Section 1.4.Further guidance on the safe storage of LPG is available from your supplier or the Liquefied Petroleum Gas Association’s Code of Practice.9FireworksFireworks can cause fires and explosions in shops. They have the potential for a violent release of pressure and heat that can cause severe harm to people and damage to a building.Fireworks can be ignited or detonated by contact with ignition sources or by contamination, where other chemicals or water cause the material to become unstable.If you sell fireworks you have certain obligations to the public and your staff. You must:ï be ‘registered’ or obtain a licence to store fireworks;ï obtain a ‘licence to sell fireworks’ if you intend to sell outside the usual fireworks period;ï store fireworks safely;ï not sell fireworks to under 18s; andï review your risk assessment and, where necessary, take additional measures.Preventative measures include:ï store and display fireworks in appropriate containers, display cabinets;ï keep all fireworks in a dry place;ï do not store an excessive amount of fireworks either in the shop or stockroom and do not store more than your licence permits;ï do not store the fireworks near other articles that could spread the fire;ï do not store fireworks near an escape route;ï exclude sources of ignition and in particular, stop people smoking anywhere near the fireworks; andï avoid all unnecessary handling of fireworks;ï 
Further guidance on the storage and sale of fireworks is available on the DTI website www.dti.gov.uk/fireworks.AerosolsSome aerosols can contain flammable products stored at pressure and they can present a high level of hazard. When ignited they can explode, produce fireballs and rocket to distances of 40m. Their presence in premises can make it unsafe for firefighters to enter a building and they have the potential for starting multiple fires.The following should be considered to reduce these risks:ï All staff involved in the movement, storage and display of aerosol cans should be adequately instructed, trained and supervised.ï Damaged and leaking aerosol cans should be removed immediately to a safe, secure, well ventilated place prior to disposal. Powered vehicles should not be used to move damaged stock, unless specially adapted for use in flammable atmospheres. Arrangements should be made for disposal at a licenced waste management facility.1.4 Equipment and machineryCommon causes of fire in equipment are:ï allowing ventilation points to become clogged or blocked, causing overheating;ï inadequate cleaning of heat-shrink packaging equipment, such as that used in in-store bakeries;ï allowing extraction equipment in catering environments to build up excessive grease deposits;ï misuse or lack of maintenance of cooking equipment and appliances; andï disabling or interfering with automatic or manual safety features and cut-outs.All machinery, apparatus and office equipment should be properly maintained by a competent person. Appropriate signs and instructions on safe use may be necessary.
HeatingIndividual heating appliances require particular care if they are to be used safely, particularly those which are kept for emergency use during a power cut or as supplementary heating during severe weather. The greatest risks arise from lack of maintenance and staff unfamiliarity with them. Heaters should preferably be secured in position when in use and fitted with a fire guard if appropriate.As a general rule, convector or fan heaters should be preferred to radiant heaters because they present a lower risk of fire and injury.The following rules should be observed:ï All heaters should be kept well clear of combustible materials and where they do not cause an obstruction.ï Heaters which burn a fuel should be sited away from draughts.ï Portable fuel burning heaters (including bottled gas (LPG)) should only be used in exceptional circumstances and if shown to be acceptable in your risk assessment.All gas heating appliances should be used only in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions and should be serviced annually by a competent person.In general, staff should be discouraged from bringing in their own portable heaters and other electrical equipment (e.g. kettles) into the premises.Cooking processesTypical installations used in cooking processes include deep fat fryers, ovens, grills, surface cookers, ductwork, flues, filters, hoods, extract and ventilation ducts and dampers.These cooking processes can operate with high temperatures, involving large quantities of oil and combustible food stuffs. Heat sources used for cooking processes include: gas, electric and microwave. The main cause of fire are ignition of cooking oil, combustion of crumbs and sediment deposits, and ductwork fires from a build up of fats and grease.The siting of cooking processes close to insulated core panels with combustible insulation (see Section 1.10) can lead to the likely ignition of the panels and consequent rapid fire spread to other parts of the building. This practice should therefore be avoided.
44

The following should be considered to reduce the risk from cooking processes:ï regular cleaning to prevent build-up of crumbs and other combustible material;ï fire resisting containers for waste products;ï a fire suppression system capable of controlling an outbreak of fire;ï monitored heat/oil levels, even after the cooking process is complete and installation of temperature control/cut-off/ shut off devices as appropriate;ï duct, joints and supports able to withstand high cooking temperatures;ï seperation from wall and ceiling panels (with combustible insulation) e.g. 2.5m for walls, 4m for ceilings;ï insulation of ducts to prevent heating/ignition of nearby combustible wall and ceiling materials;ï a regular programme for inspection and cleaning;ï a programme of electrical and mechanical maintenance; andï annual service of all gas heating appliances by a competent person.1.5 Electrical safetyElectrical equipment can be a significant cause of accidental fires in shops and offices. The main causes are:ï overheating cables and equipment, e.g. due to overloading circuits, bunched or coiled cables or impaired cooling fans;ï incorrect installation or use of equipment;ï little or no maintenance and testing of equipment;ï incorrect fuse ratings;ï damaged or inadequate insulation on cables or wiring;ï combustible materials being placed too close to electrical equipment which may give off heat even when operating normally or may become hot due to a fault;ï arcing or sparking by electrical equipment; andï embrittlement and cracking of cable sheathing in cold environments.
All electrical equipment should be installed and maintained in a safe manner by a competent person. If portable electrical equipment is used, including items brought into a workplace by staff, then your fire risk assessment should ensure that it visually inspected and undergoes portable appliance testing (‘PAT’) at intervals suitable for the type of equipment and its frequency of use (refer to HSE guidance10). If you have any doubt about the safety of your electrical installation then you should consult a competent electrician.Issues to consider include:ï overloading of equipment;ï correct fuse ratings;ï PAT testing and testing of fixed installations;ï protection against overloading of installation;ï protection against short circuit;ï insulation, earthing and electrical isolation requirements;ï frequency of electrical inspection and test;ï temperature rating and mechanical strength of flexible cables;ï portable electrical equipment;ï physical environment in which the equipment is used (e.g. wet or dusty atmospheres); andï suitable use and maintenance of personal protective equipment.All electrical installations should be regularly inspected by a competent electrical engineer appointed by you, or on your behalf, in accordance with the Electricity at Work Regulations 1989 (EAW Regulations).53 The use of low voltage equipment should conform to the requirements of the Electrical Equipment (Safety) Regulations 1994,54 including the requirement to be CE marked.1.6 SmokingCarelessly discarded cigarettes and other smoking materials are a major cause of fire. A cigarette can smoulder for several hours, especially when surrounded by combustible material. Many fires are started several hoursafter the smoking materials have been emptied into waste bags and left for future disposal.
Consider prohibiting smoking in your premises other than in the designated smoking areas.Display suitable signs throughout the premises informing people of the smoking policy and the locations where smoking is permitted.In those areas where smoking is permitted, provide non-combustible deep and substantial ashtrays to help prevent unsuitable containers being used. Empty all ashtrays daily into a metal waste bin and take it outside. It is dangerous to empty ashtrays into plastic waste sacks which are then left inside for disposal later.1.7 Managing building work and alterationsFires are more frequent when buildings are undergoing refurbishment or alteration.You should ensure that, before any building work starts, you have reviewed the fire risk assessment and considered what additional dangers are likely to be introduced. You will need to evaluate the additional risks to people, particularly in those buildings that continue to be occupied. Lack of pre-planning can lead to haphazard co-ordination of fire safety measures.You should liaise and exchange information with contractors who will also have a duty under the Construction (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 199611, 12 to carry out a risk assessment and inform you of their significant findings and the preventive measures they may employ. This may be supported by the contractors’ agreed work method statement. The designer should also have considered fire safety as part of the Construction (Design and Management) Regulations 1994 (the CDM Regulations).55You should continuously monitor the impact of the building work on the general fire safety precautions, such as the increased risk from quantities of combustible materials and accumulated waste and maintaining adequate means of escape. You should only allow the minimum materials necessary for the work in hand within or adjacent to your building.Additional risks can include:ï hot work such as flame cutting, welding, soldering, or paint stripping;ï temporary electrical equipment;ï 
blocking of escape routes, including external escape routes;ï introduction of combustibles into an escape route;ï loss of normal storage facilities;ï fire safety equipment, such as automatic fire-detection systems becoming affected;ï fire-resisting partitions being breached or fire doors being wedged open (see Appendix B1 for information on fire-resisting separation); andï additional personnel who may be unfamiliar with the premises.Activities such as welding, flame cutting, use of blow lamps or portable grinding equipment can pose a serious fire hazard and need to be strictly controlled when carried out in areas near flammable materials. This can be done by having a written permit to work for the people involved (whether they are your employees or those of the contractor).12A permit to work is appropriate in situations of high hazard/risk and, for example, where there is a need to:ï ensure that there is a formal check confirming that a safe system of work is being followed;ï co-ordinate with other people or activities;ï provide time-limits when it is safe to carry out the work; andï provide specialised personal protective equipment (such as breathing apparatus) or methods of communication.You must notify the fire and rescue service about alterations in your premises if an alterations notice is in force.Further guidance on fire safety during construction work is available from the HSE56,57 and the Fire Protection Association.581.8 Existing layout and constructionIn many shops, and increasingly in offices, the design is for open-plan areas allowing customers and employees to move freely throughoutthe floor.
46

Traditionally, occupants are advised to shut doors when escaping from a fire but in open- plan areas there are few doors to shut. In these areas the fire, and especially the smoke, may spread faster than expected.To assess the risk in your premises you need to evaluate the construction and layout of your premises. This does not mean a structural survey, unless you suspect that the structureis damaged or any structural fire protection is missing or damaged, but rather an informed look around to see if there are any easy paths through which smoke and fire may spread and what you can do to stop that. In general, older buildings will have more void areas, possibly hidden from view, which will allow smoke and fire to spread away from its source. Whatever your type of building, you may need to consider typical situations that may assist the spread of fire and smoke such as:ï vertical shafts, e.g. lifts, open stairways, dumb waiters or holes for moving stock around;ï false ceilings, especially if they are not fire- stopped above walls;ï voids behind wall panelling;ï unsealed holes in walls and ceilings where pipe work, cables or other services have been installed; andï doors, particularly to stairways, which are ill-fitting or routinely left open.1.9 Particular hazards in corridors and stairways used as escape routesItems that are a source of fuel, pose an ignition risk, or are combustible and likely to increase the fire loading or spread of fire, should not be located on any corridor or, stairway or circulation space that will be used as an escape route.Such items include:ï portable heaters, e.g. bottled gas (LPG) or electric radiant heaters and electric convectors or boilers;ï gas cylinders for supplying heaters;ï cooking appliances; andï unenclosed gas pipes, meters, and other fittings.
However, where more than one escape route is available and depending on the findings of your risk assessment, items such as those below may be acceptable if the minimum exit widths are maintained and the item presents a relatively low fire risk:ï non-combustible lockers;ï vending machines;ï small items of electrical equipment (e.g. photocopiers); andï small coat racks and/or small quantities of upholstered furniture which meetsBS 7176 or the Furniture and Furnishings (Fire) (Safety) Regulations 1988.1.10 Insulated core panelsMany buildings have insulated core panels as exterior cladding or for internal structures (Figure 17) and partitions. The food industry, in particular, uses insulated core panels because they are easy to clean and facilitate consistent temperature control within the premises. The simple construction of these panels enables alterations and for additionalinternal partitions to be erected with minimum disruption to business.Figure 17: Insulated core panels – internalThey normally consist of a central insulated core, sandwiched between an inner and outer metal skin. There is no air gap. The external surface is then normally coated with a PVC covering to improve weather resistance or the aesthetic appeal of the panel. The central core can be made of various insulating materials, ranging from virtually non-combustible through to highly combustible. Differing fire hazards are
associated with common types of insulation, when the panels are subjected to certain temperatures. Typical examples are:ï Mineral rock/modified phenolic will produce surface char and little smoke or gaseous combustion products, at temperatures above 230°C.ï Polyisocyanurate (PIR)/polyurethane (PUR) will char and will generate smoke and gaseous combustion products, at temperatures above 430°C PIR and 300°C PUR.ï Expanded polystyrene (EPS) will melt and will generate smoke and gaseous combustion products, at temperatures above 430°C PIR.Insulation charring can lead to panel delamination/ collapse, and the gaseous combustion products can fill areas with the toxic gases carbon monoxide and styrene.A number of fires in buildings where insulated panels have been used extensively in the fabric of the building have highlighted the particular dangers that may be associated with this form of construction, i.e. where the fabric of the building can contribute to the fire hazards.In a fire the following may occur:ï early buckling and falling away of the facing materials;ï burning of the combustible insulating material;ï production of large quantities of dense, toxic smoke;ï rapid heat generation;ï early loss of structural strength can result if the system has not been properly designed, and this can lead to the collapse of the wall, partition or ceiling;ï there may be cavities in older buildings where the panels are used as an internal envelope, enabling fire to spread unnoticed and possibly unchecked by fire barriers.Once installed it is difficult to identify the core material of a panel and its potential fire hazard.The following best practise can help you reduce risks associated with insulated panels.ï Do not install heating appliances, such as ovens, against the panels. Operate a clear distance policy for cooking systems.ï Control ignition sources that are adjacent to, or penetrating the panels.48ï 
Control hot working.ï Check for damage to heater tapes used to prevent ice build-up at doors.ï Do not store highly combustible materials against panels or allow rubbish to collect against panels.ï Have damaged panels or sealed joints repaired immediately and make sure that jointing compounds or gaskets used around the edges of the panels are in good order.ï Check where openings have been made for doors, windows, cables and ducts to ensure that these have been effectively sealed and the inner core has not been exposed.ï Check that there has been no mechanical damage and repair any that has occured,e.g. caused by mobile equipment such as fork lift trucks.ï Ensure that any loads, such as storage and equipment, are only supported by panels which have been designed and installed to perform this function.ï Check that the inner and outer skins are adhering tightly to the core.ï Ensure that the panels are correctly secured to the structure or are designed to be independently structurally secure. One solution is to ensure the retaining brackets bolt the panel to a support frame through the outer and inner skins;ï Ensure large roof cavities are appropriately protected, e.g. escape routes are clear, signed and have limited travel distance, and fire warning systems are audible.The use of combustible panels in areas of buildings with a high life risk, e.g. where large numbers of people are present, should be carefully considered. Your fire risk assessment may need to be revised to ensure that any increased risk resulting from this type of construction is considered.The potential for fire development involving mineral fibre cores is less than that for panels containing polymeric cores. Therefore, in areas where there is considerable life risk, it may be appropriate to consider replacing combustible panels, providing a fire suppression system or installing non-combustible fire breaks within or between the panels at suitable intervals.


Insulated core panels should be installed by a competent person in accordance with industry guidance.Guidance on the design, construction, specification and fire management of insulated core panels has been published by the International Association of Cold Storage Contractors.591.11 Restricting the spread of fire and smokeTo reduce the risk to people if there is a fire, you need to consider how to control or restrict the spread of fire and smoke. The majority of people who die in fires are overcome by the smoke and gases.It is important ensure that, in the event of fire, the rate of fire growth is restricted in its early stages. It should also be noted that most measures which restrict the rate of fire growth in its early stages will also serve to restrict the fire spread in its later stages.
Display materials and decorationsDisplays are often located in corridors, entrance foyers and shop floors, and generally comprise materials such as paper, cardboard and plastic which provide a means for the rapid spread of fire. You should assess how these materials could contribute to the development of a fire in the area where they are located. To reduce the risk of fire spread, you should consider the following:ï avoid the use of displays in corridors and foyers;ï minimise the size and number of display areas to discrete, separated areas;ï treating displays with proprietary flame- retardant sprays;ï the use of display boxes;ï keep displays away from curtains, light fittings and heaters;ï keep displays away from ceiling voids which may lack fire barriers; andï ensure that there are no igntion sources in the vicinity.Staff information should be confined to appropriately located display boards in areas away from escape routes. Display boards may be used on escape routes as long as they are no bigger than 1m2 or have been enclosed in a sealed display case.Catering facilitiesWherever possible any extensive catering facilities, particularly those with deep fryers, should be located in a seperate building, or alternatively, seperated from the remainder of the building by fire doors and fire resisting construction and provided with adequate ventilation.Where flues pass through any part of the structure, the structure should be protected by fire resisting construction. Where fire shutters are used these should be capable of operating both manually and by fusible link. Where a fire detection and warning system is installed, the fire shutter should also be designed to closeon activation of the system via a controlled geared mechanism.Fire-resisting structuresMany buildings are divided into different areas by fire doors and fire-resisting walls and floors. These are partly designed to keep a fire within one area, giving people more time to escape. You will need to identify which doors, walls
and floors in your building are fire-resisting. There may be information available from when the building was built, if alterations have been made, or from a previously held fire certificate.High-risk areas should be seperated from the rest of the premises by 30-minute fire- resisting construction.Normally if there are fire doors in a wall, then the wall itself will also need to be fire-resisting. (See Appendix B1 for more information about fire-resisting walls.) If a wall or floor is required to be fire-resisting then you should not make any holes in it, e.g. for extra doors or pipe ducts, without consulting a competent person.Smoke controlIn larger buildings and some units in shopping complexes, there may be some form of automatic smoke ventilation (Figure 18) provided for the safety of the occupants and to assist firefighting (e.g. Smoke and Heat Exhaust Ventilation Systems (SHEVS)). These systems are designed to restrict the spread of fire and smoke usually by venting the heat and smoke through the
roof or via other routes to the outside. Low level inlet air is essential for the operation of SHEVS and all openings for this purpose should not be obstructed.Special down-stands may have been installed to create a reservoir which will contain the smoke and hot gases at roof level, while vents allow the smoke to escape. It is important that any smoke can flow easily into the reservoirs and that nothing which could cause an obstruction, e.g. display material, is fixed near the vents. It is important that any smoke can flow easily into the reservoirs and that nothing which could cause an obstruction, e.g. large advertising displays, is fixed near the vents.In shopping complexes the front of individual shops often forms part of the smoke control design. If your building has smoke vents fitted, or any other form of smoke control, then you may need to seek advice from someone who is competent in such systems.Further information on smoke control can be found from CIBSE Guide E64 or from the BRE.65
Figure 18: Smoke vents50

1.12 ArsonRecent studies indicate that, across all premises types, over 2,100 deliberately set fires, resulting in two deaths and 55 injuries, occur every week. In shops it is estimated that 44% of all fires are deliberately set.*51 All premises can be targeted either deliberately or just because they offer easy access.Be aware of other small, deliberately set fires in the locality, which can indicate an increased risk to your premises. Be suspicious of any small ‘accidental’ fires on the premises and investigate them fully and record your findings.Fires started deliberately can be particularly dangerous because they generally develop much faster and may be intentionally started in escape routes. Of all the risk-reduction measures, the most benefit may come from efforts to reduce the threat from arson.Measures to reduce arson may include the following:ï ensure the outside of the premises is well lit and, if practical, secure the perimeter of the premises;ï thoroughly secure all entry points tothe premises, including windows and the roof, but make sure that this does not compromise people’s ability to use the escape routes;ï make sure you regularly remove all combustible rubbish;ï do not place rubbish skips adjacent to the building and secure waste bins in a compound separated from the building;ï do not park vehicles or store goods or materials in the open next to windows or doors opening into buildings;ï encourage staff to report people acting suspiciously;ï remove automatic entry rights from staff who have been dismissed;ï ensure that your security alarm/fire- detection system is monitored and acted on;ï secure flammable liquids so that intruders cannot use them;ï 
secure all storage areas and unused areas of the building that do not form part of an escape route against unauthorised access, ensure access to keys to those areas is restricted; andï fit secure metal letterboxes on the inside of letter flaps to contain any burning materials that may be pushed through.Further guidance on reducing the risk of arson has been published by the Arson Prevention Bureau.51**1.13 Help for people with special needsOf all the people who may be especially at risk you will need to pay particular attention to people who may have special needs, including those with a disability. The Disability Rights Commission estimates that 11 million peoplein this country have some form of disability, which may mean that they find it more difficult to leave a building if there is a fire. Under the Disability Discrimination Act,13 if disabled people could realistically expect to use your premises, then you must anticipate any reasonable adjustments that would make it easier for that right to be exercised.The Disability Discrimination Act13 includes the concept of ‘reasonable adjustments’ and this can be carried over into fire safety law. It can mean different things in different circumstances. For a small business, it may be considered reasonable to provide contrasting colours on a handrail to help those with vision impairment to follow an escape route more easily. However, it might be unreasonable to expect that same business to install an expensive voice-alarm system. Appropriate ‘reasonable adjustments’ for a large business or organisation may be much more significant.If disabled people are going to be in your premises then you must also provide a safe means for them to leave if there is a fire. You and your staff should be aware that disabled people may not react, or can react differently, to a fire warning or small fire. You should give similar consideration to others with special needs such as parents with young children or the elderly.
* Fire Statistics UK, 2004, ODPM: 2006.** Visit www.arsonpreventionbureau.org.uk for more information.
In premises with a simple layout, a common- sense approach, such as offering to help lead a blind person or helping an elderly person down steps may be enough. In more complexpremises, more elaborate plans and procedures will be needed, with trained staff assigned to specified duties. In this case you may also wish to contact a professional consultant or take advice from disability organisations.Consider the needs of those with mental disabilities or spatial recognition problems. The range of disabilities encountered can be considerable, extending from mild epilepsy to complete disorientation in an emergency situation. Many of these can be addressed byproperly trained staff, discreet and empathetic use of the ‘buddy system’ or by careful planning of colour and texture to identify escape routes.Where people with special needs use orwork in the premises, their needs should, so far as is practicable, be discussed with them. These will often be modest and may require only changes or modifications to existing procedures. You may need to develop individual ‘personal emergency evacuation plans’ (PEEPs) for disabled people who frequently use a building. They will need to be confident of any plan/PEEP that is put in place after consultation with them.As part of your consultation exercise you will need to consider the matter of personal dignity.If members of the public use your building then you may need to develop a range of standard PEEPs which can be provided on request to a disabled person or others with special needs.Guidance on removing barriers to the everyday needs of disabled people is in BS 8300.14 Much of this advice will also help disabled people during an evacuation.Further advice can be obtained from the Disability Rights Commission at www.drc-gb.org.52
Section 2 Further guidance onfire detection and warning systems
Where an electrical fire-warning system is necessary then a straightforward arrangement typically includes the following:ï manual call points (break-glass call points) next to exits with at least one call point on each floor;ï electronic sirens or bells; andï a control and indicator panel.An alternative system of interconnected combined manual call points and sounders may be acceptable.If your building has areas where a fire could develop undetected or where people work alone and might not see a fire, then it may be necessary to upgrade your fire-warning system to incorporate automatic fire detection or install an automatic fire-detection and warning system.If, for any reason, your system fails you must still ensure that people in your premises can be warned and escape safely. A temporary arrangement, such as gongs, whistles or air horns, combined with suitable training, may be acceptable for a short period, pending system repairs.The fire warning sound levels should be loud enough to alert everyone, taking intoaccount background noise. In areas with high background noise, or where people may be wearing hearing protectors, the audible warning should be supplemented, e.g. with visual alarms.People with hearing difficultiesWhere people have hearing difficulties, particularly those who are profoundly deaf, then simply hearing the fire warning is likely to be the major difficulty. If these persons are never alone while on the premises then this may not be a serious problem, as it would be reasonable for other occupants to let them know that the building should be evacuated. If a person with hearing difficulties is likely to be alone, then consider other means of raising the alarm. Among the most popular are visual beacons and vibrating devices or pagers that are linked to the existing fire alarm.
Voice alarmsResearch has shown that some people and, in particular, members of the public, do not always react quickly to a conventional fire alarm. Voice alarms are therefore becoming increasingly popular and can also incorporate a public address facility. The message or messages sent must be carefully considered. It is therefore essential to ensure that voice- alarm systems are designed and installed by aperson with specialist knowledge of these systems.Schematic planIn order to quickly determine where a fire has been detected, you should consider displaying a schematic plan showing fire alarm zones in a multi-zoned system adjacent to the control panel.2.1 Manual call pointsManual call points, often known as ‘break- glass’ call points, enable a person who discovers a fire to immediately raise the alarm and warn other people in the premises of the danger.People leaving a building because of a fire will normally leave by the way they entered. Consequently, manual call points are normally positioned at exits and storey exits that people may reasonably be expected to use in case of fire, not just those designated as fire exits.However it is not necessary in every case to provide call points at every exit.Manual call points should normally be positioned so that, taking into account all fixtures and fittings, machinery and stock are in place, no one should have to travel more than 45m to the nearest alarm point. This distance may need to be less if your premises caterfor people of limited mobility or there are particularly hazardous areas. They should be conspicuous (red), fitted at a height of about1.4m (or less for premises with a significant number of wheelchair users), and not in an area likely to be obstructed.
2.2 Automatic fire detectionAutomatic fire detection may be needed for a number of reasons. These can include:ï if you have areas where people are isolated or remote and could become trapped bya fire because they are unaware of its development, such as lone workers;ï if you have areas where a fire can develop unobserved (e.g. storerooms);ï as a compensating feature, e.g. for inadequate structural fire protection, in dead-ends or where there are extended travel distances; andï where smoke control and ventilation systems are controlled by the automatic fire-detection system.If you have an automatic fire detection system, the system should:ï be designed to accommodate the emergency evacuation procedure;ï give an automatic indication of the fire warning and its location. If the indicator panel is located in a part of the premises other than the control point (for example, to the secretary’s office) there should ideally be a repeater panel sited in the control point;ï be maintained and tested by a competent person; andï communicate with a central control room (if you have one).New automatic fire detection systems should be designed and installed by a competent person. Further guidance is given in BS 5839-116 or a more recent standard where applicable.Where the public address system is part of the fire warning system it should be connected to an auxiliary power source to ensure the continued use of the system in the event of fire or other emergency.Whichever warning or detection systems are in place, however, if a fire occurs the fire and rescue service should always be called immediately.2.3 
Reducing false alarmsFalse alarms from automatic fire detection systems are a major problem and result in many unwanted calls to the fire and rescue service every year. Guidance on reducing false alarms has been published by ODPM/ CFOA/BFPSA.15If there are excessive false alarms in your premises, people may become complacent and not respond correctly to a warning of a real fire. In such circumstances, you may be failing to comply with fire safety law. All false alarms should be investigated to identify the cause of the problem and remedial action taken.To help reduce the number of false alarms, the system design and location of detection and activation devices should be reviewed against the way the premises are currently used. For example, if a store room has been converted to staff area with cooking facilities (e.g. a microwave and toaster) then the likelihood of the detector being set off is increased. Consequently, subject to the outcome of the fire risk assessment a heat detector may be more appropriate.Similarly, if a manual call point is placed in a storage area where there is continual movement of stock, the call point is likely to be accidentally damaged. In this case a simple, fabricated hinged metal guard around the call point is likely to solve the problem.Occasionally people set off a manual call point in the genuine, but incorrect belief that there is a fire. Nothing should be done to discourage such actions and the number of false alarms generated this way is not significant.Further detailed guidance on reducing false alarms is available in BS 5839-1.162.4 Staged fire alarmsIn the vast majority of premises sounding the fire warning system should trigger the immediate and total evacuation of the building. However, in some large or complex premises this may not be necessary as alternative arrangements may be in place.
54

These alternative arrangements broadly fall into two groups. Firstly, those people potentially most at risk from a fire, usually those closestto where the alarm was activated, will be immediately evacuated, while others in the building are given an alert signal and will only evacuate if it becomes necessary. This is generally called a phased evacuation and theinitial movement, depending on the layout and configuration of the premises, can be either horizontal or vertical.The second alternative is for the initial alert signal to be given to certain staff, who then carry out pre-arranged actions to help others to evacuate more easily. It requires able, fully- trained staff to be available at all times and should not be seen as a simple means of reducing disruption to working practices.Where staged alarms are being used, disabled people should be alerted on the first stage to give them the maximum time to escape.These arrangements both require fire-warning systems capable of giving staged alarms, including an ‘alert signal’ and a different ‘evacuate signal’ and should only be considered after consultation with specialist installers and, if necessary, the relevant enforcing authority.Such systems also require a greater degree of management input to ensure that staff and others are familiar with the system and action required.2.5 Testing and maintenanceYour fire-warning and/or detection system should be supervised by a named responsible person, given enough authority and training to manage all aspects of the routine testing and scrutiny of the system.The control and indicating equipment should be checked at least every 24 hours to ensure there are no specific faults. All types of fire- warning systems should be tested once a week. For electrical systems a manual call point should be activated (using a different call point for each successive test), usually by inserting a dedicated test key (Figure 19).This will check that the control equipment is capable of receiving a signal and in turn, activating the warning alarms. Manual call points may be numbered to ensure they are sequentially tested.
Testing and maintenance of the system should be carried out by a competent person.Figure 19: Using a test keyIt is good practice to test the alarm at the same time each week, but additional tests may be required to ensure that staff or people present outside normal working hours are given the opportunity to hear the alarm.Where systems are connected to a central monitoring station, arrangements should be made prior to testing to avoid unwanted false alarms. Further guidance on testing and maintenance of fire warning systems can be found in BS 5839-1.16Six-monthly servicing and preventive maintenance should be carried out by a competent person with specialist knowledge of fire-warning and automatic detection systems. This task is normally fulfilled by entering into a service contract with a specialist fire alarm company.It is good practice to record all tests, false alarms and any maintenance carried out.
2.6 Guaranteed power supplyIf your fire risk assessment concludes that an electrical fire-warning system is necessary, then the Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations 19965 requires it to have a back-up power supply.Whatever back-up system is used, it should normally be capable of operating the fire- warning and detection system for a minimum period of 24 hours and sounding the alarm signal in all areas for 30 minutes.2.7 New and altered systemsGuidance on the design and installation of new systems and those undergoing substantial alterations is given in BS 5839.16 If you are unsure that your existing system is adequate you will need to consult a competent person.56
Section 3 Further guidance on firefighting equipment and facilitiesYou have responsibility for the provision of appropriate firefighting equipment. It is also your responsibility to check that all firefighting equipment is in the correct position and in satisfactory order before the premises are used.Appropriate staff should be trained in the use of all such equipment.3.1 Portable firefighting equipmentFires are classed according to what is burning. Fire extinguishers provided should be appropriate to the classes of fire found in your premises in accordance with Table 1.Table 1: Class of fireClass of fireDescriptionClass AFires involving solid materials such as wood, paper or textiles.Class BFires involving flammable liquids such as petrol, diesel or oils.Class CFires involving gases.Class DFires involving metals.Class FFires involving cooking oils such as in deep-fat fryers.Note:1. If there is a possibility of a fire in your premises involving material in the shaded boxes then you should seek advice from a competent person.2. It is not safe to fight fires involving aerosols with fire extinguishers.1. 
Number and type of extinguishersTypically for the Class A fire risk, the provision of one water-based extinguisher for approximately every 200m2 of floor space, with a minimumof two extinguishers per floor, will normally be adequate.Where it is determined that there are additionally other classes of fire risk, the appropriate type, number and size of extinguisher should be provided. Further information is available in BS 5306-8.18Where the fire risk is not confined to a particular location, e.g. Class A fires, the fire extinguishers should be positioned on escape routes, close to the exit from the room or floor, or the final exit from the building. Similarly, where the particular fire risk is specifically located, e.g. flammable liquids, the appropriate fire extinguisher should be near to the hazard, and located so that it can be safely used. They should be placed on a dedicated stand or hung on a wall at a convenient height so that employees can easily lift them off (at about 1m for larger extinguishers, 1.5m for smaller ones, to the level of the handle). Ideally no one should have to travel more than 30m to reach a fire extinguisher. If there is a risk of malicious use you may need to use alternative, and more secure, locations.Consider the implications of the Manual Handling Operations Regulations 199217 when selecting and siting firefighting equipment.Where there are self-contained small premises, multi-purpose extinguishers which can cover a range of risks may be appropriate. Depending on the outcome of your fire risk assessment, it may be possible to reduce this to one extinguisher in very small premises with a floor space of less than 90m2.Extinguishers manufactured to current standards (BS EN 3-7)79 are predominately red but may have a colour-coded area, sited above or within the instructions, denoting the typeof extinguisher. Most older extinguishers, manufactured to previous standards, have bodies painted entirely in a single colour which denotes the type of extinguisher. These older extinguishers remain acceptable until they are no longer serviceable. However, it is good practice to ensure that old and new style extinguishers are not mixed on the same floor of a building.
The following paragraphs describe the different types of extinguisher. The colour referred to is the colour of the extinguisher or the colour- coded area.Water extinguishers (red)This type of extinguisher can only be used on Class A fires. They allow the user to direct water onto a fire from a considerable distance. A 9-litre water extinguisher can be quite heavy and some water extinguishers with additives can achieve the same rating, although they are smaller and therefore considerably lighter. This type of extinguisher is not suitable for use on live electrical equipment.Water extinguishers with additives (red) This type of extinguisher is suitable for Class A fires. They can also be suitable for use on Class B fires and where appropriate, this will be indicated on the extinguisher. They are generally more efficient than conventional water extinguishers.Foam extinguishers (cream)This type of extinguisher can be used on Class A or B fires and is particularly suited to extinguishing liquid fires such as petrol and diesel. They should not be used on free- flowing liquid fires unless the operator has been specially trained, as these have the potential to rapidly spread the fire to adjacent material. This type of extinguisher is not suitable for deep-fat fryers or chip pans.Powder extinguishers (blue)This type of extinguisher can be used onmost classes of fire and achieve a good ‘knock down’ of the fire. They can be used on fires involving electrical equipment but will almost certainly render that equipment useless.Because they do not cool the fire appreciably it can re-ignite. Powder extinguishers can create a loss of visibility and may affect people who have breathing problems, and are not generally suitable for enclosed spaces.Carbon dioxide extinguishers (black)This type of extinguisher is particularly suitable for fires involving electrical equipment as they will extinguish a fire without causing any further damage (accept in the case of some electronic equipment e.g. computers). As with all fires involving electrical equipment, the power should be disconnected if possible.
58

Class ‘F’ extinguishersThis type of extinguisher is particularly suitable for commercial catering establishments with deep-fat fryers.Selection, installation and maintenance of portable fire extinguishersAll portable fire extinguishers will require periodic inspection, maintenance and testing. Depending on local conditions such as the likelihood of vandalism or the environment where extinguishers are located, carry out brief checks to ensure that they remain serviceable. In normal conditions a monthly check should be enough. Maintenance by a competent person should be carried out annually.New fire extinguishers should comply with BS EN 3-7.79 Guidance on the selection and installation of fire extinguishers can be found in BS 5306-8,18 for maintenance, BS 5306-319 and for colour coding in BS 7863.20Fire blanketsFire blankets should be located in the vicinity of the fire hazard they are to be used on, but in a position that can be safely accessedin the event of a fire. They are classified as either light duty or heavy duty. Light-duty fire blankets are suitable for dealing with small fires in containers of cooking oils or fats and fires involving clothing. Heavy-duty fire blankets are for industrial use where thereis a need for the blankets to resist penetration by molten materials.3.2 Fixed firefighting installationsThese are firefighting systems which are normally installed within the structure of the building. They may already be provided in your premises or you may be considering them as a means of protecting some particularly dangerous or risk-critical area as part of your risk-reduction strategy.Hose reelsPermanent hose reels (Figure 20) installed in accordance with the relevant British Standard (BS EN 671-3: 200021) provide an effective firefighting facility. They may offer an alternative, or be in addition to, portable firefighting equipment. A concern is that untrained people will stay and fight a fire when escape is the safest option. Where hose reels are installed, and your fire risk
assessment expects relevant staff to use them in the initial stages of a fire, they should receive appropriate training.Note: It is not safe to fight fires involving aerosols with hose reels.Maintenance of hose reels includes visual checks for leaks and obvious damage and should be carried out regularly. More formal maintenance checks should be carried out at least annually by a competent person.Figure 20: Hose reelSprinkler systemsSprinkler systems can be very effective in controlling fires. They can be designed to protect life and/or property and may be regarded asa cost-effective solution for reducing the risks created by fire. Where installed, a sprinkler system is usually part of a package of fire precautions in a building and may form an integral part of the fire strategy for the building.Sprinkler protection could give additional benefits, such as a reduction in the amount of portable firefighting equipment necessary,and the relaxation of restrictions in the design of buildings.
Guidance on the design and installation of new sprinkler systems and the maintenance of all systems is given in the Loss Prevention Council (LPC) Rules or BS EN 1284522 or BS 5306-260 andshould only be carried out by a competent person.Routine maintenance by on-site personnel may include checking of pressure gauges, alarm systems, water supplies, any anti-freezing devices and automatic booster pump(s).A competent maintenance contractor should provide guidance on what records need to be completed.Following a sprinkler operation the sprinkler system should be reinstated by a competent person. A stack of spare sprinkler bulbs should be available on site for replacements, preferably in a seperate building e.g. the pumphouse.If a sprinkler system forms an integral part of your fire strategy it is imperative that adequate management procedures are in place to cater for those periods when the sprinkler system is not functional. This should form part of your emergency plan. Although the actual procedures will vary, such measures may include the following:ï Restore the system to full working order as soon as possible.ï Limit any planned shutdown to low-risk periods when numbers of people are at a minimum (e.g. at night) or when the building is not in use. This is particularly important when sprinklers are installed to a life safety standard or form part of the fire safety engineering requirements.ï You may need to isolate the area without the benefit of working sprinklers from the rest of the premises by fire-resisting material.ï Avoid higher-risk processes such as ‘hot-work’.ï Extra staff should be trained and dedicated to conducting fire patrols.ï Any phased or staged evacuation strategy may need to be suspended. Evacuation should be immediate and complete. (Exercise caution as the stairway widths may have been designed for phased evacuation only.)ï Inform the local fire and rescue service.If, having considered all possible measures, the risk is still unacceptable then it will be necessary to close all or part of the building. If in doubt you should seek guidance from a competent person.60
Other fixed installationsThere are a number of other fixed installations including water mist, gaseous, deluge and fixed powder systems. If your premises have a fixed firefighting system that you are unfamiliar with, then seek advice. Where a fixed firefighting system forms an integral part of your fire safety strategy, it should be maintained in accordance with the relevant British Standard by a competent person.3.3 Other facilities (including those for firefighters)Building Regulations and other Acts, including local Acts, may have required firefighting equipment and other facilities to be provided for the safety of people in the building and to help firefighters. Fire safety law places a duty on you to maintain such facilities in good working order and at all times.These may include:ï access for fire engines and firefighters;ï firefighting shafts and lifts;ï fire suppression systems e.g. sprinklers, water mist and gaseous;ï smoke-control systems;ï dry or wet rising mains and firefighting inlets;ï information and communication arrangements e.g. fire telephones and wireless systems and information to brief the fire and rescue service when they arrive; andï firefighters’ switches.The Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 199223 also require that systems provided for safety within a workplace are maintained.Access for fire engines and firefighters Buildings that have been constructed to modern building regulations or in accordance with certain local Acts will have been provided with facilities that allow fire engines to approach and park within a reasonable distance so that firefighters can use their equipment without too much difficulty.These facilities may consist of access roads to the building, hard standing areas for fire engines and access into the building for firefighters.It is essential that where such facilities are


provided they are properly maintained and available for use at all relevant times.Where a building is used by a number of different occupants you will need to ensure co-operation between the various ‘responsible ‘persons’ to maintain fire and rescue service access. In exceptional cases, where access ispersistently obstructed, you may need to make additional arrangements.See Approved Document B to the Building Regulations for more information.24Firefighting shafts and liftsFirefighting shafts (Figure 21) are provided in larger buildings to help firefighters reach floors further away from the building’s access point. They enable firefighting operations to start quickly and in comparative safety by providing a safe route from the point of entry to the floor where the fire has occurred.Figure 21: Firefighting shaftEntry points from a stairway in a firefighting shaft to a floor will be via a lobby, through two sets of fire and smoke-resisting doors and walls. Many people will use the stairway for normal movement through the building and it is important that the safety features are not compromised by doors being wedged open.Most firefighting shafts will also incorporate a firefighting lift which opens into the lobby.The lift will have a back-up electrical supply
and car control overrides. The primary function of the lift is to transport firefighting personnel and their equipment to the scene of a firewith the minimum amount of time and effort. It may also be used to help evacuate less mobile people.Alterations that might affect the shaft should not be made without first liaising with other responsible persons, any owners or managing agents and the enforcing authority. Any proposed changes will require Building Regulation approval from a Building Control Body.Where a firefighting shaft is provided, it should be maintained by a competent person.Suppression systemsFire suppression systems can include sprinklers and other types of fixed installations designed to automatically operate and suppress a fire.Such systems should be maintained by a competent person.Smoke control systemsThese are complex systems that are provided for life safety of occupants, assistance to firefighters and property protection by clearing hot smoke and gases from the building. If you have one of these systems provided in your premises you should ensure you understand how it operates and that it is maintained in full working order. If your system is part of a larger system then you should liaise with other occupiers and building managers.The smoke control system should be maintained by a competent person who is familiar with the fire engineering performance specificationsof that specific system.Where these systems are installed in addition to a sprinkler system, then the design and installation of each system should not act detrimentally on one another. A competent person should be employed to confirm this.Dry and wet rising fire mainsThe rising fire main (Figure 22) is an important facility for the fire and rescue service in taller buildings. It consists of an inlet box where firefighters can connect their hoses, a pipe running up or through the building, outlet valves on each floor level and an air ventat the top.
Figure 22: Rising main
It is important that fire mains remain in good working order. Issues to be considered can include the following:ï The physical approach to the inlet box should be such that a fire engine can park within 18 m with the inlet box in view.ï Prohibit car parking in front of the inlet box.ï Secure the inlet box in such a way that firefighters can open the door without too much difficulty.ï It is advisable to lock the landing valves in the closed position, usually with a leather strap and padlock.Foam inletsFoam intlets are special inlets are usually fitted to provide an efficient way of extinguishing a fire in a basement or other area of high risk such as plant room. In many respects they look the same as rising main inlet boxes, but the door should be clearly marked ‘foam inlet’. The risk area should be kept clear of obstructions to allow the foam to spread into the compartment.Maintenance of rising mains and foam inlets All types of rising mains and foam inlets together with associated valves should be maintained and tested on a regular basis by a competent person. Although there are no recommended periods between maintenance checks it would be prudent to carry out an annual service.62
Firefighters’ switchesSafety switches are normally provided to isolate high voltage luminous signs or to cut off electrical power. In the case of existing installations, if they have been provided in accordance with previous legislation (e.g. the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 198225), then it is likely that they will comply with the Order. If this is not the case, then you may need to consult the enforcing authority regarding the suitability of its location and marking. Testing should be carried out in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. If you have no such instructions then an initial test should be carried out by a competent electrician.Other firefighting facilitiesAs well as those already mentioned, other facilities to assist firefighters may have been installed in your premises, and should be properly maintained by a competent person. Your maintenance audit (see Appendix A for an example checklist) should include these. Such facilities can include:ï information signs for firefighters;ï static water supplies, private hydrants, meter bypass valves and underground tanks;ï standby fire pumps, electrical generators, air pumps and hydraulic motors; andï manual/self-closing devices for roller shutter doors in fire compartment walls.ï 

Section 4 Further guidance on escape routes
IntroductionThis section provides further guidance on the general principles that apply to escape routes and provides examples of typical escape route solutions for a range of common building layouts. The guidance is based on premises of normal risk so if your premises (or part of your premises) are higher (or lower) risk you should adapt the solution accordingly.You are not obliged to adopt any particular solution for escape routes in this section if you prefer to meet the relevant requirement in some other way. If you decide to adopt some alternative arrangement it will need to achieve at least an equivalent level of fire safety.Refer to the glossary (Appendix D) for the definitions of any terms you may not be familiar with.Levels of riskIn order to apply the guidance in this section, you need to understand that in any fire situation, the time that people have to escape before they could become affected by the fire is limited.Providing them with sufficient time usually means that as well as having an appropriate way of detecting and giving warning in case of fire, the distance that people have to travel to make their escape to a place of reasonable or total safety must be restricted.The travel distances which are usually appropriate for this purpose (and are suggested later in this section) vary according to the level of risk in the premises (or part of them). To check your escape routes you will need to form a judgement about the level of risk that people may be at after you have taken other risk reduction (preventative and protective) measures.In premises where there is a likelihood of a fire starting and spreading quickly (or a fire could start and grow without being quickly detected and a warning given) and affect the escape routes before people are able to use them, then the risk should normally be regarded at ‘higher’. Such premises could include those where significant quantities of
flammable materials are used or stored; ready sources of ignition are present, e.g. heat producing machinery and processes; premises where significant numbers of the people present are likely to move slowly or be unable to move without assistance; and premises where the construction provides hidden voids or flues through which a fire could quickly spread.In premises where there is a low occupancy level and all the occupants are able bodied and capable of using the means of escape without assistance; very little chance of a fire; few if any highly combustible or flammable materials or other fuels for a fire; fire cannot spread quickly; and will be quickly detected so people will quickly know that a fire has occurred and can make their escape, then the risk can usually be regarded as ‘lower’.In most cases however, the risk will usually be ‘normal’.The travel distances suggested are not hard and fast rules and should be applied with a degree of flexibility according to the circumstances. For example, in premiseswhere the risk might otherwise be considered ‘normal’ but where there are a significant number of people who move slowly or may need assistance to evacuate, it would usually be appropriate to consider this a ‘higher’ risk. However, where other measures are in place to mitigate this, such as the availability of extra assistance and this has been planned for in your emergency plan, it may be that the risk level can be regarded as ‘normal to higher’.Equally, in premises where the risk category would otherwise be ‘lower’ but for the fact that a small number of occupants may move slowly or need assistance, it may be appropriate to categorise the risk as ‘normal’ in these circumstances.If you are not sure about the level of risk that remains in your premises, you should seek advice from a competent person.
4.1 General principlesSuitability of escape routesYou should ensure that your escape routes are:ï suitable;ï easily, safely and immediately usable at all relevant times;ï adequate for the number of people likely to use them;ï free from any obstructions, slip or trip hazards; andï available for access by the emergency services.In multi-occupied premises, escape routes should normally be independent of other occupiers, i.e. people should not have to go through another occupier’s premises as the route may be secured or obstructed. Where this is not possible, then robust legal agreements should be in place to ensure their availability at all times.All doors on escape routes should open in the direction of escape and ideally be fitted with a safety vision panel. This is particularly important if more than 60 people use them or they provide an exit from an area of high fire risk.At least two exits should be provided if a room/area is to be occupied by more than 60 persons. This number of 60 can be varied in proportion to the risk; for a lower risk there can be a slight increase, for a higher risk, lower numbers of persons should be allowed.Movement of persons up or down a group of not less than three steps will be so obvious to those following that they will be prepared for the change in level, but movement up or down one step is not so readily observed and may easily lead to a fall. Wherever practicable, differences of level in corridors, passages and lobbies should be overcome by the provision of inclines or ramps of gradients not exceeding 1 in 12 or steps not having less than three risers in any flight. Corridors and passages should be level for a distance of 1.5 metres in each direction from any steps.Any mirrors situated in escape routes should be sited so that persons escaping from a fire will not be thrown into confusion by any reflected image of the route they are using, or be misled as to the direction they should take to reach fire exits
While not normally acceptable, the use of ladders, floor hatches, wall hatches or window exits may be suitable for small numbers of able-bodied, trained staff in exceptional circumstances.Fire-resisting constructionThe type and age of construction are crucial factors to consider when assessing the adequacy of the existing escape routes. To ensure the safety of people it may be necessary to protect escape routes from the effects of a fire. In older premises (see Appendix C for more information on historical properties) it is possible that the type of construction and materials used may not perform to current fire standards. Also changes of occupier and refurbishment may have led to:ï cavities and voids being created, allowing the potential for a fire to spread unseen;ï doors and hardware worn by age and movement being less likely to limit the spread of smoke;ï damaged or lack of cavity barriers in modular construction; andï breaches in fire compartment walls, floors and ceilings created by the installation of new services, e.g. computer cabling.Where an escape route needs to be separated from the rest of the premises by fire-resisting construction, e.g. a dead-end corridor or protected stairway (see Figures 31 and 35 on pages 74 and 78 respectively), then you should ensure the following:ï Doors (including access hatches to cupboards, ducts and vertical shafts linking floors) walls, floors and ceilings protecting escape routes should be capable of resisting the passage of smoke and fire for long enough so that people can escape from the building.ï Where suspended or false ceilings are provided, the fire resistance should extend up to the floor slab level above. For means of escape purposes a 30 minutes fire-resisting rating is normally enough.ï Cavity barriers, fire stopping and dampers in ducts are appropriately installed.If there is any doubt about the nature of the construction of your premises, ask for advice from a competent person.
64

Number of people using the premisesAs your escape routes need to be adequate for the people likely to use them you will need to consider how many people, including employees and the public, may be present at any one time. Where premises have been subject to building regulations approval for use as either an office or a shop, the number and width of escape routes and exits will normally be enough for the anticipated number of people using the building. In such buildings where the risk has changed or buildings were constructed before national Building Regulations it is still necessary to confirm the provision.For offices, the maximum numbers of staff, visitors and contractors liable to be in the building at the same time will be known by the responsible person. For shops, the responsible person will normally be aware of the maximum number of people liable to be present from a personal knowledge of trading patterns. There will also be an appreciation of the use of the building by those with special needs, such as the disabled.If you propose to make changes to the use or layout of the building which may increase the number of people, you should check the design capacity by referring to guidance given in the Building Regulations Approved Document B.24
Mobility impairmentEffective management arrangements need to be put in place for those that need help to escape.Consider the following points:ï A refuge is a place of reasonable safety in which disabled people can wait either for an evacuation lift or for assistance up or down stairs (see Figure 23). Disabled people should not be left alone in a refuge area whilst waiting for assistance with evacuation from the building. Depending on the design and fire resistance of other elements, a refuge could be a lobby, corridor, part of a public area or stairway, or an open space such as a flat roof, balcony or similar place which is sufficiently protected (or remote) from any fire risk and provided with its own means of escape and a means of communication.ï Where refuges are provided, they should be enclosed in a fire-resisting structure which creates a protected escape route which leads directly to a place of total safety and should only be used in conjunction with effective management rescue arrangements. Your fire safety strategy should not rely on the fire and rescue service rescuing people waiting in these refuges.ï If firefighting lifts (provided in high buildings as firefighting access) are to be used for evacuation, this should be co-ordinated with the fire and rescue service as part of the pre-planned evacuation procedures.ï Normal lifts may be considered suitable for fire evacuation purposes, subject to anadequate fire risk assessment and development of a suitable fire safety strategy by a competent person.ï Since evacuation lifts can fail, having reached a refuge a disabled person should also be able to gain access to a stairway (should conditions in the refuge become untenable). An evacuation lift with its associated refuge should therefore be located adjacent to a protected stairway.ï Enough escape routes should always be available for use by disabled people. This does not mean that every exit will need to be adapted. Staff should be aware of routes suitable for disabled people so that they can direct and help people accordingly.ï 
ï Stairways used for the emergency evacuation of disabled people should comply withthe requirements for internal stairs in the building regulations. Specialist evacuation chairs or other equipment may be necessary to negotiate stairs.ï Plans should allow for the careful carrying of disabled people down stairs without their wheelchairs, should the wheelchair be too large or heavy. You will need to take into account health and safety manual handling procedures in addition to the dignity and confidence of the disabled person.ï 
Stairlifts should not be used for emergency evacuation. Where installed in a stairway used for emergency evacuation, no parts of the lift, such as its carriage rail, should be allowed to reduce the effective width of the stairway or any other part of an emergency evacuation route.ï Where ramps are necessary for the emergency evacuation of people in wheelchairs they should be as gentle as possible. Ramps should be constructed in accordance with Approved Document M.62Further guidance is available in BS 5588-863 and BS 5588-12.52
Figure 23: An example of a refuge66

Widths and capacity of escape routes and stairwaysOnce you have established the maximum number of people likely to be in any part of the premises, the next step is to establish that the capacity of the escape routes is adequate for people to escape safely in sufficient time to ensure their safety in case of fire.The capacity of a route is determined by a number of factors including the width of the route, the time available for escape and the ability of the persons using them.The effective usable width of an escape route is the narrowest point, normally a door or other restriction such as narrowing of a corridor due to fixtures and fittings. The capacity of an escape route is measured by the number of persons per minute that can pass through it, so to establish the capacity of the route, it is first necessary to measure the width of the route at the narrowest point. The effective width of a doorway is the clear unobstructed width through the doorway when the door is open at right angles to the frame. The effective width at any other point is the narrowest clear unobstructed width through which people can pass.The time available for escape depends on several factors. Studies of human behaviour in an emergency situation have shown that about two thirds of the time available to escape is taken up by the initial reaction to the developing situation. For example, people will decide whether the situation is real or false, often waiting to see the reaction of people around them, and generally gathering information to decide whether to act or not. The final third is taken up by the actual movement away from the area of the fire. Throughout this time the fire may be growing and spreading. Therefore to account for the limited available time for people to travel to a place of reasonable safety, the length of escape routes needs to be restricted. The suggested travel distances in this section (Table 2 on page 68) take this restriction into account.The following guide can be used to determine the general capacities of escape routes:
A width of at least 750mm can accommodate up to:ï 80 people in higher risk premises;ï 100 people in normal risk premises; orï 120 people in lower risk premises.A width of at least 1050mm can accommodate up to:ï 160 people in higher risk premises;ï 200 people in normal risk premises; orï 240 people in lower risk premises.An additional 75mm should be allowed for each additional 15 persons (or part of 15).Note: The minimum width of an escape route should not be less than 750mm (unless it is for use by less than five people in part of your premises) and, where wheelchair users are likely to use it, not less than 900mm.The aggregate width of all the escape routes should be not less than that required to accommodate the maximum numbers of people likely to use them.When calculating the overall available escape route capacity for premises that have more than one way out, you should normally assume that the widest is not available because it has been compromised by fire. If doors or other exits leading to escape routes are too close to one another you should consider whether the fire could affect both at the same time. If that is the case, it may be necessary to discount them both from your calculation.As a general rule stairways should be at least 1050mm wide and in any case not less than the width of the escape routes that lead to them. In all cases the aggregate capacity of the stairways should be sufficient for the number of people likely to have to use them in case of fire.Stairways wider than 2100mm should normally be devided into sections, each separated from the adjacent section by a handrail, so that each section measured between the handrails is not less than 1050mm wide.
Travel distanceHaving established the number and location of people and the exit capacity required to evacuate them safely, you now need to confirm that the number and location of existing exits is adequate. This normally determined by the distance people have to travel to reach them.Table 2 gives guidance on travel distances.It should be understood, however, that these distances are flexible and may be increasedor decreased depending upon the level of risk after you have put in place the appropriate fire-prevention measures (Part 1, Step 3.3).In new buildings which have been designed and constructed in accordance with modern building standards the travel distances will already have been calculated. Once you have completed your fire risk assessment you need to confirm that those distances are still relevant.
When assessing travel distances you need to consider the distance to be travelled by people when escaping, allowing for walking around furniture or display material etc. (see Figure 24). The distance should be measured from all parts of the premises (e.g. from the most remote part of an office or shop on any floor) to the nearest place of reasonable safety which is:ï a protected stairway enclosure (a storey exit);ï a separate fire compartment from which there is a final exit to a place of total safety; orï the nearest available final exit.ï 
Table 2: Suggested travel distancesEscape routesSuggested range of travel distanceWhere more than one escape route is provided25m in higher fire-risk area1 45m in normal fire-risk area 60m in lower fire-risk area2Where only a single escape route is provided12m in higher fire-risk area1 18m in normal fire-risk area 25m in lower fire-risk area2Note 1:Where there are small high-risk areas this travel distance should apply. Where the risk assessment indicates that the whole building is high- risk, ask advice from a competent person.Note 2:The travel distance for lower risk premises should only be applied in exceptional cases in the very lowest risk premises where densities are low, occupants are familiar with the premises, excellent visual awareness, and very limited combustibles.68

The travel distances given in Table 2 are based on those recommended in Approved Document B of the Building Regulations24 and are intended to complement the other fire safety recommendations in ApprovedDocument B. Your current escape route travel distances may be different from these since they may be based on recommendations made in alternative guidance.Where your route leads to more than one final exit, but only allows initial travel in a single direction (e.g. from a room or dead end, see Figures 28 and 29), then this initial travel distance should be limited to that for a ‘single escape route’ in Table 2. However, your total travel distance should not exceed that for ‘more than one escape route’.
Measuring travel distanceThe figures that follow are schematic and are intended to represent part of a larger building.The route taken through a room or space will be determinted by the layout of the contentse.g. work stations, aisle layout (Figure 24). It is good practice to ensure routes to the exits are kept as direct and short as possible. In a small room there may be only one exit but in a larger room or area there may be many exits.In some cases where the contents are moved around or the space is liable to frequent change, e.g. in a storage area or where racking is moveable you should ensure that the exits, or the routes to them, do not become blocked or the length of the route is not significantly extended.
Figure 24: Measuring travel distance
Inner roomsWhere the only way out of a room is through another room (Figure 25), an unnoticed fire in the outer room could trap people in the inner room. This means of exit should be avoided where possible. If, however, this cannot be achieved then adequate warning of a fire should be provided by any one of the following means:ï a vision panel between the two rooms providing adequate vision to give an indication of the conditions in the outer room and the means of escape;ï a large enough gap between the dividing wall and the ceiling, e.g. 500mm, so that smoke will be seen; orï an automatic smoke detector in the outer room that will sound a warning in the inner room.
In addition, the following points should also be considered:ï Restrict the number of people using an inner room to 60.ï Access rooms should be under the control of the same person as the inner room.ï The travel distance from any point in the inner room to the exit from the access room should be restricted to escape in one direction only (see Table 2 on page 68), unless there are alternative exits from the access room.ï No one should have to pass through more than one access room while making their escape.ï The outer room should not be an area of high fire risk.ï 
Figure 25: Inner rooms70
Alternative exitsWhere alternative exits from a space or room are necessary, they should wherever possible be located at least 45° apart (see Figure 26) unless the routes to them are seperated by fire-resisting construction (see Figure 27). If in doubt consult a competent person.Figure 26: Alternative exitsFigure 27: Alternative exits seperated by fire-resisting construction
Measuring travel distances for initial dead-end travelWhere the initial direction of travel in an open area (see Figure 28) or within an inner room (see Figure 29) is in one direction only the travel distance (A–B) should be limited tothat for a ‘single escape route’ in Table 2 on page 68.
Any alternative exits should be positioned to ensure a fire will not compromise both exits. The maximum total travel distance recommended in Table 2 should apply to the nearest exit (Figure 28 and 29, distance A–C). However, since you have two exits, your total travel distance should not exceed that for ‘more than one escape route’ in Table 2.
Figure 28: Measuring travel distance from initial dead end (open plan)72
Figure 29: Measuring travel distance from initial dead end (inner room)
Escape routes with dead-end conditionsIf your premises has escape routes from which escape can be made in one direction only(a dead end), then an undetected fire in that area could affect people trying to escape. To overcome this problem, limit the travel distance (see Table 2) and use one of the following solutions:ï Fit an automatic fire detection and warning system in those areas where a fire could present a risk to the escape route (see Figure 30).ï 
Protect the escape route with fire-resisting construction to allow people to escape safely past a room in which there is a fire (see Figure 31).ï Provide an alternative exit (see Figure 32).Alternative approaches may be acceptable, although expert advice may be necessary.
Figure 30: Dead-end condition with automatic fire detectionFigure 31: Dead-end condition with fire-resisting construction74
Figure 32: Dead-end condition provided with an alternative exit
Basement, escape and protectionIn all buildings with basements (other than very small basements), stairways serving upper floors should preferably not extend to the basement and in any case should not do so where they are the only stairway serving the upper floors. Any stairway that does extend from the basement to the upper floors should be seperated at basement level by a fire resisting lobby or corridor between the basement and the stairway. All basements used by more than 60 people or where there are no exits directly to a place of total safety, should have at least two protected escape stairways.In high risk premises there should be an alternative stairway from the basement to ground level unless there is a suitable alternative route to the final exit.Wherever possible all stairways to basements should be entered at ground level from the open air, and should be positioned so that smoke from any fire in the basement would not obstruct any exit serving the other floors of the building.
Where any stairway links a basement with the ground floor, the basement should be separated from the ground floor, preferably by two30-minute fire doors, one at basement and one at ground floor level (see Figure 33).Any floor over a basement should provide 60 minutes fire resistance. For smaller premises 30 minutes may be acceptable. Where this is impractical, and as long as no smoke can get through the floor, automatic smoke detection linked to a fire-alarm system which is audiblethroughout the premises could, as an alternative, be provided in the basement area. If in doubt, contact a competent person for moredetailed advice.
Figure 33: Basement protection
Subdivision of corridorsIf your premises has corridors more than 30m long, then generally these corridors should be subdivided near the centre of the corridor with fire doors and, where necessary, fire-resisting construction to limit the spread of fire and smoke and to protect escape routes if thereis a fire.Where a corridor serves two exits from a floor, generally these corridors should be subdivided with fire doors to separate the two exits (see Figure 34).Doors that are provided solely for the purpose of restricting the travel of smoke need not be fire doors, but will be suitable as long as they are of substantial construction, are capable of resisting the passage of smoke, and are self- closing. Smoke should not be able to bypass these doors, e.g. above a false ceiling, or via alternative doors from a room, or adjoining rooms, opening on either side of the subdivision.
Generally, false ceilings should be provided with barriers or smoke stopping over any fire doors. Where the false ceiling forms part of the fire- resisting construction this may not be necessary.If you have doubts about subdivision of corridors, ask advice from a competent person.Stairway enclosuresStairways if unprotected from fire can rapidly become affected by heat and smoke cutting off the escape route and allowing fire to spread to other floors. However if adequately protected, escape stairways can be regarded as places of reasonable safety to enable people to escape to a place of total safety.In most premises which are served by more than one stairway, it is probable that these stairways will be protected by fire-resisting construction and will lead to a final exit. If any floor has an occupancy of over 60 each storey should have at least two exits i.e. protected routes. The figure
76
Figure 34: Subdivision of corridor between two stairways or exits
of 60 can be varied in proportion to the risk, lower risk slight increase, higher risk lower numbers of persons.It is possible that you may have some stairways which have no fire protection to them. In this case they are not designed for escape and are normally known as accommodation stairways (see accommodation stairways on page 81).If you have a protected stairway(s) then it is essential that you maintain that level of fire protection.The benefit of protecting stairways from the effects of fire allows you to measure your travel distance from the furthest point on the relevant floor to the nearest storey exit rather than the final exit of the building.If the building you occupy has floors which are occupied by different companies to your own you need to consider, as part of your fire risk assessment, the possibility that a fire may occur in another part of the building over which you may have no control and which may affectthe protected stairway if allowed to develop unchecked. If your fire risk assessment shows that this may be the case and people using any
floor would be unaware of a developing fire, then additional fire-protection measures may be required, e.g. an automatic fire-detection and warning system. If this is required you will need to consult and co-operate with other occupiers and building managers.You may find that stairways in your building are provided with protected lobbies or corridors at each floor level (except the top floor) (Figure 35). Although these are not generally necessary for means of escape in multi-stairway buildings of less than 18m high, they may have been provided for other reasons (e.g. firefighting access). In all case protected corridors, lobbies and stairways must be kept clear of combustibles and obstructions.In taller buildings (in general those over five storeys, excluding basements), the person who has overall control of common areas of the building may need to seek advice from a competent person.
lobby/corridor approach
Ideally stairway enclosures should lead directly to a final exit. If your premises has only one stairway from the upper floor(s) which does not lead directly to a final exit, adopt one of the following arrangements:ï provide a protected route from the foot of the stairway enclosure leading to a final exit (Figure 36); or78ï 
provide two exits from the stairway, each giving access to a final exit via routes which are separated from each other by fire-resisting construction (Figure 37).ï 

stairway to a final exitFigure 37: Examples of two escape routes from a stairway to final exits

Separation of protected stairways Where there are two or more protected stairways, the routes to final exits should beseparated by fire-resisting construction so that fire cannot affect more than one escape route at the same time (see Figure 38).
Creating a stairway bypass routeNo one should have to pass through a protected stairway to reach another stairway. Options to avoid this include:ï using intercommunicating doors between rooms adjacent to the stairway, such doors must be available at all times when the building is occupied (see Figure 39);ï using balconies and other features to bypass the stairway; orï as long as there is enough space, create a bypass corridor around the stairway enclosure.ï 
80

Reception areasReception or enquiry areas should only be located in protected stairways where the stairway is not the only one serving the upper floors, the reception area is small (less than 10m2) and is of low fire risk.Accommodation stairwaysIf you have stairways that are used for general communication and movement of people in the premises, and they are not designatedas fire escape stairs then these are called ‘accommodation stairways’. They may not require fire separation from the remainder of the floor as long as they do not pass through
a compartment floor, or people do not have to pass the head of such a stairway in order to access a means of escape stairway. However, experience shows that many people will continue to use these as an escape route.Accommodation stairways, escalators and travelators should not normally form an integral part of the calculated escape route capacity, however, where your fire risk assessment indicates that it is safe to do so, then you may consider them for that purpose.In these circumstances it may be necessary to seek advice from a competent person to verify this.
External stairwaysTo be considered a viable escape route, an external stairway should normally be protected from the effects of a fire along its full length.This means that any door, window (other than toilet windows) and walls within 1.8m horizontally and 9m vertically below any part of the stairway should be fire-resisting.Windows should be fixed shut and doors self- closing (Figure 40).Figure 40: Protection to an external stairway82

These should not normally be used for members of the public, particularly where large numbers are likely to use them.Consider protecting the external stairway from the weather as the treads may become slippery, e.g. due to algae, moss or ice. If this is not possible, you must ensure that the stairway is regularly maintained. Consider fixing non-slip material to the treads.Spiral and helical stairwaysSpiral and helical stairways are usually acceptable only in exceptional situations, e.g. for a maximum of 50 people who are not members of the public. The stairway should not be more than 9m in total height and not less than 1.5m in diameter with adequate headroom. A handrail should be continuous throughout the full length of the stairway.However, spiral and helical stairways may be used as means of escape by more than 50 staff and may be used by the public if the stairways have been designed for the purpose. Further guidance is given in BS: 5395-2.26 However, they are not usually suitable for young children.LiftsDue to the danger of the power supplies to a lift being affected by a fire, lifts not specifically designed as ‘firefighting’ or ‘evacuation’ lifts are not normally considered acceptable as a means of escape. However, where a lift and stairway for a means of escape are incorporated in a fire-resisting shaft which has a final exit fromit at the access level and the lift has a separate electrical supply to that of the remainder of the building, than that lift subject to an agreed fire risk assessment, may be acceptable as a means of escape in case of fire.Lifts are housed in vertical shafts that interconnect floors and compartments, therefore precautions have to be taken to protect people from the risk of fire and smoke spreading from floorto floor via the lift shaft. Such precautions may include:ï separating the lift from the remainder of the storey using fire-resisting construction and access via a fire door;ï ensuring the lift shaft is situated in a protected enclosure which may also be a stairway enclosure; andï providing ventilation of at least 0.1m2 at the top of each lift-well to exhaust any smoke.
Roof exitsIt may be reasonable for an escape route to cross a roof. Where this is the case, additional precautions will normally be necessary:ï The roof should be flat and the route across it should be adequately defined and well- illuminated where necessary with normal electric and emergency escape lighting. The route should be non-slip and guarded with a protective barrier.ï The escape route across the roof and its supporting structure should be constructed as a fire-resisting floor.ï Where there are no alternatives other than to use a roof exit, any doors, windows, roof lights and ducting within 3m of the escape route should be fire-resisting.ï Where an escape route passes through or across another person’s property, you will need to have a robust legal agreement in place to allow its use at all times when people are on your premises.ï The exit from the roof should be in, or lead to, a place of reasonable safety where people can quickly move to a place of total safety.A typical escape route across a roof is illustrated in Figure 41.External escape routes should receive routine inspection and maintenance to ensure they remain fit for use. You will need to ensure that any legal agreements in place cover access for maintenance of the escape route.
Figure 41: An escape route across a roof
Revolving doors, wicket doors, sliding doors and roller shuttersRevolving doors should not normally be considered as escape doors unless the leaves fold outward to form a clear opening upon pressure from within or standard doors of the required exit width are provided next to the revolving door.Ideally wicket doors or gates should have a minimum opening height of 1.5m. The bottom of the door should not be more than 250mm above the floor and the width should be preferably more than 500mm but not less than 450mm. Normally wicket doors will only be suitable for up to 15 members of staff however, in areas of a higher fire risk, this should be reduced to a maximum of three.
Loading and goods delivery doors, shutters (roller, folding or sliding), up-and-over doors and similar openings are not normally suitable for use as a final exit. However, they may be suitable for escape from areas of normal risk by small numbers of staff as long as they are not likely to be obstructed and can be easily and immediately opened manually, even if normally power-operated and the staff are familiar with the escape routes.Sliding doors are not normally suitable on escape routes unless they are for the sole use of members of staff. Where provided, a notice with the words ‘slide to open’ with an arrow pointing in the direction of opening, should be permanently displayed at about eye level on the face of the door.
84

Final exit doors and escape away from the premisesGood escape routes to a final exit will be of little benefit if the occupants are not able to get out of the building and quickly disperse from the area to a place of total safety. It is also important to consider where people will go once they have evacuated from the premises.The matters that you should consider include the following:ï Final exit doors should be quickly and easily openable without a key or code in the event of a fire. Where possible, there should be only one fastening. See Appendix B3 for more information on security fastenings.ï Final exit doors should not lead people into an enclosed area from which there is no further escape.ï Where a final exit discharges into an enclosed area, further access to a place of total safety should be available by means of further doors or gates that can be easily opened in a manner similar to the final exit.4.2 Escape route layoutThe examples listed in Table 3 on page 86 show typical escape route solutions for a range of common building layouts. In each case the solution is for a normal risk building unless otherwise illustrated.These are not intended to be prescriptive or exhaustive but merely to help you understand how the principles of means of escape may be applied in practice.They are illustrative of the key features of escape route layouts and not intended to be real building layouts or to scale.You do not need to read all of this section, you only need to consider those figures and the accompanying text which most closely resemble your premises. If your premises do not resemble these then you should seek advice from a competent person. These examples are intended to represent your existing layout; they are not to be used as design guidance.
In all of these examples the following basic principles apply:ï The farthest point on any floor to the final exit or storey exit to a protected stairway is within the overall suggested travel distance (see Table 2).ï The route to and the area near the exit is kept clear of combustibles and obstructions.ï The fire-resisting stairway is kept clear of combustibles and obstructions.ï The escape route leads to a final exit.ï Where the stairway is not a protected stairway, the final exit is visible and accessible from the discharge point of the stairway at ground floor level.ï High-risk rooms do not generally open directly into a protected stairway.ï If your fire risk assessment shows that people using any floor would be unaware of a fire you may require additional fire- protection measures, e.g. an automatic fire-detection and warning system.ï There should be more than one escape route from all parts of the premises (rooms or storeys) except for areas or storeys with an occupancy of less than 60. The figure of 60 can be varied in proportion to the risk, for a lower risk there can be a slight increase, for a higher risk, lower numbers of persons should be allowed.ï 
Table 3: Typical examples of escape route layoutsSingle storey buildings (or the ground floor of a larger building)Ground floor premises with a single exit (including a mezzanine)See Figure 42Ground floor cellular layoutSee Figure 43Ground floor open plan layoutSee Figure 44Multi storey buildings with a single stairwayTwo-storey premisesSee Figure 45Two-storey premises, including basementSee Figure 46Three-storey premises, including basementSee Figure 47Larger three-storey premises, including basementSee Figure 48Office premises, ground and up to three upper storeysSee Figure 49Shop premises, ground and up to three upper storeys – protected lobbies/corridorsSee Figure 50Shop premises, ground and up to three upper storeys – automatic fire detectionSee Figure 51Multi-storey buildings with more than one stairwayExample of a multi-storey buildingSee Figure 52Tall building with a firefighting shaftSee Figure 53If you do not have any of the stairway configurations given, and depending on the outcome of your fire risk assessment it may be that you can achieve an equivalent level of safety by other means.The green arrows on the Figures 42–53 represent the travel distances given in Table 2 (page 68) which should be applied.If your building has more than ground and three upper storeys, ask advice from a competent person.86
Single-storey buildings(or the ground floor of a larger building)Ground floor premises with a single exit (may include a mezzanine)Part of your premises may have only a single exit. The example shown in Figure 42will be generally acceptable provided that part of the premises served only by a single exit accommodates no more than 60 people in total.If your fire risk assessment shows that people using mezzanine or cellular offices/stores would be unaware of fire elswhere in the building, it may require additional fire-protection measures, e.g. an automatic fire-detection and warning system.Note: A mezzanine covering more than half of the floor area may need to be treated as a separate floor (see two-storey building).Figure 42: Ground floor premises with a single exit (including a mezzanine)
Ground floor premises with more than one exitFigure 43 shows an acceptable example of a cellular layout for a ground floor premises with more than one exit.
Figure 44 shows an acceptable example of an open plan layout for a ground floor premises with more than one exit.
Figure 43: Ground floor cellular layoutFigure 44: Ground floor open plan layout88
Multi-storey buildings with a single stairwayTwo-storey premisesFigure 45 shows an acceptable layout for atwo-storey premises with a single open stairway.ï The upper floor should accommodate no more than 60 people.ï The farthest point on each of the floors to the final exit is within the overall suggested travel distance for escape in one direction only (see Table 2, page 68).Figure 45: Two-storey premises
Two-storey premises, including basement In premises with a basement and a simple layout, an open stairway is acceptable as indicated in Figure 46.ï The basement can accommodate no more than 60 people.ï The farthest point from any floor to the final exit is within the overall suggested travel distance (see Table 2, page 68).Figure 46: Two-storey premises, including basement90

Three-storey premises, including basement In premises with a basement, ground and first floor, served by individual stairways the layout in Figure 47 will be generally acceptable as long as the following apply:ï The basement should accommodate no more than 60 people.ï The first floor should accommodate no more than 60 people.ï 
The farthest point in the basement to the door to the stairway is within the overall suggested travel distance (see Table 2, page 68).ï The stairway from the basement to ground floor level is enclosed by fire-resisting construction and leads to a final exit.ï The farthest point on the first floor to the final exit is within the overall suggested travel distance.ï 
Figure 47: Three-storey premises, including basement
Larger three-storey premises, including basementIn larger premises with a basement, ground and first floor, served by a single stairway, the layout shown in Figure 48 will be generally acceptable as long as the following apply:ï The basement should accommodate no more than 60 people.ï The first floor should accommodate no more than 60 people.ï 
To overcome the restriction of travel distance the stairway has been completely enclosed in 30 minute fire-resisting construction and all doors onto the stairway are self-closing fire doors.ï The furthest point on all of the floors to the storey exit is within the overall suggested travel distance (see Table 2 page 68).ï Where the building incorporates a basement, any stairway from the basement is separated by a protected lobby or corridor between that basement andthe protected stairway.
Figure 48: Larger three-storey premises, including basement92
Office premises, ground and up to three upper storeysIn office premises only, with a ground floor and up to three upper storeys served by a single stairway, it is important to understand that you are unlikely to be able to meet the suggested travel distance to a final exit (see Table 2 page 68). In these circumstances it is necessary to protect the stairway by a fire- resisting enclosure as shown (Figure 49).If the building you occupy has floors which are occupied by different companies to your own, you need to consider, as part of your fire risk assessment, the possibility that a fire may occur in another part of the building over which you may have no control and which may affect the protected stairway if allowed to develop unchecked. If your fire risk assessment shows that this may be the case and people using any floor would be unaware of a developing fire, you may require additional fire-protection measures, e.g. an automatic fire-detection and warning system. If this is required you will need to consult and co-operate with other occupiers and building managers.The layout shown in Figure 49 will be generally acceptable as long as the following apply:ï The upper floors or any basement should each accommodate no more than 60 people.ï The furthest point on all of your floors to the storey exit is within the overall suggested travel distance (see Table 2 page 68).ï Where the building incorporates a basement, any stairway from the basement is separated by a fire-resisting lobby or corridor between that basement and the protected stairway.Where your building has more than three upper storeys and a single stairway you should ask advice from a competent person.
Figure 49: Office premises, ground and up to three upper storeys94
Shop premises, ground and up to three upper storeysBecause of the higher risk posed by shop premises, and to protect the escape route by preventing smoke from entering the stairway, a protected lobby or corridor approach between the stairway and all floors (other than the top floor) should be provided as shown in Figure 50.The layout shown in Figure 50 will be generally acceptable as long as the following apply:ï The upper floors should each accommodate no more than 60 people.ï The furthest point on all of your floors to the lobbied storey exit is within the overall suggested travel distance (see Table 2 page 68).ï When a protected lobby or corridor approach to the stairway is employed the travel distance is measured to the storey exit and not the door to the lobby or corridor.Alternatively automatic fire detection on all floors may be used instead of protected lobbies or corridors (see Figure 51), however, the stairway must still be protected. If the building you occupy has floors which are occupied by different companies to your own, you need to consider, as part of your fire risk assessment, the possibility that a fire may occur in another part of the building over which you may have no control and which may affect the protected stairway if allowed to develop unchecked. If your fire risk assessment shows that this may be the case and people using any floor would be unaware of a developing fire, you may require additional fire-protection measures, e.g. an automatic fire-detection and warning system. If this is required you will need to consult and co-operate with other occupiers and building managers.If your building has more than three upper storeys and a single stairway, ask advice from a competent person.
upper storeys – protected lobbies/corridors96
three upper storeys – automatic fire detection
Multi-storey buildings with more than one stairwayExample of a multi-storey buildingThe layout shown in Figure 52 illustrates these principles. You also need to consider the following:ï Where the building incorporates a basement any stairway from the basement should be separated by a protected lobby or corridor between that basement and the protected stairway.ï 
If you do not have a protected stairway and, depending on the outcome of your fire risk assessment, it may be that you can achieve an equivalent level of safety by other means. However, it is strongly recommended that you ask advice from a competent person.ï These principles apply to taller buildings (with floors up to 18m high), however where your building has more than three upper storeys you should ask the advice of a competent person.ï 
Figure 52: Example of a multi-storey building98

Tall building with a firefighting shaft Figure 53 shows a multi-storey building fitted with a firefighting shaft which is required for specific types of buildings including multi- stairway buildings with a floor higher than 18m.
If the premises you occupy are situated in a building like this, you should ask the advice of a competent person.
Figure 53: Tall building with a firefighting shaft
Section 5 Further guidance on emergency escape lighting
The primary purpose of emergency escape lighting is to illuminate escape routes but it also illuminates other safety equipment.The size and type of your premises and the risk to the occupants will determine the complexity of the emergency escape lighting required.Borrowed lighting may be suitable in small premises where the light is from a dependable source, e.g. street lamps, and it will adequately illuminate escape routes. Where borrowed lighting is not suitable, then a number of torches, in strategic positions, can be considered.Single ‘stand-alone’ escape lighting units may be sufficient in small premises and these can sometimes be combined with exit or directional signs (Figure 54). The level of general illumination should not be significantly reduced by the sign.In larger more complex premises a more comprehensive system of fixed automatic escape lighting is likely to be needed. This will be particularly true in premises with extensive basements or where there are significant numbers of staff or members of the public.You will have identified the escape routes when carrying out your fire risk assessment and need to ensure that they are all adequately lit. If there are escape routes that are not permanently illuminated by normal lighting, such as external stairs, then a switch, clearly marked ‘Escape lighting’, or some othermeans of switching on the lighting should be provided at the entry to that area/stairs.An emergency escape lighting system should normally cover the following:ï each exit door;ï escape routes;ï intersections of corridors;ï outside each final exit and on external escape routes;ï emergency escape signs;ï 
stairways so that each flight receives adequate light;ï changes in floor level;ï windowless rooms and toilet accommodation exceeding 8m2;ï firefighting equipment;ï fire alarm call points;ï equipment that would need to be shut down in an emergency;ï lifts; andï areas in premises greater than 60m2.It is not necessary to provide individual lights (luminaires) for each item above, but there should be a sufficient overall level of lightto allow them to be visible and usable.Emergency escape lighting can be both ‘maintained’, i.e. on all the time, or ‘non- maintained’ which only operates when the normal lighting fails. Systems or individual lighting units (luminaires) are designed to operate for durations of between one and three hours. In practice, the three-hour design is the most popular and can help with maintaining limited continued use of the premises during a power failure (other thanin an emergency situation).Figure 54: Luminaires
100

Emergency escape lighting (luminaires) can be stand-alone dedicated units or incorporated into normal light fittings. There are highly decorative versions of these for those areas that demand aesthetically pleasing fixtures. Power supplies can be rechargeable batteries integral to each unit, a central battery bank or an automatic start generator.To complement emergency escape lighting, people, especially those unfamiliar with the premises, can be helped to identify exit routes by the use of way-guidance equipment. Way- guidance systems usually comprise photo- luminescent material, lines of LEDs, or strips of miniature incandescent lamps, forming a continuous marked escape route at lower level (Figure 55). These systems have proved particularly effective when people have toescape through smoke, and for partially-sighted people. They can be particularly useful in premises where they can provide marked routes on floors and in multi-storey premises they can direct people to escape routes which are seldom used.If you decide that you need to install emergency escape lighting or to modify your existing system, any work should be carried out by a competent person in accordance with the appropriate standards. Further guidance is given in BS 5266-128 and BS 5266-8.27Figure 55: A ‘way-guidance’ system
Maintenance and testing of emergency escape lightingAll emergency escape lighting systems should be regularly tested and properly maintained to an appropriate standard. Most existing systems will need to be manually tested. However, some modern systems have self-testing facilities that reduce routine checks to a minimum.Depending on your type of installation you should be able to carry out most of the routine tests yourself. The test method will vary. Ifyou are not sure how to carry out these tests you should contact your supplier or other competent person.Figure 56: A test keyTest facilities often take the form of a ‘fishtail’ (Figure 56) key inserted in a special switch either near the main fuse board or adjacent to relevant light switches.Typically, testing would include:ï a daily visual check of any central controls;ï a monthly function test by operating the test facility for a period sufficient to ensure that each emergency lamp illuminates; andï an annual full discharge test.Particular care needs to be taken following a full discharge test. Batteries typically take24 hours to re-charge and the premises should not be re-occupied until the emergency lighting system is fully functioning unless alternative arrangements have been made. See BS 5266-827 for more information.It is good practice to keep a record of tests.
Section 6 Further guidance on signs and notices
Escape signsIn simple premises, a few signs indicating the alternative exit(s) might be all that is needed. In larger and more complex premises, a series of signs directing people along the escape routes towards the final exit might be needed.Many people with poor vision retain some sight and are able to recognise changing or contrasting colour to provide them with visual clues when moving around a building.* 102It may sufficient to paint any columns and walls in a contrasting colour and to highlight changes in level by, for example, making the nosingto step and stair treads a contrasting colour (see BS 830014).For people with no sight, a well-managed ‘buddy system’, continuous handrails or a sound localisation system (which helps people to move towards an alert sound), or the installation of more tactile aids may be appropriate.Exit signs should be clearly visible whenever the public, staff and contractors are present.Positioning of escape signsThe presence of other signs in shops (such as advertising and customer information) or shop dressing, can distract attention from, or obscure the visibility of escape signs. This could affect people’s ability to see and understand escape signs, particularly if there is a fire evacuation. Always ensure that escape signs are not overwhelmed.Escape signs should meet the following criteria:ï They should provide clear, unambiguous information to enable people to safely leave a building in an emergency.ï Every escape route sign should, where necessary, incorporate, or be accompanied by, a directional arrow. Arrows should not be used on their own.ï If the escape route to the nearest exit is not obvious then it should be indicated by a sign(s).ï Signs should be positioned so that a person escaping will always have the next escape route sign in sight.ï 
Escape signs should be fixed above the door in the direction of escape and not be fixed to doors, as they will not be visible if the door is open.ï Signs mounted above doors should be at a height of between 2.0m and 2.5m above the floor.ï Signs on walls should be mounted between1.7m and 2.0m above the floor.ï Mounting heights greater than 2.5m may be used for hanging signs, e.g. in large open spaces or for operational reasons, but care should be taken to ensure that such signs are both conspicuous and legible. In such case larger signs may be necessary.ï Signs should be sited at the same height throughout the escape route, so far as is reasonably practicable.Escape sign designFor a sign to comply with safety signs and signals regulations it must be pictographic (see Figures 57 and 58). The pictogram can be supplemented by text if this is considered necessary to make the sign easily understood(BS-type sign), but you must not have a safety sign that uses only text. Either type of sign can be used but different types should notbe mixed. Appropriate signs should take into account the needs of those who may need to use them.The legibility of escape signs is determinedby the size of the sign, its level of illumination and the distance over which it is viewed. The use of signs within the same premises should follow a consistent design pattern or scheme. You should not rely on a few outsized signs which may encourage people to travel to a particular escape route when other more appropriate routes should be used.In multi-occupied premises, co-operation between the respective ‘responsible persons’ should be sought to ensure that, as far as possible, all signs in the building conform to a single pattern or scheme.

102
* The Royal National Institute of the Blind estimates that only about 4% of visually impaired people are totally blind.


Figure 57: BS-type signFigure 58: Euro signOther safety signs and noticesA number of other mandatory signs such as ‘Fire action’ notices may also be necessary.Fire doors that have been fitted with self- closing devices should be labelled ‘Fire door – keep shut’ (Figure 59) on both sides. fire- resisting doors to cupboards, stores and service ducts that are not self-closing because they are routinely kept locked should be labelled ‘Fire door – keep locked’ on the outside.Figure 59: Fire door ‘keep shut’ notice
Signs should indicate non-automatic fire safety equipment if there is any doubt about its location, e.g. fire extinguishers that are kept in cabinets or in recesses.A notice with the words ‘Push bar to open’ should be permanently displayed immediately above the push-bar on all doors fitted with a panic bolt or panic latch.A notice with the words ‘Fire escape – keep clear’ should be permanently displayed at about eye level on the external face of all doors which are provided as a means of escape in case of fire and which, because they are not normally used, may become obstructed.Staff noticesIn simple premises where there are a limited number of escape routes, it may be reasonable to provide staff with verbal reminders of what they need to do if there is a fire. In some premises, you could consider providing this in a short written statement that could, for example, be delivered with staff pay slips every six months.In multi-occupied, larger and more complex premises or where there is a high turnover of staff, a more considered approach for staff notices and instructions will be necessary. As well as positioning the fire instructions notice on escape routes adjacent to fire break-glass call points (Figure 60), put them where staff frequently assemble in the premises, e.g. the canteen and locker rooms.Figure 60: Staff action notice

If your premises are routinely expected to accommodate people whose first language is not English you may need to consider providing instruction in more than one language. The interpretation should always convey an identical message.IlluminationAll signs and notices will need illumination to ensure they are conspicuous and legible. There are a number of options available to achieve this, such as:ï external illumination; andï internal illumination.The supplier or other competent person can give you further advice.Signs or notices of the photo-luminescent type,i.e. where the active material making up the luminous parts of such signs or notices needs a period of exposure to light before they become visible in darkness (but get fainter with time), are not a substitute for appropriate emergency lighting and should only be used where other forms of illumination are present.Further guidanceDetailed guidance on fire safety signs can be found in BS 5499-4,30 BS 5499-5.74 Published guidance5,6 on compliance with health and safety legislation on signs is also available.Guidance about the use of photo-luminescent fire safety signs and notices can be foundin BS 5266-6.73104
Section 7 Further guidance on recording, planning, informing, instructing and training
7.1 Fire safety recordsKeeping up-to-date records of your fire risk assessment can help you effectively manage the fire strategy for your premises and demonstrate how you are complying with fire safety law.Even if you do not have to record the fire risk assessment, it can be helpful to keep a record of any co-operation and exchange of information made between employers and other responsible people for future reference.In larger and more complex premises, it is best to keep a dedicated record of all maintenance of fire-protection equipment and training.There is no one ‘correct’ format specified for this. Suitable record books are available from trade associations and may also be available from your local enforcing authority.In all cases the quality of records may also be regarded as a good indicator of the overall quality of the safety management structure.Your records should be kept in a specified place on the premises (for example, in the management’s office), and should include:ï details of any significant findings from the fire risk assessment and any action taken (see Part 1, Section 4.1);ï testing and checking of escape routes, including final exit locking mechanisms, such as panic devices, emergency exit devices and any electromagnetic devices;ï testing of fire-warning systems, including weekly alarm tests and periodic maintenance by a competent person;ï recording of false alarms;ï testing and maintenance of emergency lighting systems;ï testing and maintenance of fire extinguishers, hose reels and fire blankets etc.;ï if appropriate, testing and maintenance of other fire safety equipment such as fire-suppression systems and smoke control systems;ï 
recording and training of relevant people and fire evacuation drills;ï planning, organising, policy and implementation, monitoring, audit and review;ï maintenance and audit of any systems that are provided to help the fire and rescue service;ï the arrangements in a large multi-occupied building for a co-ordinated emergency plan or overall control of the actions you or your staff should take if there is a fire; andï all alterations, tests, repairs and maintenance of fire safety systems, including passive systems such as fire doors.Other issues that you may wish to record include:ï the competence, qualifications and status of the persons responsible for carrying out inspections and tests;ï the results of periodic safety audits, reviews, inspections and tests, and any remedial action taken;ï all incidents and circumstances which had the potential to cause accidents and monitor subsequent remedial actions; andï a record of the building use, the fire prevention and protection measures in place and high-risk areas.You should ensure that no other management decisions or policies compromise safety.Your documentation should be available for inspection by representatives of the enforcing authority.More detailed advice is given in BS 5588-12.52Figure 61 is an example of how to record some individual stages of the process in more detail. A blank version of this form is provided in Appendix A2.
Figure 61: Example record of significant findingsRisk Assessment – Record of significant findingsRisk assessment forAssessment undertaken byCompanyabc storesDate02/02/2006Address2 The High StCompleted byJ SmithAny TownSignatureJ SmithAB12 3CDSheet numberFloor/areaUseOneGround floor sales areaShopStep 1 – Identify fire hazardsSources of ignitionSources of fuelSources of oxygenHot lamp in display areaï Fabrics and textilesNo additional sourcesElectrical heatersï Display materialMicrowave/kettle in tea bayï Packagingï StationeryStep 2 – People at risk6 full time staff members 2 part time staff members60 customers at peak periods1 Clerical assistant working in first floor office(1 wheel chair user)Step 3 – Evaluate, remove, reduce and protect from risk(3.1) Evaluate the risk of the fire occuringï Hot lamps too close to display materialsï 1 wall heater close to shelving/goodsï Tea bay routinely use for storing packaging material(3.2) Evaluate the risk to people from a fire starting in the premisesï Predominantly open plan so fire in sales area quickly evidentï Fire in rear store could go undetectedï Fire on sales floor could effect first floor office(3.3) Remove and reduce the hazards that may cause a fireï Replace hot lamps with overhead low wattage track lightingï Remove wall heater as other 2 heaters considered adequateï Tea bay to be moved to first floorï Packaging material to be placed in secure refuse store to rear of premises(3.4) Remove and reduce the risks to people from a fireThe current fire precautions measures (refer to floor plan A) have been assessed in view of the findings recorded above. They are considered adequate with the following exceptionsAdditional measures considered necessaryï Provide automatic fire detection to rear storeï Fire door protecting staircase to 1st floor office requires new self closerï Ramp to rear fire exit requires repairï Fire extinguishers require maintenanceï Introduce periodic staff refresher trainingï Replace damaged fire exit sign above rear exitAssessment reviewAssessment review dateCompleted bySignatureReview outcome (where substantial changes have occurred a new record sheet should be used)
106
Notes:(1) The risk assessment record of significant findings should refer to other plans, records or other documents as necessary.(2) The information in this record should assist you to develop an emergency plan; coordinate measures with other ‘responsible persons’ in the building; and to inform and train staff and inform other relevant persons.(1) 

In premises with ‘engineered fire safety strategies’, a fire policy manual should be providedin addition to any other records. Enforcing authorities would expect a fire engineering policy manual to conform to the structure set out in BS 7974-0 section 5: Reporting and presentation.31Fire safety auditA fire safety audit can be used alongside your fire risk assessment to identify what fire safety provisions exist in your premises.When carrying out a review of your fire safety risk assessment, a pre-planned audit can quickly identify if there have been any significant changes which may affect the fire safety systems and highlight whether a full fire risk assessment is necessary.Plans and specificationsPlans and specifications can be required to assist understanding of a fire risk assessmentor emergency plan. Even where not needed for this purpose they can help you and your staff keep your fire risk assessment and emergency plan under review and help the fire and rescue service in the event of fire. Any symbols used should be shown on a key. Plans and specifications could include the following:ï essential structural features such as the layout of function rooms, escape doors, wall partitions, corridors, stairways etc. (including any fire-resisting structure and self-closing fire doors provided to protect the escape routes);ï location of refuges and lifts that have been designated suitable for use by disabled people and others who may need assistance to escape in case of fire;ï methods for fighting fire (details of the number, type and location of the firefighting equipment);ï location of manually-operated fire alarm call points and control equipment for fire alarms;ï location of any control rooms and any fire staff posts;ï location of any emergency lighting equipment and the exit route signs;ï location of any high-risk areas, equipment or process that must be immediately shut down by staff on hearing the fire alarm;ï 
location of any automatic firefighting systems, risers and sprinkler control valves;ï location of the main electrical supply switch, the main water shut-off valve and, where appropriate, the main gas or oil shut-off valves; andï plans and specifications relating to all recent constructions.This information should be passed on to any later users or owners of the premises.7.2 Emergency plansEmergency plan and contingency plans Your emergency plan should be appropriate to your premises and could include:ï how people will be warned if there is a fire;ï what staff should do if they discover a fire;ï how the evacuation of the premises should be carried out;ï where people should assemble after they have left the premises and procedures for checking whether the premises have been evacuated;ï identification of key escape routes, how people can gain access to them and escape from them to a place of total safety;ï arrangements for fighting the fire;ï the duties and identity of staff who have specific responsibilities if there is a fire;ï arrangements for the safe evacuation of people identified as being especially at risk, such as those with disabilities, lone workers and young persons;ï any machines/appliances/processes/power supplies that need to be stopped or isolated if there is a fire;ï specific arrangements, if necessary, for high-fire-risk areas;ï contingency plans for when life safety systems such as evacuation lifts, fire-detection and warning systems, sprinklers or smoke control systems are out of order;ï how the fire and rescue service and any other necessary services will be called and who will be responsible for doing this;ï procedures for meeting the fire and rescue service on their arrival and notifying them of any special risks, e.g. the location of highly flammable materials;ï 
ï what training employees need and the arrangements for ensuring that this training is given;ï phased evacuation plans (where some areas are evacuated while others are alerted but not evacuated until later); andï plans to deal with people once they have left the premises.As part of your emergency plan it is good practice to prepare post-incident plans for dealing with situations that might arise such as those involving:ï unaccompanied children;ï people with personal belongings (especially valuables) still in the building;ï people wishing to rejoin friends;ï getting people away from the building (e.g. to transport); andï inclement weather.You should therefore prepare contingency plans to determine specific actions and/or the mobilisation of specialist resources.Guidance on developing health and safety management policy has been published by the HSE.327.3 Information, instruction,co-operation and co-ordinationSupplying informationYou must provide easily understandable information to employees, the parents of children you may employ, and to employers of other persons working in your premises about the measures in place to ensure a safe escape from the building and how they will operate, for example:ï any significant risks to staff and other relevant persons that have been identified in your fire risk assessment or any similar assessment carried out by another user and responsible person in the building;ï the fire prevention and protection measures and procedures in your premises and where they impact on staff and other relevant persons in the building;ï the procedures for fighting a fire in the premises; andï 
the identity of people who have been nominated with specific responsibilities in the building.Even if you do not have to record the fire risk assessment, it would be helpful to keep a record of any co-operation and exchange of information made between employers and other responsible people for future reference.You need to ensure that all staff and, where necessary, other relevant persons in the building, receive appropriate information in a way that can be easily understood. This might include any special instructions to particular people who have been allocated a specific task, such as shutting down equipment or guiding people to the nearest exit.Duties of employees to give information Employees also have a duty to take reasonable care for their own safety and that of other people who may be affected by their activities. This includes the need for them to inform their employer of any activity that they consider would present a serious and immediate danger to their own safety and that of others.Dangerous substancesHSE publishes guidance8 about specific substances where appropriate information may need to be provided. If any of these, or any other substance that is not included but nevertheless presents more than a slight risk, is present in your premises, then you must provide such information to staff and others, specifically you must:ï name the substance and the risks associated with it, e.g. how to safely use or store the product to avoid creating highly flammable vapours or explosive atmospheres;ï identify any legislative provisions that may be associated with the substance;ï allow employees access to the hazardous substances safety data sheet; andï inform the local fire and rescue service where dangerous substances are present on the premises.ï 
108

Information to the fire and rescue services In addition to providing information to the fire and rescue service when dangerous substances are present in sufficient quantities to pose an enhanced risk, it will also be helpful to inform them of any short term changes that might have an impact on their firefighting activities,e.g. in the event of temporary loss of a firefighting facility and temporary alterations.Procedures should also include meeting and briefing the fire and rescue service when they arrive.InstructionYou will need to carefully consider the type of instructions to staff and other people working in your premises. Written instructions mustbe concise, comprehensible and relevant and therefore must be reviewed and updated as new working practices and hazardous substances are introduced.
Inclusive access and employment policies mean that people with learning difficulties may now be present in a range of premises and your fire risk assessment should consider whether further instruction or guidance is necessary to ensure that your evacuation strategy is appropriate and understood by everyone.Instructions will need to be given to people delegated to carry out particular tasks, for example:ï removing additional security, bolts, bars or chains on final exit doors before the start of business to ensure that escape routes are accessible;ï daily, weekly, quarterly and yearly checks on the range of fire safety measures (in larger premises some of the work may be contracted out to a specialist company);ï safety considerations when closing down the premises at the end of the day, e.g. removing rubbish, ensuring enough exits are available for people that remain and closing fire doors and shutters;ï leaving hazardous substances in a safe condition when evacuating the building;ï the safe storage of hazardous substances at the end of the working day; andï ensuring everyone in large organisations with many buildings within a curtilage and a security zone know how to use internal emergency telephones.Specific instructions may be needed about:ï how staff will help members of the public/ visitors to leave the building;ï ‘sweeping’ of the shop floor by staff to guide people to the nearest exit when the fire alarm sounds;ï designating particular areas of a shop/ office for supervisors to check that no one remains inside;ï calling the emergency services;ï carrying out evacuation roll calls;ï taking charge at the assembly area;ï meeting and directing fire engines; andï cover arrangements when nominated people are on leave.ï 
Co-operation and co-ordinationWhere you share premises with others (this includes people who are self-employed or in partnership), each responsible person, i.e. each employer, owner or other person who has control over any part of the premises, will need to co-operate and co-ordinate thefindings of their separate fire risk assessments to ensure the fire precautions and protection measures are effective throughout the building. This could include:ï co-ordinating an emergency plan (see Step 4.2 for features of an emergency plan);ï identifying the nature of any risks and how they may affect others in or about the premises;ï identifying any fire-prevention and protection measures;ï identifying any measures to mitigate the effects of a fire; andï arranging any contacts with external emergency services and calling the fire and rescue service.7.4 
Fire safety trainingStaff trainingThe actions of staff if there is a fire are likely to be crucial to their safety and that of other people in the premises. All staff should receive basic fire safety induction training and attend refresher sessions at pre-determined intervals.You should ensure that all staff and contractors are told about the emergency plan and are shown the escape routes.The training should take account of the findings of the fire risk assessment and be easily understood by all those attending. It should include the role that those members of staff will be expected to carry out if a fire occurs.This may vary in large premises, with some staff being appointed as fire marshals or being given some other particular role for which additional training will be required.In addition to the guidance given in Part 1, Step 4.4, as a minimum all staff should receive training about:ï the items listed in your emergency plan;ï the importance of fire doors and other basic fire-prevention measures;ï where relevant, the appropriate use of firefighting equipment;ï the importance of reporting to the assembly area;ï exit routes and the operation of exit devices, including physically walking these routes;ï general matters such as permitted smoking areas or restrictions on cooking other than in designated areas; andï assisting disabled persons where necessary.Training is necessary:ï when staff start employment or are transferred into the premises;ï when changes have been made to the emergency plan and the preventive and protective measures;ï where working practices and processes or people’s responsibilities change;ï to take account of any changed risks to the safety of staff or other relevant persons;ï 
110

ï to ensure that staff know what they have to do to safeguard themselves and others on the premises;ï where staff are expected to assist disabled persons; andï if a member of staff may take on the role of duty manager.Training should be repeated as often as necessary and should take place during working hours.Whatever training you decide is necessary to support your fire safety strategy and emergency plan, it should be verifiable.Enforcing authorities may want to examine records as evidence that adequate training has been given.Fire marshalsStaff expected to undertake the role of fire marshals (often called fire wardens) would require more comprehensive training. Their role may include:ï helping those on the premises to leave;ï checking the premises to ensure everyone has left;ï using firefighting equipment if safe to do so;ï liaising with the fire and rescue service on arrival;ï shutting down vital or dangerous equipment; andï performing a supervisory/managing role in any fire situation.Training for this role may include:ï detailed knowledge of the fire safety strategy of the premises;ï awareness of human behaviour in fires;ï how to encourage others to use the most appropriate escape route;ï how to search safely and recognise areas that are unsafe to enter;ï the difficulties that some people, particularly if disabled, may have in escaping and any special evacuation arrangements that have been pre-planned;ï additional training in the use of firefighting equipment;ï 
an understanding of the purpose of any fixed firefighting equipment such as sprinklers or gas flooding systems; andï reporting of faults, incidents and near misses.Fire drillsOnce the emergency plan has been developed and training given, you will need to evaluate its effectiveness. The best way to do this is to perform a fire drill. This should be carried out at least annually or as determined by your fire risk assessment. If you have a high staff turnover, you may need to carry them out more often.A well-planned and executed fire drill will confirm understanding of the training and provide helpful information for future training. The responsible person should determine the possible objectives of the drill such as to:ï identify any weaknesses in the evacuation strategy;ï test the procedure following any recent alteration or changes to working practices;ï familiarise new members of staff with procedures; andï test the arrangements for disabled people.Who should take part?Within each building the evacuation should be for all occupants except those who may need to ensure the security of the premises, or people who, on a risk-assessed basis, are required to remain with particular equipment or processes that cannot be closed down.Premises that consist of several buildings on the same site should be dealt with one building at a time over an appropriate period unless the emergency procedure dictates otherwise.Where appropriate, you may find it helpful to include members of the public in your fire drill – ensuring that all necessary health and safety issues are addressed before you do so.Carrying out the drillFor premises that have more than one escape route, the escape plan should be designed to evacuate all people on the assumption that one exit or stairway is unavailable because of the fire. This could be simulated by a designated person being located at a suitable point on an exit route. Applying this scenario to different escape routes at each fire drill will encourage individuals to use alternative escape routes which they may not normally use.
When carrying out the drill you might find it helpful to:ï circulate details concerning the drill and inform all staff of their duty to participate. It may not be beneficial to have ‘surprise drills’ as the health and safety risks introduced may outweigh the benefits;ï ensure that equipment can be safely left;ï nominate observers;ï inform the alarm receiving centre if the fire-warning system is monitored (if the fire and rescue service is normally called directly from your premises, ensure that this does not happen);ï inform visitors and members of the public if they are present; andï ask a member of staff at random to set off the alarm by operating the nearest alarm call point using the test key. This will indicate the level of knowledge regarding the location of the nearest call point.More detailed information on fire drills and test evacuations are given in BS 5588-12.52The roll call/checking the premises have been evacuatedWhere possible, you should ensure that a roll call is carried out as soon as possible at the designated assembly point(s), and/or receive reports from wardens designated to ‘sweep’ the premises. You should note any people who are unaccounted for. In a real evacuation this information will need to be passed to the fire and rescue service on arrival.Check that people have assembled at the evacuation point.Once the roll call is complete or all reports have been received, allow people to return to the building. If the fire-warning system is monitored inform the alarm receiving centre that the drill has now been completed and record the outcomes of the drill.
Monitoring and debriefThroughout the drill the responsible person and nominated observers should pay particular attention to:ï communication difficulties with regard to the roll call and establishing that everyone is accounted for;ï the use of the nearest available escape routes as opposed to common circulation routes;ï difficulties with the opening of final exit doors;ï difficulties experienced by people with disabilities;ï the roles of specified people, e.g. fire wardens;ï inappropriate actions, e.g. stopping to collect personal items, attempting to use lifts etc.; andï windows and doors not being closed as people leave.On-the-spot debriefs are useful to discuss the fire drill, encouraging feedback from everybody. Later, reports from fire wardens and observations from people should be collated and reviewed. Any conclusions and remedial actions should be recorded and implemented.
112
Section 8 Quality assurance of fire protection equipment and installationFire protection products and related services should be fit for their purpose and properly installed and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions or the relevant British Standard.Third-party certification schemes for fire protection products and related services are an effective means of providing the fullest possible assurances, offering a level of quality, reliability and safety that non-certificated products may lack. This does not mean goods and services that are not third-party approved are less reliable, but there is no obvious way in which this can be demonstrated.Third-party quality assurance can offer comfort both as a means of satisfying you that goods and services you have purchased are fit for purpose, and as a means of demonstrating that you have complied with the law.However, to ensure the level of assurance offered by third party schemes, you should always check whether the company you employ sub-contracts work to others. If they do, you will want to check that the sub- contractors are subject to the same level of checks of quality and competence as the company you are employing.Your local fire and rescue service, fire trade associations or your own trade association may be able to provide further details about third- party quality assurance schemes and the various organisations that administer them.
Appendix AA.1 Example fire safety maintenance checklist
A fire safety maintenance checklist can be used as a means of supporting your fire safety policy. This example list is not intended to be comprehensive and should not be used as a substitute for carrying out a fire risk assessment.You can moidfy the example where necessary, to fit your premises and may need to incorporate
the recommendations of manufacturers and installers of the fire safety equipment/systems that you may have installed in your premises.Any ticks in the grey boxes should result in further investigation and appropriate action as necessary. In larger and more complex premises you may need to seek the assistance of a competent person to carry out some of the checks.
YesNoN/ACommentsDaily checks (not normally recorded)Escape routesCan all fire exits be opened immediately and easily? Are fire doors clear of obstructions?Are escape routes clear??????????Fire warning systemsIs the indicator panel showing ‘normal’?Are whistles, gongs or air horns in place???????Escape lightingAre luminaires and exit signs in good condition and undamaged?Is emergency lighting and sign lighting working correctly???????Firefighting equipmentAre all fire extinguishers in place? Are fire extinguishers clearly visible?Are vehicles blocking fire hydrants or access to them??????????Weekly checksEscape routesDo all emergency fastening devices to fire exits (push bars and pads, etc.) work correctly?Are external routes clear and safe???????Fire warning systemsDoes testing a manual call point send a signal to the indicator panel? (Disconnect the link to the receiving centre or tell them you are doing a test.)Did the alarm system work correctly when tested? Did staff and other people hear the fire alarm?Did any linked fire protection systems operate correctly? (e.g. magnetic door holder released, smoke curtains drop)????????????114
YesNoN/ACommentsWeekly checks continuedDo all visual alarms and/or vibrating alarms and pagers (as applicable) work?Do voice alarm systems work correctly? Was the message understood???????Escape lightingAre charging indicators (if fitted) visible??	?	?Firefighting equipmentIs all equipment in good condition?Additional items from manufacturer’s recommendations.??????Monthly checksEscape routesDo all electronic release mechanisms on escape doors work correctly? Do they ‘fail safe’ in the open position?Do all automatic opening doors on escape routes ‘fail safe’ in the open position?Are fire door seals and self-closing devices in good condition?Do all roller shutters provided for fire compartmentation work correctly? Are external escape stairs safe?Do all internal self-closing fire doors work correctly???????????????????Escape lightingDo all luminaires and exit signs function correctly when tested?Have all emergency generators been tested? (Normally run for one hour.)??????Firefighting equipmentIs the pressure in ‘stored pressure’ fire extinguishers correct?Additional items from manufacturer’s recommendations.??????Three-monthly checksGeneralAre any emergency water tanks/ponds at their normal capacity? Are vehicles blocking fire hydrants or access to them?Additional items from manufacturer’s recommendations.?????????Six-monthly checksGeneralHas any firefighting or emergency evacuation lift been tested by a competent person?Has any sprinkler system been tested by a competent person?Have the release and closing mechanisms of any fire-resisting compartment doors and shutters been tested by a competent person??????????Fire warning systemHas the system been checked by a competent person????
YesNoN/ACommentsSix-monthly checks continuedEscape lightingDo all luminaires operate on test for one third of their rated value?Additional items from manufacturer’s recommendations.??????Annual checksEscape routesDo all self-closing fire doors fit correctly?Is escape route compartmentation in good repair???????Escape lightingDo all luminaires operate on test for their full rated duration?Has the system been checked by a competent person???????Firefighting equipmentHas all firefighting equipment been checked by a competent person??	?	?MiscellaneousHas any dry/wet rising fire main been tested by a competent person?  ?Has the smoke and heat ventilation system been tested by a	?competent person?Has external access for the fire service been checked for	?ongoing availability?Have any firefighters’ switches been tested?	?Has the fire hydrant bypass flow valve control been tested by a	?competent person?Are any necessary fire engine direction signs in place?	?????????????116
A2 Example form for recording significant findingsRisk Assessment – Record of significant findingsRisk assessment forAssessment undertaken byCompany AddressDate Completed by SignatureSheet numberFloor/areaUseStep 1 – Identify fire hazardsSources of ignitionSources of fuelSources of oxygenStep 2 – People at riskStep 3 – Evaluate, remove, reduce and protect from risk(3.1) Evaluate the riskof the fire occuring(3.2) Evaluate the risk topeople from a fire startingin the premises(3.3) Remove and reducethe hazards that maycause a fire(3.4) Remove and reducethe risks to peoplefrom a fireAssessment reviewAssessment review dateCompleted bySignatureReview outcome (where substantial changes have occurred a new record sheet should be used)Notes:(1) The risk assessment record of significant findings should refer to other plans, records or other documents as necessary.(2) The information in this record should assist you to develop an emergency plan; coordinate measures with other ‘responsible persons’ in the building; and to inform and train staff and inform other relevant persons.(1) 
Appendix BTechnical information on fire-resisting separation, fire doors and door fastenings
B1 Fire-resisting separationGeneralThe materials from which your premises are constructed may determine the speed with which a fire may spread, affecting the escape routes that people will use. A fire starting in a building constructed mainly from readily combustible material will spread faster than one where modern fire-resisting constructionmaterials have been used. Where non-combustible materials are used and the internal partitions are made from fire-resisting materials, the fire will be contained for a longer period, allowing more time for the occupants to escape.Because of the requirements of the Building Regulations you will probably already have some walls and floors that are fire-resisting and limitations on the surface finishes to certain walls and ceilings.You will need to consider whether the standard of fire resistance and surface finishing in the escape routes is satisfactory, has been affected by wear and tear or alterations and whether any improvements are necessary.The following paragraphs give basic information on how fire-resisting construction can provide up to 30 minutes protection to escape routes. This is the standard recommended for most situations. If you are still unsure of the levelof fire resistance which is necessary after reading this information, you should consult a fire safety expert.
Fire-resisting constructionThe fire resistance of a wall or floor is dependent on the quality of construction and materials used. Common examples of types of construction that provide 30-minute fire resistance to escape routes if constructed to the above standards are:ï internal framed construction wall, non-load bearing, consisting of 72mm x 37mm timber studs at 600mm centres and faced with 12.5mm of plasterboard with all joints taped and filled (see Figure 62);ï internal framed construction, non-load bearing, consisting of channel section steel studs at 600mm centres faced with 12.5mm of plasterboard with all joints taped and filled; andï masonry cavity wall consisting of solid bricks of clay, brick earth, shale, concrete or calcium silicate, with a minimum thickness of 90mm on each leaf.There are other methods and products available which will achieve the required standard of fire resistance and may be more appropriate for the existing construction in your premises. If there is any doubt about how your building is constructed, then ask for further advice from a competent person.
118
Figure 62: Fire-resisting construction
Fire-resisting floorsThe fire resistance of floors will depend on the existing floor construction as well as the type of ceiling finish beneath. If you need to upgrade the fire resistance of your floor it may not be desirable to apply additional fire resistance to the underside of an existing ornate ceiling. In older buildings there may be a requirement to provide fire resistance between beams and joists.A typical example of a 30-minute fire-resisting timber floor is tongue and groove softwood of not less than 15mm finished thickness on 37mm timber joists, with a ceiling below of onelayer of plasterboard to a thickness of 12.5mm with joints taped and filled and backed by supporting timber.There are other, equally valid, methods and products available for upgrading floors.If you are in any doubt you should ask the advice of a competent person and ensure that the product is installed in accordance with instructions from the manufacturer or supplier.Fire-resisting glazingThe most common type of fire-resisting glazing is 6mm Georgian wired glazing, which is easily identifiable. Clear fire-resisting glazing is available and can quickly be identified by a mark etched into the glass, usually in the corner of the glazed panel, to confirm its fire-resisting standard.Although this is not compulsory, the marking
of glass is supported by the Glass and Glazing Federation; you should check whether the glazing will be marked accordingly before purchase.The glazing should have been installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and to the appropriate standard,66 to ensurethat its fire-resisting properties are maintained.The performance of glazed systems in terms of fire resistance and external fire exposure should, wherever possible, be confirmed by test evidence. Alternatively, where there is a lack of test information, ask for an assessment of the proposed construction from suitably qualified people.Fire separation of voidsA common problem encountered with fire separation is fire-resisting partitions which do not extend above false ceilings to true ceiling height. This may result in unseen fire spread and a loss of vital protection to the escape routes. It is important therefore to carefully check all such partitions have beeninstalled correctly.CLASP and SCOLA type construction CLASP (Consortium of Local Authorities Special Programme) and SCOLA (Second Consortium of Local Authorities) are total or systematic methods of construction that were developed to provide consistent building quality, while reducing the need for traditional skilled labour.
They consist of a metal frame upon which structural panels are fixed. This results in hidden voids through which fire may spread. It is important that cavity barriers that restrict the spread of fire are installed appropriately, especially to walls and floors that need to be fire-resisting. If you are in any doubt as to whether any remedial work will be required, then ask for advice from a competent person.Breaching fire separationTo ensure effective protection against fire, walls and floors providing fire separation must form a complete barrier, with an equivalent level of fire resistance provided to any openings such as doors, ventilation ducts, pipe passages or refuse chutes.The passing of services such as heating pipes or electrical cables through fire-resisting partitions leaves gaps through which fire and smoke may spread. This should be rectified by suitablefire stopping and there are many proprietary products available to suit particular types of construction. Such products should be installed by competent contractors.Décor and surface finishes of walls, ceilings and escape routesThe materials used to line walls and ceilings can contribute significantly to the spread of flame across their surface. Most materials that are used as surface linings will fall into one of three classes of surface spread of flame.The following are common examples of acceptable materials for various situations:Class 0: Materials suitable for circulation spaces and escape routesï Such materials include brickwork, blockwork,concrete, ceramic tiles, plaster finishes (including rendering on wood or metal lathes), wood-wool cement slabs and mineral fibre tiles or sheets with cement or resin binding.Note: Additional finishes to these surfaces may be detrimental to the fire performance of the surface and if there is any doubt about this then consult the manufacturer of the finish.Class 1: Materials suitable for use in all rooms but not on escape routesï Such materials include all the Class 0 materialsreferred to above. Additionally, timber, hardboard, blockboard, particle board, heavy flock wallpapers and thermosetting plastics will be suitable if flame-retardant treated to achieve a Class 1 standard.
Class 3: Materials suitable for use in rooms of less than 30m2ï Such materials include all those referredto in Class 1, including those that have not been flame-retardant treated and certain dense timber or plywood and standard glass-reinforced polyesters.The equivalent European classification standard will also be acceptable. Further details about internal linings and classifications are available in Approved Document B.24 Appropriate testing procedures are detailed in BS 476-733 and where appropriate BS EN 13501-1.34Further guidance on types of fire-resisting construction has been published by the Building Research Establishment.35B2 Fire-resisting doorsRequirements of a fire-resisting door Effective fire-resisting doors (see Figure 63) are vital to ensure that the occupants can evacuate to a place of safety. Correctly specified and well-fitted doors will hold back fire and smoke, preventing escape routes becoming unusable, as well as preventing the fire spreading from one area to another.Fire-resisting doors are necessary in any doorway located in a fire-resisting structure. Most internal doors are constructed of timber. These will give some limited protection against fire spread, but only a purpose-built fire-resisting door that has been tested to an approved standard will provide the necessary protection. Metal fire-resisting doors are also available and specific guidance for these follows.All fire-resisting doors are rated by their performance when tested to an appropriate standard. The level of protection provided by the door is measured, primarily by determining the time taken for a fire to breach the integrity (E), of the door assembly, together with its resistance to the passage of hot gases and flame.It may be possible to upgrade the fire resistance of existing doors. Further information is available from the Building Research Establishment67 or Timber Research and Development Association.68
120
Figure 63: A fire-resisting and smoke-stopping door
Timber fire-resisting doors require a gap of 2-4mm between the door leaf and the frame.However larger gaps may be necessary to ensure that the door closes flush into its frame when smoke seals are fitted. Further information is available in BS 4787-1.69 For fire-resisting purposes the gap is normally protected by installing an intumescent seal, in either the door or, preferably, the frame. The intumescent seal expands in the early stages of a fire and enhances the protection given by the door.Additional smoke seals will restrict the spread of smoke at ambient temperatures. Doors fitted with smoke seals, either incorporated in the intumescent seal or fitted separately, havetheir classification code suffixed with a ‘S’.The principal fire-resisting door categories are:ï E20 fire-resisting door providing 20 minutes fire resistance (or equivalent FD 20S). (Note: Many suppliers no longer provide an E20 type fire-resisting door.)ï E30 fire-resisting door providing 30 minutes fire resistance (or equivalent FD 30S).ï 
E60 fire-resisting door providing 60 minutes fire resistance (or equivalent FD 60S).Timber fire-resisting doors are available that will provide up to 120 minutes fire resistance but their use is limited to more specialised conditions that are beyond the scope of this guidance.Metal fire-resisting doorsAlthough the majority of fire-resisting doors are made from timber, metal fire-resisting doors, which meet the appropriate standard, can often be used for the same purpose. However, there are situations where they are more appropriate. The majority of metal fire-resisting door manufacturers will require the use of bespoke frames and hardware for their door sets.121See BS EN 1634-136 and BS 476-2237 for more information.For detailed guidance refer to Approved Document B.24
Glazing in fire-resisting doorsAlthough glazing provides additional safety in everyday use and can enhance the appearance of fire-resisting doors, it should never reduce the fire resistance of the door. The opening provided in the door for the fire-resisting glazing unit(s) and the fitting of the beading are critical, and should only be entrusted to a competent person. In nearly all cases the door and glazing should be purchased from a reputable supplier who can provide documentary evidence that the door continues to achieve the required rating.Fire-resisting door furnitureHingesTo ensure compliance with their rated fire performance, fire-resisting doors need to be hung with the correct number, size and quality of hinges. Normally a minimum of three hinges are needed, however themanufacturer’s instructions should be closely followed. BS EN 193538 including Annex B, is the appropriate standard.Alternative door mountingsAlthough the most common method of hanging a door is to use single axis hinges, alternative methods are employed where the door is required to be double swing or mounted on pivots for other reasons.Floor mounted controlled door closing devices are the most common method regularly found with timber, glass and steel doors while transom mounted devices are commonly used with aluminium sections. In each case reference should be made to the fire test report for details as to compliance with the composition of the door assembly including the door mounting conditions.Self-closing devicesAll fire-resisting doors, other than those to locked cupboards and service ducts, should be fitted with an appropriately controlled self- closing device that will effectively close the door from any angle. In certain circumstances, concealed, jamb-mounted closing devices may be specified and in these cases should be capable of closing the door from any angle and against any latch fitted to the door; spring hinges are unlikely to be suitable. Further information is available in BS EN 1154.39Rising butt hinges are not suitable for use as a self-closing device due to their inability to close and latch the door from any angle.
Automatic door hold-open/release devices for self-closing fire doorsThese devices are designed to hold open self- closing fire doors or allow them to swing free during normal use. In the event of a fire alarm the device will then release the door automatically, allowing the self-closing mechanism to close the door.Such devices are particularly useful in situations where self-closing doors on escape routes are used regularly by significant numbers of people, or by people with impaired mobility who may have difficulty in opening the doors.Typical examples of such devices include:ï electro-magnetic devices fitted to the fire- resisting door which release when the fire detection and warning system operates, allowing a separate self-closer to close the door;ï electro-magnetic devices within the controlled door closing device which function on the operation of the fire detection and warning system; andï ‘free swing’ controlled door closing devices, which operate by allowing the door leaf to work independently of the closing device in normal conditions. An electro-magnetic device within the spring mechanism linked to the fire detection and warning system ensures that the door closes on the operation of the system.Note: Free swing devices may not be suitable in some situations, such as corridors, where draughts are a problem and the doors are likely to swing uncontrolled, causing possible difficulty or injury to certain people e.g. those with certain disabilities, the elderly and frail, or young children.Automatic door hold open/release devices fitted to doors protecting escape routes should only be installed in conjunction with an automatic fire detection and warning system incorporating smoke detectors, that is designed to protect the escape routes in the building (see Part 2, Section 2).In all cases the automatic device should release the fire-resisting door allowing it to close effectively within its frame when any of the following conditions occur:ï the detection of smoke by an automatic detector;ï 
122

ï the actuation of the fire detection and alarm system by manual means e.g. operation of break glass call point;ï any failure of the fire detection and alarm system; orï any electrical power failure.Other devices, including self-contained devices which perform a similar function, that are not connected directly to a fire alarm system and are not therefore able to meet the above criteria are available and may be acceptable where a site specific risk assessment can show that they are appropriate. Such devices are unlikely to be suitable for use on doors protecting single stairways or other critical means of escape.In all cases where a door hold open device is used it should be possible to close the door manually.A site specific risk assessment should be undertaken before any type of automatic door hold open/release device is installed. If you are unsure about the suitability of such devices in your premises, you should seek the advice of a competent person.Further guidance about automatic door hold open/release devices is given in BS EN 115570 or BS 5839-3.41Door co-ordinatorsWhere pairs of doors with rebated meeting stiles are installed it is critical that the correct closing order is maintained. Door coordinators to BS EN 115871 should be fitted and fully operational in all cases where the doors are self-closing.Installation and workmanshipThe reliability and performance of correctly specified fire-resisting doors can be undermined by inadequate installation. It is important that installers with the necessary level of skill and knowledge are used. Accreditation schemes for installers of fire-resisting doors are available.Fire-resisting doors and shutters will require routine maintenance, particularly to power operation and release and closing mechanisms.Further information is available on fire-resisting doors in BS 8214.42 If you are unsure about the quality, the effectiveness or the fitting of your fire-resisting doors consult a fire safety expert.
For further guidance on the selection and maintenance of door furniture suitable for use on timber fire resisting and escape doors refer to The Building Hardware Industry Federation (BHIF) Code of Practice – Hardware for Timber Fire and Escape Doors.72B3 Door-fastening devicesThe relationship between the securing of doors against unwanted entry and the ability to escape through them easily in an emergency has often proved problematical. Careful planning and the use of quality materials remain the most effective means of satisfying both of these objectives.Any device that impedes people making good their escape, either by being unnecessarily complicated to manipulate or not being readily openable, will not be acceptable.Guidance on fire exits starts from the position that doors on escape routes should not be fitted with any locking devices (electrically operated or otherwise). However, it is accepted that in many cases the need for security will require some form of device that prevents unlimited access, but still enables the occupants of a building or area to open the door easily if there is a fire. These devices can take many forms but, in the majority of cases, premises where there are members of the public present or others who are not familiar with the building should use panic exit bar devices (i.e. push bars or touch bars). See BS EN 112543 for further information.Premises that have limited numbers of staff or others who are familiar with the building and where panic is not likely may use alternative devices (i.e. push pads or lever handles).See BS EN 17944 for further information.In some larger premises, when only staff are on the premises and there is a security issue, it may be acceptable to restrict the number of emergency exits immediately available,e.g. when only security staff are present at night, or prior to opening the premises in the morning. Staff should be made fully aware of any restrictions and the number of exits not immediately available should be limited.
Electrical locking devicesElectrically operated entry control devices have been developed for use as locking devices on fire exits. They fall into two main categories, electromechanical and electromagnetic.ï Electromechanical devicesElectromechanical devices comprise electromechanical lock keeps and draw bolts, which can be controlled by people inside the premises by entering a code or by using ‘smart cards’, which have been adapted to control the exit from certain areas. These devices have been fitted in many premises and may be linked to the fire-detection and/or warning system.Experience has shown that these devices can fail to open in a number of ways. They are dependent on a spring mechanism to return the lock keep or draw bolt(s) and are liable to jam when pressure is applied to the door. It is also relatively easy to fit them incorrectly. Electromechanical locking devices are normally unacceptable on escape doors, unless they are fitted witha manual means of overriding the locking mechanism, such as a push bar, push pad or lever handle or they do not rely on a spring mechanism, fail-safe open and are not affected by pressure, in which case the criteria for electromagnetic devices should be applied.ï Electromagnetic devicesThese devices comprise a magnet and a simple fixed retaining plate with nomoving parts and are therefore generally considered to be more reliable due totheir inherent ‘fail-safe unlocked’ operation. Electromagnetic locking devices go some way to addressing the particular concerns surrounding electromechanical locking systems. The release of this type of device is controlled by the interruption of electrical current to an electromagnet either manually via a switch or other means, break-glass point (typically coloured green), or by linking to the fire-warning and/or detection system of the premises.Time-delay devices on escape routesA further development is the fitting of a time- delay system to the electronic door-locking device. This delays the actual opening of an exit door for a variable period following operation of the panic bar or other exit device. Periods of between five and 60 seconds can
be pre-set at the manufacturing stage or can be adjusted when fitted. These are not usually acceptable for use by members of the public. However, they may be acceptable for use by staff who are familiar with their operation and are suitably trained in their use.Management of electronic door-control devices including time delaysThe use of such devices may be accepted by enforcing authorities if the responsible person can demonstrate, through a suitable risk assessment for each individual door, both the need and the adequate management controls to ensure that people can escape safely from the premises. In particular:ï Access control should not be confused with exit control. Many devices are available which control the access to the premises but retain the immediate escape facility from the premises.ï In public areas, when push bars are operated on escape doors, they should release the electromagnetic locks immediately and allow the exit doors to open.ï The requirement for exit control should be carefully assessed and should not be seen as a substitute for good management of the employees and occupants.ï All other alternatives should have been explored/evaluated prior to using these devices to ensure they do not affect the safety of occupants.ï The device should be connected to the fire warning and/or detection system.ï The device should incorporate a bypass circuit for immediate release on activation of the fire warning and/or detection system.ï Each door should be fitted with a single securing device.ï The emergency exit doors should be clearly labelled about how to operate them.ï Adequate control measures should be put in place to ensure the safety of the occupants.The use of electronic door-locking devices should be considered with particular care in premises with a number of different occupancies.The management of a complicated system of evacuation for many different groups is unlikely to be practicable.The technical standards in respect of sourcing, maintaining and testing must be extremely high.
124
When part of the management control system involves trained personnel helping others at these doors, it is vital to ensure these people are available.The use of exit control devices should not be considered where the number of trained staff is low or where members of the public would be expected to operate the devices without help.In premises where there may be large numbers of people, the devices should only be considered when linked to a comprehensive automaticfire-detection and warning system in accordance with BS 5839-1.16 There should be an additional means of manually overriding the locking device at each such exit (typically a green break-glass point).The use of time-delay systems that prevent the opening of emergency exits for a pre-set time are primarily used to improve security. These add a further layer of complexity to the fire strategy and should not be considered in public areas. They should only be used in non-public areas when all other options such as relocating valuable stock or exterior boundary management have been addressed. Their value in preventing theft is likely to be transient as the use of the manual override becomes more widely known.British Standard 822045 gives further advice on security in buildings and while this standard does refer to electronic locking devices, it also acknowledges that the balance must remain on the side of emergency escape rather than security.
Appendix CHistoric buildings
General considerationsThis appendix offers additional information about listed and historical buildings.Fire risk assessments conducted for a office or shop which is within a listed or historic building will need to endeavour to strike a balance between ensuring sufficient fire safety measures are in place for the safety of people, yet avoid extensive alterations and helping to maintain the character of the building.As well as the fire risk assessment it is recommended that a general fire policy statement and manual is compiled. A person must be nominated to take responsibility for all aspects of fire safety. Usually the person charged with the management and control of the premises will be the ‘responsible person’ under the Order.1The advice and/or consent of a building control body or any other relevant bodies (e.g. English Heritage) should form part of any fire risk assessment that impacts on the character of the building (e.g. replacement of doors, fittings, wooden panelling and decor) or material changes to existing escape routes. An ideal solutionis one that is reversible, enabling the historic elements to be reinstated.A fire safety adviser will be able to suggest alternatives to conventional fire precautions, such as:ï a fire engineering solution;ï upgrading existing doors and partitions in a sympathetic manner to improve their fire resistance; andï considering the installation of specialist fire-detection or suppression systems.
Should the design and nature of the historic building preclude the introduction of conventional fire safety features, it will be necessary to manage the building in sucha way that:ï limits the number of occupants, either staff or members of the public, inside the building;ï limits activities in the building; andï provides adequate supervision within the building.Liaison with the fire and rescue serviceThe responsible person will need to ensure effective liaison with the fire and rescue service to enable them to carry out firefighting operations. These may include information on:ï the provision of water supplies, seasonal ponds, lakes and underground tanks, and any associated pumps;ï difficult access for fire engines;ï particular hazards in the construction features of the building (including asbestos);ï the use of combustible under floor insulation;ï underground vaults ducts and voids where fire may spread unchecked;ï worn stone slabs in stairway construction; andï the presence of cast iron columns and wrought iron beams.Emergency planningAn important consideration for the owners and trustees is the protection of valuable artefacts and paintings from the effects of fire. However, the efficient evacuation of all occupants must take precedence over procedures for limiting damage to property and contents. Salvage work should be limited to those parts of the building not directly affected by the fire.
126
Fire wardens and others tasked with carrying out salvage work should have received formal training, adequate protection and be fully briefed about the health and safety risk assessment carried out to identify the dangers associated with this activity. Further detailed advice on fire safety in historic buildings can be found in the following publications:ï BS 7913: Guide to the principles of the conservation of historic buildings, British Standards Institution.ï Heritage under fire: A guide to the protection of historic buildings, Fire Protection Association (for the UK Working Party on Fire Safety in Historic Buildings) 1991, ISBN 0902167944.ï The Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Historic Buildings (Historic Scotland Technical Advice Note S.), Fire Protection Association (TCRE Division/Scottish Conservation Bureau, Hist.) 1998,ISBN 1 900168 63 4.ï Fire Protection Measures in Scottish Historic Buildings: Advice on Measures Required to Minimise the Likelihood of Fire Starting and to Alleviate the Destructive Consequences of Fire in Historic Buildings (Technical Advice Note), TCRE Division/Scottish Conservation Bureau, Hist. 1997,ISBN 1 900168 41 3.ï Fire Risk Management in Heritage Buildings (Technical Advice Note), TCRE Division/ Scottish Conservation Bureau, Hist. 2001, ISBN 1 900168 71 5.ï Summary and conclusions of the report into fire protection measures for the Royal Palaces by Sir Alan Bailey. Following the Windsor Castle fire, 1992.ï The fire at Upton Park. Published by the National Trust.ï Timber panelled doors and fire. Published by English Heritage.ï Fire safety in historic town centres. Published by English Heritage and Cheshire Fire and Rescue Service.ï 
Appendix DGlossaryThese definitions are provided to assist the responsible person in understanding some of the technical terms used in this guide. They are not exhaustive and more precise definitions may be available in other guidance.TermDefinitionAccess roomA room through which the only escape route from an inner room passes.Accommodation stairwayA stairway, additional to that required for means of escape purposes, provided for the convenience of occupants.Alterations noticeIf your premises are considered by the enforcing authority to be high risk, they may issue an alterations notice that requires you to inform them before making any material alterations to your premises.Alternative escape routeEscape routes sufficiently separated by either direction and space, or by fire-resisting construction to ensure that one is still available irrespective of the location of a fire.Approved Document B (ADB)24Guidance issued by Government in support of the fire safety aspects of the building regulations.As low as reasonably practicableIs a concept where risks should continue to be reduced until you reach a point where the cost and effort to reduce the risk further would be grossly disproportionate to the benefit achieved.Automatic fire detection systemA means of automatically detecting the products of a fire and sending a signal to a fire warning system. See ‘Fire warning’.BasementA storey with a floor which at some point is more than 1,200mm below the highest level of ground adjacent to the outside walls, unless, and for escape purposes only, such area has adequate, independent and separate means of escape.ChildAnyone who is not over compulsory school age, i.e. before or just after their 16th birthday.Class 0, 1 or 3 surface spread of flameClasses of surface spread of flame for materials needed to line the walls and ceilings of escape routes. See Appendix B for further information.Combustible materialA substance that can be burned.Compartment wall and/or floorA fire-resisting wall or floor that separates one fire compartment from another.128
TermDefinitionCompetent personA person with enough training and experience or knowledge and other qualities to enable them properly to assist in undertaking the preventive and protective measures.Dangerous substance1. A substance which because of its physico-chemical or chemical properties and the way it is used or is present at the workplace creates a risk.2. A substance subject to the Dangerous Substances and Explosive Atmosphere Regulations 2002 (DSEAR).Dead endArea from which escape is possible in one direction only.Direct distanceThe shortest distance from any point within the floor area to the nearest storey exit, or fire-resisting route, ignoring walls, partitions and fixings.Domestic premisesPremises occupied as a private dwelling, excluding those areas used in common by the occupants of more than one such dwelling.Emergency escape lightingLighting provided to illuminate escape routes that will function if the normal lighting fails.Enforcing authorityThe fire and rescue authority or any other authority specified in Article 25 of the Regulatory Reform (Fire Safety) Order 20051.Escape routeRoute forming that part of the means of escape from any point in the premises to a final exit.Evacuation liftA lift that may be used for the evacuation of people with disabilities, or others, in a fire.External escape stairStair providing an escape route, external to the building.Fail-safeLocking an output device with the application of power and having the device unlock when the power is removed. Also known as fail unlock, reverse action or power locked.False alarmA fire signal, usually from a fire warning system, resulting from a cause other than fire.Final exitAn exit from a building where people can continue to disperse in safety and where they are no longer at danger from fire and/or smoke.Fire compartmentA building, or part of a building, constructed to prevent the spread of fire to or from another part of the same building or an adjoining building.Fire doorA door or shutter, together with its frame and furniture, provided for the passage of people, air or goods which, when closed is intended to restrict the passage of fire and/or smoke to a predictable level of performance.
TermDefinitionFirefighting liftA lift, designed to have additional protection, with controls that enable it to be used under the direct control of the fire and rescue service when fighting a fire.Firefighting shaftA fire-resisting enclosure containing a firefighting stair, fire mains, firefighting lobbies and if provided, a firefighting lift.Firefighting stairwaySee firefighting shaft.Fire resistanceThe ability of a component or construction of a building to satisfy, for a stated period of time, some or all of the appropriate criteria of relevant standards. (Generally described as 30 minutes fire- resisting or 60 minutes fire-resisting.) See BS EN 1363-1,46BS 476-733 and associated standards for further information.Fire safety managerA nominated person with responsibility for carrying out day-to-day management of fire safety. (This may or may not be the same as the ‘responsible person’.)Fire safety strategyA number of planned and co-ordinated arrangements designed to reduce the risk of fire and to ensure the safety of people if there is a fire.Fire stoppingA seal provided to close an imperfection of fit or design tolerance between elements or components, to restrict the passage of fire and smoke.Fire-warning systemA means of alerting people to the existence of a fire. (See automatic fire detection system.)Flammable materialEasily ignited and capable of burning rapidly.Highly flammableGenerally liquids with a flashpoint of below 21°C.(The Chemicals Hazard Information and Packaging for Supply Regulations 200247 (CHIP) give more detailed guidance.)Hazardous substance1. See Dangerous substance.2. A substance subject to the Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations 2002 (COSHH).Inner roomA room from which escape is possible only by passing through another room (the access room).Licensed premisesAny premises that require a licence under any statute to undertake trade or conduct business activities.Material changeAn alteration to the premises, process or service which significantly affects the level of risk to people from fire in those premises.130
TermDefinitionMeans of escapeRoute(s) provided to ensure safe egress from the premises or other locations to a place of total safety.Phased evacuationA system of evacuation in which different parts of the premises are evacuated in a controlled sequence of phases, those parts of the premises expected to be at greatest risk being evacuated first.Place of reasonable safetyA place within a building or structure where, for a limited period of time, people will have some protection from the effects of fireand smoke. This place, usually a corridor or stairway, will normally have a minimum of 30 minutes fire resistance and allow peopleto continue their escape to a place of total safety.Place of total safetyA place, away from the premises, in which people are at no immediate danger from the effects of a fire.PremisesAny place, such as a building and the immediate land bounded by any enclosure of it, any tent, moveable or temporary structure or any installation or workplace.Protected lobbyA fire-resisting enclosure providing access to an escape stairway via two sets of fire doors and into which no room opens other than toilets and lifts.Protected stairwayA stairway which is adequately protected from the rest of the building by fire-resisting construction.Protected routeAn escape route which is adequately protected from the rest of the building by a fire-resisting construction.RefugeA place of reasonable safety in which a disabled person and others who may need assistance may rest or wait for assistance before reaching a place of total safety. It should lead directly to a fire-resisting escape route.Responsible personThe person ultimately responsible for fire safety as defined in the Regulatory Reform (Fire Safety) Order 2005.1Relevant personsAny person lawfully on the premises and any person in the immediate vicinity, but does not include firefighters carrying out firefighting duties.Self-closing deviceA device that is capable of closing the door from any angle and against any latch fitted to the door.Significant findingA feature of the premises, from which the fire hazards and persons at risk are identified.The actions you have taken or will take to remove or reduce the chance of a fire occuring or the spread of fire and smoke.The actions people need to take in case of fire.The necessary information, instruction and training needed and how it will be given
TermDefinitionSmoke alarmDevice containing within one housing all the components, except possibly the energy source, for detecting smoke and giving an audible alarm.Staged fire alarmsA fire warning which can be given in two or more stages for different purposes within a given area (i.e. notifying staff, stand by to evacuate, full evacuation).Storey exitA final exit or a doorway giving direct access into a protected stairway, firefighting lobby, or external escape route.Travel distanceThe actual distance to be travelled by a person from any point within the floor area to the nearest storey exit or final exit, having regard to the layout of walls, partitions and fixings.Vision panelA transparent panel in a wall or door of an inner room enabling the occupant to become aware of a fire in the access area during the early stages.Way guidanceWhere necessaryLow mounted luminous tracks positioned on escape routes in combination with exit indicators, exit marking and intermediate direction indicators along the route, provided for use when the supply to the normal lighting fails, which do not rely on an electrical supply for their luminous output.The Order requires that fire precautions (such as firefighting equipment, fire detection and warning, and emergency routes and exits) should be provided (and maintained) ‘where necessary’.What this means is that the fire precautions you must provide (and maintain) are those which are needed to reasonably protect relevant persons from risks to them in case of fire. This will be determined by the findings of your risk assessment including the preventative measures you have or will have taken. In practice, it is very unlikely, that a properly conducted fire risk assessment, which takes into account all the matters relevant for the safety of persons in case of fire, will conclude that no fire precautions (including maintenance) are necessary.Young person(a) A person aged 16 years, from the date on which he attains that age until and including the 31st August which next follows that date.(b) A person aged 16 years and over who is undertaking a course of full-time education at a school or college which is not advanced education.(c) A person aged 16 years and over who is undertaking approved training that is not provided through a contract of employment.For the purposes of paragraphs (b) and (c) the person:(a) shall have commenced the course of full-time education or approved training before attaining the age of 19 years; and(b) shall not have attained the age of 20 years.132
ReferencesThe following documents are referenced in this guide. Where dated only this version applies. Where updated, the latest version of the document applies.1 Regulatory Reform (Fire Safety) Order 2005, SI 2005/1541. The Stationery Office, 2005. ISBN 0 11 072945 5.2 Fire Precautions Act 1971 (c 40). The Stationery Office, 1971. ISBN 0 10 544071 X.3 Fire Precautions (Workplace) Regulations 1997, SI 1997/1840. The Stationery Office, 1997. ISBN 0 11 064738 6.4 Fire Precautions (Workplace) (Amendment) Regulations 1999, SI 1999/1877. The Stationery Office, 1999. ISBN 0 11 082882 8.5 Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations 1996, SI 1996/341. The Stationery Office, 1996. ISBN 0 11 054093 X.6 Safety signs and signals. The Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations 1996. Guidance on regulations, L64. HSE Books, 1996. ISBN 0 7176 0870 0.7 Dangerous Substances and Explosive Atmospheres Regulations 2002, SI 2002/2776. The Stationery Office, 2002. ISBN 0 11 042957 5.8 Dangerous substances and explosive atmospheres. Dangerous Substances and Explosive Atmospheres Regulations 2002. Approved code of practice and guidance, L138. HSE Books, 2003. ISBN 0 7176 2203 7.9 Storage of full and empty LPG cylinders and cartridges. Code of Practice 7. LP Gas Association 2000. Available from LP Gas Association, Pavilion 16, Headlands Business Park, Salisbury Road, Ringwood, Hampshire BH24 3PB.10 Maintaining portable electrical equipment in offices and other low-risk environments, INDG236. HSE Books, 1996. (ISBN 0 7176 1272 4 single copy free or priced packs of 10.)11 Construction (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1996, SI 1996/1592. The Stationery Office, 1996. ISBN 0 11 035904 6.12 A guide to the Construction (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1996, INDG220. HSE Books, 1996. (ISBN 0 7176 1161 2 single copy free or priced packs of 10.)Health and safety in construction, HSG150 (second edition). HSE Books, 2001. ISBN 0 7176 2106 5.13 Disability Discrimination Act 1995 (c 50). The Stationery Office, 1995. ISBN 0 10 545095 2.14 BS 8300: The design of buildings and their approaches to meet the needs of disabled people. Code of practice. British Standards Institution. ISBN 0 580 38438 1.15 ODPM/CACFOA/BFPSA guidance on reducing false alarms.16 BS 5839-1: Fire detection and alarm systems for buildings. Code of practice for system design, installation, commissioning and maintenance, British Standards Institution.ISBN 0 580 40376 9.17 Manual Handling Operations Regulations 1992, SI 1992/2793. The Stationery Office, 1992. ISBN 0 11 025920 3.18 BS 5306-8: Fire extinguishing installations and equipment on premises. Selection and installation of portable fire extinguishers. Code of practice. British Standards Institution.ISBN 0 580 33203 9.19 BS 5306-3: Fire extinguishing installations and equipment on premises. Code of practice for the inspection and maintenance of portable fire extinguishers. British Standards Institution.ISBN 0 580 42865 6.20 BS 7863: Recommendations for colour coding to indicate the extinguishing media contained in portable fire extinguishers. British Standards Institution. ISBN 0 580 25845 9.1 
21 BS EN 671-3: Fixed firefighting systems. Hose systems. Maintenance of hose reels with semi-rigid hose and hose systems with lay-flat hose. British Standards Institution. ISBN 0 580 34112 7.22 BS EN 12845: Fixed firefighting systems. Automatic sprinkler systems. Design, installation and maintenance. British Standards Institution. ISBN 0 580 44770 7.23 Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1992, SI 1992/3004. The Stationery Office, 1992. ISBN 0 11 025804 5.24 The Building Regulations 2000: Approved Document B fire safety. The Stationery Office. ISBN 0 11 753911 2.25 Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (c 30). The Stationery Office, 1982.ISBN 0 10 543082 X.26 BS 5395-2: Stairs, ladders and walkways. Code of practice for the design of industrial type stairs, permanent ladders and walkways. British Standards Institution. ISBN 0 580 14706 1.27 BS 5266-8: Emergency lighting. Code of practice for emergency escape lighting systems.British Standards Institution.28 BS 5266-1: Emergency lighting. Code of practice for the emergency lighting of premises.British Standards Institution.29 BS EN 1838: Lighting applications. Emergency lighting. British Standards Institution. ISBN 0 580 32992 5.30 BS 5499-4: Safety signs, including fire safety signs. Code of practice for escape route signing.British Standards Institution.31 BS 7974: Application of fire safety engineering principles to the design of buildings. Code of practice. British Standards Institution. ISBN 0 580 38447 0.32 Successful health and safety management, HSG65 (second edition). HSE Books, 1997. ISBN 0 7176 1276 7.33 BS 476-7: Fire tests on building materials and structures. Method of test to determinethe classification of the surface spread of flame of products. British Standards Institution.34 BS EN 13501-1: Fire classification of construction products and building elements. Classification using test data from reaction to fire tests. British Standards Institution.35 Guidelines for the construction of fire resisting structural elements, BR 128. Building Research Establishment, 1988.36 BS EN 1634-1: Fire resistance tests for door and shutter assemblies. Fire doors and shutters.British Standards Institution. ISBN 0 580 32429 X.37 BS 476-22: Fire tests on building materials and structures. Methods for determination ofthe fire resistance of non-loadbearing elements of construction. British Standards Institution. ISBN 0 580 15872 1.38 BS EN 1935: Building hardware. Single-axis hinges. Requirements and test methods.British Standards Institution. ISBN 0 580 39272 4.39 BS EN 1154: Building hardware. Controlled door closing devices. Requirements and test methods.British Standards Institution. ISBN 0 580 27476 4.40 BS EN 1634-2: Fire resistance tests for door and shutter assemblies. Part 2. Fire door hardware. Building hardware for fire resisting doorsets and openable windows. British Standards Institution.41 BS 5839-3: Fire detection and alarm systems for buildings. Specification for automatic release mechanisms for certain fire protection equipment. British Standards Institution.ISBN 0 580 15787 3.42 BS 8214: Code of practice for fire door assemblies with non-metallic leaves. British Standards Institution. ISBN 0 580 18871 6.43 BS EN 1125: Building hardware. Panic exit devices operated by a horizontal bar. Requirements and test methods. British Standards Institution.44 BS EN 179: Building hardware. Emergency exit devices operated by a lever handle orpush pad. Requirements and test methods. British Standards Institution. ISBN 0 580 28863 3.134
45 BS 8220: Guide for security of buildings against crime. British Standards Institution. ISBN 0 580 23692 7.46 BS EN 1363-1: Fire resistance tests. General requirements. British Standards Institution.47 Chemicals (Hazard Information and Packaging for Supply) Regulations 2002, SI 2002/1689. The Stationery Office, 2002. ISBN 0 11 042419 0.48 Guide to the safe warehousing of aerosols. British Aerosol Manufacturers Association.49 The storage of flammable liquids in containers, HSG51. Health and Safety Executive.50 Manufacture and storage of explosives. Manufacture and Storage of Explosives Regulations 2005. Approved code of practice and guidance, L139. HSE Books, 2005. ISBN 0 7176 2816 7.51 Storing and selling fireworks safely, INDG407. Health and Safety Executive.52 BS 5588-12: Fire Precautions in the design, construction and use of buildings – Part 12: Managing fire safety. British Standards Institution.53 The Electricity at Work Regulations 1989, SI 1989/635.54 The Electrical Equipment (Safety) Regulations 1994, SI 1994/3260.55 The Construction (Design and Management) Regulations 1994 (CONDAM/CDM Regs). HMSO, 1994.56 Construction Information Sheet No. 51: Construction fire safety. Health and Safety Executive.57 Fire safety in construction work, HSG 168. Health and Safety Executive. ISBN 0 7176 1332 1.58 Fire prevention on construction sites: The joint code of practice on the protection from fire of construction sites and buildings undergoing renovation (fifth edition). Fire Protection Association and Construction Federation, 2000. ISBN 0 90216739 1.59 Design, construction, specification and fire management of insulated envelopes for temperature controlled environments. International Association of Cold Storage Contractors.60 BS 5306-2: Fire extinguishing installations and equipment on premises. Specification for sprinkler systems. British Standards Institution.61 BS 5588-5: Fire precautions in the design, construction and use of buildings. Access and facilities for firefighting. British Standards Institution.62 The Building Regulations 1991: Approved Document M access to and use of buildings(2004 edition). The Stationery Office.63 BS 5588-8: Fire precautions in the design, construction and use of buildings.Code of practice for means of escape for disabled people. British Standards Institution.64 CIBSE Guide Volume E: Fire engineering. Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers, 1997.65 Design methodologies for smoke and heat exhaust ventilation, Report 368, BRE, 1999.66 A Guide to best practice in the specification and use of rire-resistant glazed systems.Glass and Glazing Federation, 2005.67 Increasing the fire resistance of existing timber doors, Information Paper 8/82. BRE.68 Fire resisting doorsets by upgrading, Wood Information Sheet 1-32. Timber Research and Development Association.69 BS 4787-1: Internal and external wood doorsets, door leaves and frames. Specification for dimensional requirements. British Standards Institution.70 BS EN 1155: Building hardware. Electrically powered hold-open devices for swing doors. Requirements and test methods. British Standards Institution.71 BS EN 1158: Building hardware. Door coordinator devices. Requirements and test methods.British Standards Institution.72 Hardware for timber fire and escape doors. BHIF, 2000.1 
73 BS 5266-6: Emergency lighting. Code of practice for non-electrical low mounted way guidance systems for emergency use. Photoluminescent systems. British Standards Institution.74 BS 5499-5: Graphical symbols and signs. Safety signs, including fire safety signs. Signs with specific safety meanings. British Standards Institution.75 ‘Sprinklers: High piled and rack storage’. Fire Surveyor, Vol. 9, No. 1, 21–26, February 1990.76 Safe handling of combustible dusts: Precautions against explosions, HSG103 (second edition). HSE Books, 2003. ISBN 0 7176 2726 8.`77 BS EN 12209: Building hardware. Locks and latches. Mechanically operated locks, latches and locking plate. British Standards Institution.78 Licensing Act 2003. The Stationery Office. ISBN 0 10 541703 3.79 BS EN 3-7: Portable fire extinguishers. Characteristics, performance requirement and test methods.British Standards Institution.80 BS EN 1906: Building hardware. Lever handles and knob furniture. Requirements and test methods. British Standards Institution.136
Further readingThe latest versions of all documents listed in this section should be used, including any amendments.Any views expressed in these documents are not necessarily those of the DCLG.BS 4422Fire. Vocabulary. British Standards Institution.BS PD 6512-3Use of elements of structural fire protection with particular reference to the recommendations given in BS 5588 Fire precautions in the design and construction of buildings. Guide to the fire performance of glass. British Standards Institution.BS EN 81Safety rules for the construction and installation of lifts. British Standards Institution.BS EN 81-70Safety rules for the construction and installation of lifts. Particular applications for passenger and goods passenger lifts. Accessibility to lifts for persons including persons with disability. British Standards Institution.BS 5041-1Fire hydrant systems equipment. Specification for landing valves for wet risers. British Standards Institution.BS 5041-2Fire hydrant systems equipment. Specification for landing valves for dry risers. British Standards Institution.BS 5041-3Fire hydrant systems equipment. Specification for inlet breechings for dry riser inlets. British Standards Institution.BS 5041-4Fire hydrant systems equipment. Specification for boxes for landing valves for dry risers. British Standards Institution.BS 5041-5Fire hydrant systems equipment. Specification for boxes for foam inlets and dry riser inlets. British Standards Institution.BS 9990Code of practice for non-automatic firefighting systems in buildings. British Standards Institution.BS 7944Type 1 heavy duty fire blankets and type 2 heavy duty heat protective blankets. British Standards Institution.BS EN 1869Fire blankets. British Standards Institution.BS ISO 14520-1Gaseous fire-extinguishing systems. Physical properties and system design. General requirements. British Standards Institution.BS 5266-2Emergency lighting. Code of practice for electrical low mounted way guidance systems for emergency use. British Standards Institution.BS EN 60598-1Luminaires. General requirements and tests. British Standards Institution.
BS 5499-1Graphical symbols and signs. Safety signs, including fire safety signs. Specification for geometric shapes, colours and layout. British Standards Institution.BS EN 1634-3Fire resistance tests for door and shutter assemblies. Smoke control doors and shutters. British Standards Institution.Draft BS EN 14637Building hardware. Electrically controlled hold-open systems for fire/smoke door assemblies. Requirements, test methods, application and maintenance. (Consultation document.) British Standards Institution.BS EN 45020Standardisation and related activities. General vocabulary. British Standards Institution.ISO 13784-2Reaction to fire tests for sandwich panel building systems. Part 2: test method for large rooms. British Standards Institution.BS 5268-4.2Structural use of timber. Fire resistance of timber structures. Recommendations for calculating fire resistance of timber stud walls and joisted floor constructions. British Standards Institution.BS 5588-11Fire precautions in design, construction and use of buildings. Part 11: Code of practice for shops, offices, industrial, storage and other similar buildings. British Standards Institution.Design principles of fire safety. The Stationery Office, 1996. ISBN 0 11 753045 X.Chemicals (Hazard Information and Packaging for Supply) Regulations 2002, SI 2002/1689. The Stationery Office, 2002. ISBN 0 11 042419 0. Supporting guides: The idiot’s guide to CHIP 3: Chemicals (HazardInformation and Packaging for Supply) Regulations 2002, INDG350. HSE Books, 2002. (ISBN 0 7176 2333 5 single copy free or priced packs of 5); CHIP for everyone, HSG228. HSE Books, 2002. ISBN 0 7176 2370 X.Guidance on the acceptance of electronic locks to doors required for means of escape. The Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers’ Association.Ensuring best practice for passive fire protection in buildings. Building Research Establishment, 2003. ISBN 1 870409 19 1Smoke shafts protecting fire shafts: their performance and design, BRE Project Report 79204. Building Research Establishment, 2002.Fire safety of PTFE-based material used in building, BRE Report 274. Building Research Establishment, 1994. ISBN 0 851256 53 8.Fires and human behaviour. David Fulton Publishers, 2000. ISBN 1 85346 105 9Management of health and safety at work. Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999. Approved code of practice and guidance, L21 (second edition). HSE Books, 2000. ISBN 0 7176 2488 9.Fire safety in construction work, HSG168. HSE Books, 1997. ISBN 0 7176 1332 1. LPC rules for automatic sprinkler installations. The Fire Protection Association, 2003.138
IndexPage numbers in italics refer to information in Figures or Tables.
Aaccess for firefighters 22, 60–1, 62, 115, 116, 126aerosols 44, 57, 59alarms see fire detection and warning systems alterations 8, 24, 46, 50, 56, 61, 130alterations notices 7, 32, 37, 46, 128arson 15, 17, 42, 51assembly points 35, 107, 109, 110, 112automatic fire detection systems 20, 54, 73, 85,93, 95, 97, 128Bbakeries 10, 44basements 75, 76, 91, 92, 93, 98, 128building work 24, 46, 50Ccavity barriers 64, 119ceilings, fire-resisting 24, 64, 76children 6, 23, 108, 128, 132co-operation and co-ordination 6, 34, 110competent persons 6, 10, 128 conduction, fire spreading by 16construction, fire-resisting 24, 26, 46, 49–50, 64,73, 74, 118–20contingency plans 107, 108 contractorscertifying 28, 123fire safety training 6, 110managing 46 permit to work 46 risk to 14, 20, 34  source of ignition 12, 17, 33, 46 convection, fire spreading by 16 cooking 10, 12, 44–5, 47, 48, 49, 54, 110Ddangerous substances 6, 13–14, 108–9, 129storage 17–18, 41–4, 46, 51, 109dead endsescape routes 64, 69, 72, 73, 74–5, 129fire alarms 54disability see people with special needs display materials 13, 41, 49doorsdoor-fastening devices 123–5door furniture 122–3final exit 85fire-resisting 49, 64, 75, 92, 107, 120–5, 129glazing 122
maintenance 7, 114, 115, 116, 123, 124notices 102, 103revolving 84roller shutter doors 62, 84, 115self-closing 75, 76, 92, 103, 107, 122–3, 131sliding 84vision panels 64, 121, 132wicket 84Eelectrical safety 12, 15, 17, 44–5emergency escape lighting 26–7, 83, 100–1, 129tests, checks and maintenance 28, 29, 30,101, 105, 114, 115, 116emergency plans 31, 32–3, 34, 39, 105, 107–8,110, 113, 126equipment and machinery 12, 15, 17, 36, 44–5 escalators and travelators 81escape routesage and construction of the premises 24, 26, 47, 64alternative exits 71, 75, 88, 128basements 75, 76, 91, 92, 93, 98, 128corridors 47, 76, 77, 92, 93, 95dead ends 54, 64, 69, 72, 73, 74–5, 129emergency lighting 26–7, 83, 100–1, 129escape time 24, 26, 67final exits 25, 26, 78, 80, 85, 105, 112, 129inner rooms 70, 72, 73, 130, 132layouts 85–99levels of risk 63, 65lifts 23, 25, 35, 65, 83, 115, 129lobbies 77, 92, 93, 95, 131managing 25, 26, 65obstructions 25, 40, 46, 77, 114people with special needs 23, 25, 26, 65–6reception areas 81roof exits 83, 84signs and notices 25, 27–8, 33, 34, 102–4suitability 64tests and checks 28–30, 105, 114, 115, 116training 25, 35travel distance 54, 63, 67, 68–9, 72, 86, 92,93, 132type and number of people using premises 23, 26width and capacity of 67  see also doors; stairways extinguishers 21, 22, 28, 29, 57–9  
Ffalse alarms 20, 54, 55, 105, 129 fireclasses of 57, 58–9spread of 15–16, 47, 50fire blankets 59, 105fire certificates 5, 50fire dampers 44, 64fire detection and warning systems 20–1 automatic fire detection systems 54, 73, 85,93, 95, 97, 128false alarms 20, 54, 55, 105, 129manual call points 53, 54, 55monitoring 51, 54, 55quality assurance 113record-keeping 55, 105smoke detectors 70, 75, 122, 131sound levels 53staged alarms 54–5, 131tests and checks 7, 28, 29, 30, 55, 105, 114,115voice alarms 20, 53, 115fire drills 35, 36, 105, 111–12fire marshals 22, 36, 111, 127fire-resisting separation 50, 64, 118–20 fire risk assessmentaims 9co-operation and co-ordination 6, 34, 110emergency plans 31, 32–3, 34, 39, 105, 107–8, 110, 113, 126evaluating risk 15–17Fire Safety Order and 5–8 flexibility 19, 39historic buildings 126–7identifying fire hazards 11, 12–14, 31, 117identifying people at risk 11, 14, 31, 117information and instruction 33–4, 108–9method 9–10, 11plan of action 39record-keeping 9, 11, 31–2, 105, 106, 107,117removing or reducing fire hazards 17–18, 31, 41, 117removing or reducing risk to people 4–5, 19–30, 31, 117reviewing 11, 36–7, 117sources of fuel 12, 13, 17–18, 40sources of ignition 12, 15, 17sources of oxygen 12, 13–14, 17fire safety audit 105, 107fire safety management 4, 39, 46 Fire Safety Order 5–8fire stopping 64, 120, 130fire suppression systems 22, 45, 48, 59–60, 60,61, 105, 126firefighters’ switches 28, 60, 62, 116
firefighting equipment and facilities 21–2 access for firefighters 22, 60–1, 62, 115,116, 126extinguishers 21, 22, 28, 29, 57–9fire suppression systems 22, 45, 48, 59–60,60, 61, 105, 126firefighters’ switches 28, 60, 62, 116firefighting lifts and shafts 22, 25, 61, 65, 83,99, 109, 115, 129hose reels 22, 29, 59, 105maintenance 7, 28, 29, 30, 59–60, 62, 105,114, 115, 116quality assurance 113rising mains 22, 61–2, 116signs 103tests and checks 28, 29, 30, 59, 114, 115, 116training 7, 22, 35, 57, 111fireworks 14, 41, 43–4flame-retardant materials 41, 49, 120flammable liquids 13, 17–18, 42, 51, 57, 58, 130floors, fire-resisting 24, 50, 64, 83, 118, 119foam inlets 62fuel, sources of 12, 13, 17–18, 40, 42–4, 49function rooms 107Gglass, fire-resisting 119, 122Hhazarddefinition 9identifying fire hazards 11, 12–14, 31, 117removing or reducing 17–18, 31, 117hazardous materials 35, 36, 108, 109, 130heating 17, 42, 44, 45, 48historic buildings 64, 126–7hose reels 22, 29, 59, 105housekeeping 35, 40Iignition, sources of 12, 15, 17, 43, 44–6information and instruction 7, 33–4, 46, 103–4,108–9  see also training insulated core panels 47–9Lladders 64 liftsescape routes 23, 25, 35, 65, 83, 115, 129firefighting 22, 25, 61, 65, 83, 109, 115, 129LPG 13, 43, 47luminaires 100, 101, 114, 115, 116
140

Mmaintenance checklist 114–16emergency escape lighting 28, 29, 30, 101,105, 114, 115, 116equipment and machinery 44, 45fire detection and warning systems 7, 28, 29,30, 55, 105, 114–16fire doors 7, 114, 115, 116, 123, 124firefighting equipment and facilities 7, 28,29, 30, 59–60, 62, 105, 114, 115, 116mezzanine floors 86, 87multi-occupied buildings 4, 5emergency plans 32, 105escape routes 64fire detection and warning systems 20 fire risk assessment 15information and instruction 34, 102, 103Nnotices see signs and noticesOofficesemergency plan 32–3escape routes 68, 86, 87, 93, 94open plan 46–7source of fuel 13, 41storage 41, 49oxygen, sources of 12, 13–14, 18Ppartitions, fire-resisting 24, 46, 50, 119 see also wallspeople at risk evaluating 15–17identifying 11, 14, 31removing or reducing risk 4–5, 19–30, 31,117restricting the spread of fire and smoke 47, 49–50  type and number using premises 23, 65 people with special needs 14evacuating 23, 25, 26, 51–2, 55, 65–6,111, 112fire warning systems 53 information and instruction 33, 102personal emergency evacuation plans (PEEPs) 23, 52plans and specifications 31, 32, 107 portable appliance testing (PAT) 45
Rradiation, fire spreading by 16 reception areas 81record-keepingemergency escape lighting 101fire detection and warning systems 55, 105 fire risk assessment 9, 11, 31–2, 105, 106,107, 117refuge areas 65, 66, 107, 131rising mains 22, 61–2, 116 riskdefinition 9evaluating 11, 15–17, 63people at risk 11, 14, 15–17reducing 4–5, 11, 19–30, 31, 41–2roll calls 109, 112roller shutter doors 62, 84, 115roof exits 83, 84Ssecurity 51shafts, firefighting see lifts shopsemergency plan 32–3escape routes 86, 95, 96–7, 102open-plan 46–7source of fuel 13, 49storage 41, 43, 49signs and notices 25, 27–8, 102–4  information and instruction 33, 34, 46 smokecontrol of 50, 54, 76, 105, 116dangers of 16spread of 16, 17, 47, 50Smoke and Heat Exhaust Ventilation Systems (SHEVS) 50, 54, 116smoke detectors 70, 75, 122, 131smoking 12, 15, 17, 45–6sprinklers 22, 59–60, 61, 111, 115 stafffire drills 35, 36, 105, 111–12fire safety training 7, 22, 25, 31, 33–4, 35–6,57, 110–12information and instruction 7, 33–4, 103–4,108  see also contractors stairwaysaccommodation stairways 77, 81, 128basements 75, 76, 91, 98bypass routes 80, 81external 82–3, 84, 129hazards in 47protected 76–80, 82, 92, 93, 98, 131 spiral and helical 83  width and capacity of 67 storage 17–18, 40–4, 47, 51, 109  
Ttrainingfire safety 25, 31, 33–4, 35–6, 110–12firefighting equipment 7, 22, 35, 57, 111Vventilation systems 13, 18, 36, 50, 54, 116vision panels 64, 70, 121, 132voids 41, 47, 49, 63, 64, 119, 120, 126Wwallsfire-resisting 24, 50, 64, 74, 118 insulated core panels 47–9 lining materials 13see also partitionswaste and packaging, combustible 15, 40,41, 51way guidance systems 27, 101, 132windows, fire-resisting 82, 83, 119, 122vision panels 64, 70, 121, 132142

This guide is for employers, managers, occupiers and owners of offices and shops. It tells you what you have to do to comply with fire safety law, helps you to carry out a fire risk assessment and identify the general fire precautions you need to have in place.The guides in this series:GuideMain useOffices and shopsISBN-13: 978 1 85112 815 0Offices and retail premises (including individual units within larger premises, e.g. shopping centres).Factories and warehousesISBN-13: 978 1 85112 816 7Factories and warehouse storage premises.Sleeping accommodationISBN-13: 978 1 85112 817 4All premises where the main use is to provide sleeping accommodation, e.g. hotels, guest houses, B&Bs, hostels, residential training centres, holiday accommodation and the common areas of flats, maisonettes, HMOs and sheltered housing (other than those providing care – see Residential care premises), but excluding hosptials, residential care premises, places of custody and single private dwellingsResidential care premisesISBN-13: 978 1 85112 818 1Residential care and nursing homes, common areas of sheltered housing (where care is provided) and similar premises, which are permanently staffed and where the primary use is the provision of care rather than healthcare (see Healthcare premises).Educational premisesISBN-13: 978 1 85112 819 8Teaching establishments ranging from pre-school through to universities, except the residential parts (see Sleeping accommodation).Small and medium places of assemblyISBN-13: 978 1 85112 820 4Smaller public houses, clubs, restaurants and cafés, village halls, community centres, libraries, marquees, churches and other places of worship or study accommodating up to 300 people.Large places of assemblyISBN-13: 978 1 85112 821 1Larger premises where more than 300 people could gather, e.g. shopping centres (not the individual shops), large nightclubs and pubs, exhibition and conference centres, sports stadia, marquees, museums, libraries, churches, cathedrals and other places of worship or study.Theatres, cinemas and similar premisesISBN-13: 978 1 85112 822 8Theatres, cinemas, concert halls and similar premises used primarily for this purpose.Open air events and venuesISBN-13: 978 1 85112 823 5Open air events, e.g. theme parks, zoos, music concerts, sporting events (not stadia – see Large places of assembly), fairgrounds and county fairs.Healthcare premisesISBN-13: 978 1 85112 824 2Premises where the primary use is the provision of healtcare (including private),e.g. hospitals, doctors’ surgeries, dentists and other similar healthcare premises.Transport premises and facilitiesISBN-13: 978 1 85112 825 9Transportation terminals and interchanges, e.g. airports, railway stations (including sub-surface), transport tunnels, ports, bus and coach stations and similar premises but excluding the the means of transport (e.g. trains, buses, planes and ships).
Industry Security NoticeNumber 2022/10Subject:	Clarification on Requirements for Remote Working with MOD MaterialIntroduction1. The UK Defence Supply Base processes a significant amount of MOD material at the OFFICIAL classification level.2. This ISN provides clarification in respect of how to work on such material when working remotely, for instance when dealing with COVID-19 travel restrictions.Issue3. The typical requirements placed on the Defence Supply Base for protection of MOD material assume a situation where a majority of staff needing access are on premises, with remote working normally being handled on an exception basis.4. This clarification provides generic requirements for Remote Working with MOD Material.1. 
Action by Industry5. Members of the UK Defence Supply Base needing to support Remote Working shall follow the additional stipulations below, in respect of:ï Remote Working Practicesï Discussion of MOD Informationï Securing MOD Informationï Physical Site Securityï Security Breaches6. Remote Working Practices. Existing mandatory security practices shall be followed when handling MOD information classified at SECRET and above, in accordance with the Security Aspect Letter (SAL).7. When handling MOD information classified as OFFICIAL, or OFFICIAL with need-to- know restrictions (for example, OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE), this shall:i. follow the current company processes for approval of remote working;ii. only be on company issued and managed devices, systems and/or services within the UK, unless export and accreditation approval have been obtained;iii. only use a secure WiFi connection that is password protected;iv. use a VPN (where appropriate), in line with company profile.8. MOD information shall not be under-classified so that it can be worked on remotely.9. Personal devices and/or accounts shall not be used to handle MOD information, this includes forwarding work email containing MOD information to personal email accounts.10. Discussing MOD Information. MOD Information classified at OFFICIAL and/or OFFICIAL with need-to-know restrictions (for example OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE) may be discussed in the UK using the PSTN, mobile phones and VOIP (for example Skype).11. When discussing MOD Information classified at OFFICIAL and/or OFFICIAL with need-to-know restrictions, the following criteria shall be met:1. 
a. Conversations are only held with key parties, for which a direct/indirectcontractual relationship exists (covered by an associated SAL or equivalent) and the recipient(s):i. hold(s) a sufficient level of clearance for the information being discussed;ii. has (have) a confirmed need-to-know requirement for the information being discussed.iii. are informed of any additional procedural measures, for the safeguarding of the information, the recipient is informed at the beginning of the conversation.b. Conversations conducted using VOIP are performed using an application approved by the company.c. Conversations:i. are not conducted in a public location or in a location where it could be overheard;ii. are conducted using headphones, where necessary to enforce any need- to-know requirements;iii. are not conducted in the vicinity of smart home speakers or devices (for example, Amazon Echo, Google Home and Smart TVs). Where this is unavoidable, ensure the devices are disconnected or switched off prior to all conversations.d. Where there are multiple participants in a ‘virtual meeting’, it is the meeting organiser’s responsibility to confirm only authorised individuals are present on the call.12. Securing MOD Information. All MOD information shall be handled in accordance with the SAL (or equivalent document), this includes:a. adhering to any handling instructions or need-to-know restrictions;b. minimising the amount of hardcopy produced, with the presumption of material being read on screen preferentially;c. protecting of all MOD information in accordance with company policy, and in particular avoiding placing un-shredded material in household waste.a. 
13. To ensure the protection of MOD information whilst travelling:a. company device encryption must be enabled, for example: by powering off/shutting down the device;b. any secure token associated with the company device must be carried separately, for example: not in the same bag/case as the device;c. devices (e.g. laptops) should be carried in line with company policy;d. all hardcopy OFFICIAL information assets should be placed in a single covered opaque envelope (with no GSC marking) or folder and placed within a bag/case;e. all MOD information assets classified as OFFICIAL with need-to-knowrestrictions (for example: OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE), should not, for any period of time, be:i. opened/accessed/viewed in a public area;ii. left unattended for any period of time, for example: hotel, restaurant, taxi, public service vehicle, railway carriage; and/oriii. left in an unattended motor vehicle.14. To ensure the protection of MOD information whilst remote working:a. Care must be taken to not draw attention to the fact that MOD information is being worked on;b. MOD information shall be viewed only in a way that it cannot be overseen by people who are not authorised. This can be achieved by making sure:i. the area used minimises overlooking and unexpected interruptions from people;ii. a clear desk policy is implemented;iii. devices are locked, or shut down when leaving it unattended for any period of time;iv. devices and document hardcopies are not to be entrusted to the custody of a member of the public who does not hold a security clearance, for example, left with a house/flat co-resident.c. devices holding MOD information and/or MOD information assets shall be stored in a secure location, for example: a cabinet/cupboard/drawer (preferable lockable). Where this is not possible, then a location that is concealed or not obvious shall be used, and if possible devices should be physically secured, for example by using a ‘laptop lock/cable’;a. 
d. all MOD information assets classified as OFFICIAL with need-to-knowrestrictions (for example: OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE) in digital forms shall be protected by encryption;e. all MOD information assets and MOD or company devices (provided to you for purposes of remote working) shall be returned to the company and/or MOD onceremote working has ceased or disposed of in accordance with MOD and company policy.15. Physical Site Security. Whilst the majority of the workforce may be remote working, it is important to ensure premises physical security controls shall be maintained.16. Security Breaches. All confirmed or suspected breaches involving MOD information shall be accurately and quickly reported to your Security Officer, in line with your company procedures, for onward transmission as necessary to DefInd WARP. The report should include details of quantities, location(s), and any handling instructions or need-to-knowrestrictions.Validity / Expiry Date17. This ISN will expire when superseded or withdrawn.MOD Point of Contact Details18. The point of contact in respect of this ISN is:Info & Info-Cyber Policy TeamDirectorate of Cyber Defence & Risk (CyDR)Ministry of Defencetel: +44-20-721-83746 (PSTN)email: UKStratCom DD-CyDR-InfoCyPol@mod.gov.uk (Multiuser)
Industry Security NoticeNumber 2024/02 dated 12 March 2024Subject:	Advance publication of DEFSTAN 05-138 (Issue 4) [2024]Introduction1. The purpose of this Industry Security Notice (ISN) is to inform suppliers that a new edition of DEFSTAN 05-138 (version 4) [2024] has been produced and will be made available via STANMIS and placed on relevant MOD webpages shortly.2. This new edition of DEFSTAN 05-138 is being made available ‘FOR INFORMATION ONLY’ at this point in time, with the previous DEFSTAN 05-138 (Issue 3) [2021] remaining in effect until such time as this ISN is revoked.Action by Industry3. Suppliers to UK MOD are advised to note the content of DEFSTAN 05-138 (Issue 4) [2024], which has been made ‘FOR INFORMATION ONLY’ at this time, and will come into force when notified at a date to be confirmed later this year, until such time DEFSTAN05- 138 (Issue 3) [2021] remains in effect.Additional Information4. If the content of this ISN conflicts with a contract-specific Security Aspects Letter(SAL), or for any further information/clarification, please refer to your MOD Delivery Team.Validity / Expiry Date5. This ISN is valid with immediate effect and will expire when superseded or1. 
withdrawn.MOD Point of Contact Details6. The point of contact in respect of this ISN is: Cyber & Supply Chain Security team,Directorate of Cyber Defence & Risk (CyDR)Ministry of Defenceemail: UKStratComDD-CyDR-DCPP@mod.gov.uk (Multiuser).
CollectionAI cyber securityA collection of policy documents andresearch papers support the government's work to address cyber security risks to artificial intelligence (AI).From: Department for Science, Innovation and Technology  (/government/organisations/department-for-science-innovation-and-technology) Published 31 January 2025Last updated 10 March 2025 —Artificial intelligence (AI) is having a transformative impact on organisations and public services, but it is vital efforts are taken to protect AI systems from growing cyber security threats. The government is therefore taking steps to address the cyber security risks to AI.Following the National Cyber Security Centre’s (NCSC) Guidelines for secure AI system development (https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/guidelines-secure-ai-  system-development), a Call for Views (https://www.gov.uk/government/calls-for-evidence/cyber- security-of-ai-a-call-for-views) and the publication of various research, the government is now publishing a world leading voluntary Code of Practice (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ai-cyber-security- code-of-practice) which will be used as the basis for a new global standard.
From securing AI systems against hacking and sabotage, to ensuring they are developed and deployed in a secure way, the Code and future standard will help developers and system operators to build secure, innovative AI products that drive growth and support the Plan for Change. This will help give confidence to organisations in adopting the technology which will enhance public services and productivity and increase growth across the economy.An overarching theme that arose from responses to the Call for Views was that organisations would benefit from additional guidance that explained how to implement the Code of Practice. The Government has therefore published an implementation guide to support organisations.DSIT, in close collaboration with NCSC, will be working within the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) to develop a global standard and accompanying guide. We will also be engaging with organisations across different sectors of the economy to support their adoption of the security requirements and to encourage participation in the standards development process. This work forms part of DSIT’s wider technology security programme and its secure by design approach across all digital technologies. Further information on how this work links with DSIT’s other cyber security codes can be found here (https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/cyber-security- codes-of-practice).Policy documentsAI Cyber Security Code of Practice(/g overnment/publications/ai-cyber-security-code-of-practice)	31 January 2025	Policy paperWorld-leading AI cyber security standard to protect digital economy and deliver Plan for Change(/g overnment/news/world-leading-ai-cyber-security-standard-to- protect-digital-economy-and-deliver-plan-for-change)31 January 2025	Press release
(/g overnment/calls-for-evidence/cyber-security-of-ai-a-call-for- views/outcome/government-response-on-the-cyber-security-of- ai)31 January 2025Call for views on the Cyber Security of AI(/g overnment/calls-for-evidence/call-for-views-on-the-cyber- security-of-ai/call-for-views-on-the-cyber-security-of-ai)2 August 2024Cyber security codes of practice(/g overnment/collections/cyber-security-codes-of-practice)	19 March 2025	CollectionDevelopers given new tools to boost cyber security in AI models as cyber security sector sees recordg rowth(/g overnment/news/developers-g iven-new-tools-to-boost-cyber- security-in-ai-models-as-cyber-security-sector-sees-record-g rowth)15 May 2024	Press releaseResearch papersAI and software cyber security market analysis (/g overnment/publications/ai-and-software-cyber-security- market-analysis)10 March 2025	Research and analysisResearch on the cyber security of AI(/g overnment/publications/research-on-the-cyber-security-of-ai)	15 May 2024	Research and analysisCyber security risks to artificial intelligence(/g overnment/publications/research-on-the-cyber-security-of- ai/cyber-security-risks-to-artificial-intelligence)15 May 2024
(/g overnment/publications/research-on-the-cyber-security-of- ai/ai-cyber-security-survey-main-report)15 May 2024Published 31 January 2025Last updated 10 March 2025 + show all updatesAll content is available under the Open GovernmentLicence v3.0, except where otherwise stated	© Crown copyright
Department for Science, Innovation & Technology Research and analysisAI cyber security survey - main reportPublished 15 May 2024
Crown copyright 2024is publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where herwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-  ence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gov.uk.here we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from e copyright holders concerned.is publication is available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/research-on-the-cyber- curity-of-ai/ai-cyber-security-survey-main-report
1. Executive summaryIntroductionThe Department for Science, Innovation and Technology (DSIT) commissioned IFF Research to conduct a survey of businesses in key sectors to understand how they use Artificial Intelligence (AI) and how businesses implement cyber security practices and processes around the AI technology they deploy.The quantitative survey was developed in collaboration with DSIT. Fieldwork was conducted using Computer Assisted Telephone Interviewing (CATI) and took place between 10th January and 13th February 2024. A total of 350 interviews were completed with businesses currently using or considering using AI in nine sectors (see page 6 for more details) so that the survey had a robust number of participants.The core objectives of the research were to understand:  What types of technology are being used, and for what purpose; Businesses’ cyber security practices – in general terms, and specific to AI;  Businesses’ future plans in relation to AI and cyber security; and How these activities and attitudes vary across businesses in different sectors and of different sizes.A glossary which includes definitions of the different types of AI can be found in the Appendix at the end of this report.Key findingsThe survey sought to create a robust sample base of businesses that were adopting at least one AI technology as well as businesses that planned to adopt AI in the future to ensure robust findings could be drawn. 68% of these businesses in the survey were currently using at least one AI technology, while 32% had plans to adopt AI in the future. Of the businesses currently using AI, 64% were deploying one type of AI technology, 22% were using two types of AI and 14% were using three or more.Among those currently using AI, natural language processing and generation
was most common with 38% of businesses deploying it. 27% utilised machine learning, 25% used computer vision, image processing and generation, 9% used hardware related to AI and 8% used robotic process automation.For each type of AI technology, over half of businesses have been using it for at least one year. In the case of machine learning, over half of businesses (52%) have been using it for over 3 years. Among those who have not yet deployed AI but have plans to do so, they most commonly planned to do this – across all AI technologies – in more than a year’s time.Each AI technology was most commonly adopted through the purchase of external software or ready-to-use systems (ranging from 38% to 60%). Around one in five businesses developed machine learning (21%) and hardware related to AI (19%) in-house. AI development most likely to be outsourced was for hardware related to AI (34%). The main reason cited for using AI technologies was financial or cost savings to their business (35%). 14% employed it to help write documents. 13% cited speed and efficiency purposes, and a further 12% used it for content generation more broadly.Of those currently using AI technologies, nearly half of respondents (47%) had no specific cyber security practices in place specifically for AI and 13% were unsure. Among those planning to use AI in the future, 25% said that their organisation would not have specific cyber security practices or processes in place explicitly regarding the AI technology, once the planned technologies were deployed, and a further 25% were unsure.Of those without or not intending to have specific AI cyber security practices or processes, there were a few key reasons as to why they had not adopted specific practices. 14% had not considered it or did not know enough about it, and 14% said they do not use AI for anything sensitive.The survey also asked participants whether there were specific cyber security requirements or features that they expect to be built into AI companies’ models and systems. 39% of respondents stated no and a significant minority (33%) were unsure.When asked more generally about cyber security practices, 90% of all businesses had at least one governance or risk management arrangement in place. Just under three-quarters (72%) had a formal policy or policies in place covering cyber security risks, and around two-thirds had either a Business Continuity Plan that covers cyber security (67%), or a written list of the most critical data, systems or assets that their organisation wants to protect (64%).Over the last 12 months, just over three-quarters (78%) of businesses had taken at least one measure in an effort to identify cyber security risk. The most common measures taken by organisations were to conduct a risk assessment
covering cyber security risk (59%), or to invest in specific tools designed for security monitoring, such as Intrusion Detection Systems (55%).2. IntroductionBackgroundThe Department for Science, Innovation and Technology (DSIT) commissioned IFF Research to conduct a survey to understand how Artificial Intelligence (AI) is used by businesses in key sectors and how businesses implement cyber security practices and processes around the AI technology they deploy.Artificial intelligence is the broader field encompassing knowledge-based systems, data-driven and machine learning-enabled systems, including classic machine learning (supervised learning, unsupervised learning), deep learning, and reinforcement learning, referring to the development of systems that can perform tasks requiring human intelligence. The use of AI is growing. In April 2023, an estimated 16% of all UK businesses had adopted at least one AI technology[footnote 1] and with the growth of more accessible and powerful generative AI models, this number is likely to increase significantly. The growing use of AI among businesses presents huge opportunities; however, without appropriate safeguards there are also significant risks. This is particularly the case with cyber security which is an essential precondition for the safety of AI systems. It was in this context that DSIT commissioned IFF Research to carry out primary research among UK businesses.Research objectivesThe core objectives of the research were to understand:What types of technology are being used, and for what purpose; Businesses’ cyber security practices – in general terms, and specific to AI; Businesses’ future plans in relation to AI and cyber security; andHow these activities and attitudes vary across businesses in different sectors and of different sizes.
A glossary which includes definitions of the different types of AI can be found in the Appendix at the end of this report.Survey fieldworkThis report is based on data from a quantitative telephone survey comprising of 350 interviews conducted between January and February 2024 with UK businesses currently using or considering using AI in the following sectors: D,E,H: Electricity, Gas and Air Conditioning Supply; Water Supply; Sewerage, Waste Management and Remediation Activities; Transportation and Storage C: Manufacturing  G: Wholesale and Retail Trade J: Information and Communication K: Financial and Insurance Activities M: Professional, Scientific and Technical Activities  Q: Human Health and Social Work Activities3. MethodologyA quantitative survey was developed in collaboration with DSIT and refined during a pilot fieldwork phase (full details of the methodology are included in the accompanying technical report). Interviews lasted an average of 15 minutes and fieldwork was conducted using Computer Assisted Telephone Interviewing (CATI) between 10th January and 13th February 2024 (inclusive of the pilot fieldwork phase). The interviewing team asked to speak to the person responsible for cyber security within the organisation.Participants interviewed held a range of roles, often within the remit of IT or operations, such as: Head of IT, IT director / manager, Operations director / manager, Business development manager, and Office manager.Sectors of interest and interview targets
This research sought to interview a total of 350 UK businesses, split equally among seven (grouped) sectors as shown in Table 3.1. The sectors were chosen by mapping SIC sectors where AI uptake is likely to be high, alongside Critical National Infrastructure sectors where the largest societal impacts from the exploitation of cyber security vulnerabilities are likely to exist.Table 3.1 Interview targets by sectorSector	TargetD, E, H: Electricity, Gas and Air Conditioning Supply; Water Supply;	50Sewerage, Waste Management and Remediation Activities; Transportation and StorageC: Manufacturing	50G: Wholesale and Retail Trade	50J: Information and Communication	50K: Financial and Insurance Activities	50M: Professional, Scientific and Technical Activities	50Q: Human Health and Social Work Activities	50SampleThe sample for the survey was sourced from Market Location, a commercial database of UK businesses. The survey sought to create a robust sample base of businesses that were adopting at least one AI technology as well as businesses that planned to adopt AI in the future to ensure robust findings could be drawn. It was not possible to know at the point of drawing sample whether or not businesses were in-scope for the survey, therefore it was necessary to screen for this with a question at the point of recruitment.
Achieved interviews and response rateProfile of participating businessesA total of 350 interviews were achieved, split by size and sector in Table 3.2.Table 3.2 Profile of participating businessesSectorMicroSmallMediumLargeTotal(1-9)(10-(50-(250+)49)249)D, E, H: Electricity, Gas and Air Conditioning Supply; Water Supply; Sewerage, Waste Management and Remediation Activities; Transportation and Storage112113550C: Manufacturing18168850G: Wholesale and Retail Trade201210850J: Information and Communication23186350K: Financial and Insurance Activities27154450M: Professional, Scientific and Technical Activities231111550Q: Human Health and Social Work Activities141791050Total1361106143350Call outcomes and survey response rate
A call outcome is defined as a definite response to the survey invitation, i.e. whether an interview was achieved, or whether an interview could not be achieved and the reason was established. Among the 10,924 businesses called at least once, the response rate for the survey was 3% (shown in Table 3.3). This included businesses where no final outcome was reached, for example where the interviewing team were not able to get through to the right person, where an appointment had been made to call back at a later date, or where a or where the call went to answerphone. Among the 2,193 businesses where a definite call outcome was achieved, the response rate was 16% (shown in Table 3.4).10% of businesses screened out because they confirmed their organisation does not use AI and is not considering deploying it in the future. However, this proportion increases to 48% when based on records where a definitive outcome was reached. The high proportion of businesses screening out and subsequent lower response rate was expected due to the specific eligibility requirement of businesses needing to be using or have plans to use AI.Table 3.3 Unadjusted response rateDescriptionNumber%Total records called at least once10,924100%Completed3503%Screen out - Organisation does not use AI and is not considering deploying AI in the future1,05910%Respondent refusal4864%Respondent unavailable during fieldwork2342%Contact made – no definite outcome2,70725%No direct contact made with respondent5,05646%Over quota641%Unobtainable (e.g. wrong number, out of service)9689%
Table 3.4 Adjusted response rate based on a definitive call outcomeDescriptionNumber%Definitive call outcome2,193100%Completed35016%Screen out - Organisation has not used AI and is not considering deploying AI in the future1,05948%Respondent refusal48622%Respondent unavailable during fieldwork23411%Over quota643%Of the 350 businesses that took part in the survey, 239 were currently using AI. These businesses as a proportion of all those for whom we have a definite answer on whether or not they use AI, equates to 21%. This is slightly higher than the ONS finding in April 2023 which reported an estimated 16% of all UK businesses had adopted at least one AI technology.[footnote 2]Reasons for not using AIRespondents who confirmed during the survey that they do not use, or have plans to use, any Artificial Intelligence tools within the business were asked what has prevented their organisation from implementing AI technologies.Among the 193 businesses who answered, the most common reason provided was that they have not identified a need for AI, including deeming it irrelevant for their sector or industry (44%). One in ten said they have not thought about AI or do not know enough about it (10%) and they have no interest in it, for example preferring human interaction (9%). 8% deemed AI unnecessary due to the small size of their business, 6% said they lack the time or resources to set it up and 6% had concerns about the security of AI models and systems, including data security and confidentiality.
Data analysis and weightingLarge and medium-sized businesses are over-represented in this survey compared to the business population. This was a deliberate decision - the Department needed a good-sized sample base of these types of businesses. Weighting by size and sector was therefore considered. However, as the number of interviews is small, the weights were deemed too large to apply and would have had a considerable negative impact on the effective base size. Specifically, it would have meant that it would not be possible to report the findings of businesses of a particular size or sector. These survey results cannot therefore be considered representative of the business population, however, can still provide useful insight into the behaviour of businesses that took part.4. AI usageThis chapter explores: the types of AI used by organisations;  how long they have been using them;  how the AI was adopted; and reasons for employing AI technologyTypes of AI usedOverall, 68% of businesses were currently using at least one AI technology, while the remaining 32% had plans to adopt AI in the future. Figure 4.1 illustrates the type of AI technologies currently used and planned within these businesses. Natural language processing and generation was most commonly used, with 38% of businesses currently using this type of AI, and a further 27% planning to deploy it in the future. Those in the Information and Communication sector were most likely to be currently using this type of AI (54%).Businesses in Human Health and Social Work Activities were more likely than businesses overall to be currently using computer vision, image processing and generation (42% compared to 25% overall). Businesses in this sector were also more likely to be currently using hardware related to AI (19% compared to 9% overall). The use of robotic process automation was significantly higher among
large businesses (23% compared to 8% overall).Figure 4.1 Use of AI technologiesSource: AI Cyber Security Survey. Question B1. For the following Artificial Intelligence technologies, please could you tell me whether your organisation is currently using it (including piloting), not currently but have plans to adopt in the future, or has no plans to use it. Base: All (350)Of the businesses currently using AI, 64% were deploying one type of AI technology, 22% were using two types of AI, and 14% were using three or more. Meanwhile, among businesses planning to adopt AI in the future, 43% planned to introduce one type of AI, 26% planned to introduce two types of AI and 31% planned to introduce three or more.Figure 4.2 Number of AI technologies businesses use or plan to useSource: AI Cyber Security Survey. Count of AI technologies from B1. Base: Those currently using AI (239) and Those not using AI but plan to in the future (111)Those currently using AI were asked what specific AI products they were using. The most common product was ChatGPT (38%) followed by:  15% - AI with hardware and physical products; 8% - AI tools within Microsoft office (exc. co-pilot);  5% - Microsoft Co-pilot; 5% - Gemini (formerly Google Bard);  5% - Sage; 4% - AI tool within Adobe creative suite; and  3% - Xero.The remaining AI products currently used were mentioned by 2% of businesses or less. Where there were single mentions of products, these remained categorised as “other” in the dataset. 9% of businesses currently deploying AI were unable to name the specific product.Length of time using AI
least one year. Over half of businesses (52%) using AI within machine learning have been doing so for over 3 years.Figure 4.3 Length of time using each AI technologySource: AI Cyber Security Survey. Caution * denotes low base size. Question B2. Please could you tell me whether your organisation is currently piloting the following technology, has used for 1-3 years, or has used for over 3 years. Base: Those currently using AI (239); RPA (27) *, machine learning (94), Hardware related to AI (32) *, Computer vision/ image processing and generation (88) and Natural language processing and generation (132).Among those who have not yet deployed AI but have plans to do so, they most commonly planned to do this in more than a year’s time. This is true across the different AI technologies, as shown in Figure 4.4. Natural language processing and generation (18%) and computer vision, image processing and generation (17%) were most likely to be adopted in the next year.A notable number of records were ‘back-coded’ post-fieldwork. This is where respondents initially said they did not use the AI technologies listed but instead used an alternative technology and as such were not asked this question. Post fieldwork, these ‘other’ technologies were reviewed and found to all fall into these five categories of AI and were subsequently back-coded into the appropriate technology.Figure 4.4 When organisations not currently using AI plan to adopt itSource: AI Cyber Security Survey. Question B3. Please could you tell me whether your organisation is planning to adopt the following technology in the next year or whether you plan to adopt it further in the future. Base: Those not using AI but plan to (111); Natural language processing and generation (94), Computer vision/ image processing and generation (69), Hardware related to AI (52), machine learning (98) and RPA (56).How the AI was adoptedEach AI technology was most commonly adopted through the purchase of external software or ready-to-use systems, shown in Figure 4.5. Around one in five businesses developed machine learning (21%) and hardware related to AI (19%) in-house. AI development most likely to be outsourced was for hardware related to AI (34%).
language processing and generation (5% vs 14% among businesses overall) and more likely to purchase external software or ready-to-use systems for computer vision, image processing and generation (78% vs 60% among businesses overall).Figure 4.5 How the AI technology was adoptedSource: AI Cyber Security Survey Caution * denotes low base size. Question B4. How did your organisation adopt the following technology: [Technology].Base: Those currently using AI (239); machine learning (94), Hardware related to AI (32) *, Computer vision/ image processing and generation (88), RPA (27) * and Natural language processing and generation (132).Reasons for employing AI technologyJust over a third of businesses currently using AI said they did this for the purpose of financial or cost savings to their business (35%). Those that said they had cyber security practices in place explicitly for current AI technologies were more likely to report using AI for financial or cost savings compared to those without such practices in place (42% vs 29%). 14% employed AI to help write documents, 13% cited speed and efficiency purposes, and a further 12% used it for content generation more broadly. 8% reported using AI to improve quality or enhance their product offering.Figure 4.6 Reasons for employing AI technologySource: AI Cyber Security Survey. Question B5. For what reasons does your organisation employ AI technology? Base: Those currently using AI (239)5. Cyber security practices around AIThis chapter explores organisations’ cyber security practices surrounding AI technologies they deploy.Cyber security practices explicitly regarding AIOf those currently using AI technologies, as shown in Figure 5.1, two-fifths (40%)
said they had specific cyber security practices or processes in place explicitly regarding the AI technology they deploy. Just under one-half (47%) said they did not have such practices in place specifically for AI, and 13% were unsure.Micro businesses and organisations using only one AI technology were less likely to have cyber security practices in place in relation to the AI technology they deploy (31% and 35% respectively). Similarly, those who had purchased off- the-shelf AI products were less likely to have specific practices in place (31%), while those who had outsourced the development of AI were considerably more likely to have practices in place (63%).[footnote 3] Businesses that developed the AI technologies in-house were neither more or less likely to have specific cyber security practices or processes in place compared to businesses overall.Among those planning to use AI in the future, half (50%) said that their organisation would have specific cyber security practices or processes in place explicitly regarding the AI technology once the planned technologies were deployed. Meanwhile, 25% said that they would not have such practices and 25% were unsure.Figure 5.1 Whether organisations have, or plan to have, specific cyber security practices in place explicitly regarding AI technologySource: AI Cyber Security Survey. Question C1. Does your organisation have specific cyber security practices or processes in place explicitly regarding the AI technology you deploy? Base: Those currently using AI technologies (239).Question C2. Would your organisation have specific cyber security practices or processes in place explicitly regarding the AI technology once your planned AI technologies are deployed? Base: Those planning on using AI technology (111)Of those with or intending to have specific AI cyber security practices or processes, just over a quarter mentioned deploying firewalls for AI (27%). One- fifth of organisations reported ensuring personal data is not shared with third parties (19%). As shown in Figure 5.2, just under a third (29%) did not know what exactly these cyber security practices were or would be. Although participants said they were the appropriate person to discuss cyber security, some of those interviewed were not in an IT role and therefore could be why they were unsure of the specific practices and processes in place.Figure 5.2 Cyber security processes explicitly regarding AI technologies currently deployed or that businesses plan to deploySource: AI Cyber Security Survey. Question C3. Please could you summarise what these practices or processes are/might be? Base: Those with or intending to have specific AI cyber security practices or processes (150).For those without or not intending to have specific AI cyber security practices or
processes, there were a few key reasons as to why they had not adopted specific practices. 14% had not considered it or did not believe they know enough about it, and 14% said they do not use AI for anything sensitive (and therefore deemed it unnecessary). Around one in ten said AI is not widely used enough to warrant specific measures (11%) and that it falls within their general cyber security practices anyway (10%). Those who purchased of off-the-shelf products were more likely to say AI is not widely used enough to warrant specific cyber security measures (18% vs 11% overall).Two-fifths (39%) of all businesses that took part in the survey said that there were not any specific cyber security requirements or features that they expect to be built into AI companies’ models and systems, and a further third (33%) were unsure. One in ten (11%) said that they would expect data protection and privacy to be built in, rising to 23% among large organisations, and 17% among those who purchased off-the-shelf AI tools. Others mentioned higher levels of security (3%), ensuring data sources are legal and reliable (2%) and protection against hacking/cyber-attacks (2%). 3% said security is already built into the AI system. Micro organisations were more likely to say that there were not any specific cyber requirements they would expect to be built into AI companies’ models and systems (47% vs 39% overall).Of those organisations that outsourced the development of their AI technology, 81% said they had not identified a vulnerability or been breached as a result of the AI service deployed in their infrastructure. 11% had identified a vulnerability but not been breached, while 4% had experienced a breach. There was no significant variation across subgroups.6. General cyber security practicesThis final chapter explores general cyber security practices. As stated to organisations that took part in the survey, this means any strategy, processes, practices or technologies that organisations have in place to secure their networks, computers, programs or the data they hold from damage, attack or unauthorised access.General cyber security practicesWhen asked more generally about cyber security practices, 90% of all businesses had at least one governance or risk management arrangement in place. Just under three-quarters (72%) had a formal policy or policies in place
covering cyber security risks, and around two-thirds had either a Business Continuity Plan that covers cyber security (67%), or a written list of the most critical data, systems or assets that their organisation wants to protect (64%).As shown Figure 6.1, findings varied considerably by the size of the organisation. Large businesses were more likely to have all three of these arrangements in place (88%, 93% and 81% respectively). Micro businesses on the other hand tended to be less likely to have one of these arrangements in place, with 15% stating that they had none of them at all. 7% of all businesses had none of the risk management arrangements listed, and 3% said they were unsure.There were also some differences by sector. A formal policy or policies in place covering cyber security risks was most common among those in Human Health and Social Work Activities (85%). A Business Continuity Plan that covers cyber security was most common among those in Financial and Insurance Activities (85%). An outsourced provider that manages their cyber security was most prevalent in the sector group consisting of Electricity, Gas and Air Conditioning Supply; Water Supply; Sewerage, Waste Management and Remediation Activities; and Transportation and Storage (72%), as well as those in Financial and Insurance Activities (72%). Organisations in the Information and Communication sector and Financial and Insurance Activities were most likely to have board members with responsibility for cyber security (69% and 72% respectively).Those with cyber security practices in place explicitly for AI technologies were more likely to have: An outsourced provider that manages their cyber security (67% vs 58% overall); A formal policy or policies in place covering cyber security risks (87% vs 72% overall); A Business Continuity Plan that covers cyber security (83% vs 67% overall); and A written list of the most critical data, systems or assets that their organisation wants to protect (75% vs 64% overall).Figure 6.1 Governance or risk management arrangements currently in placeSource: AI Cyber Security Survey. Question D1. Which of the following governance or risk management arrangements, if any, do you have in place? Base: All (350).When asked about specific cyber security standards or accreditations, as shown
in Figure 6.2, 34% of organisations said they adhered to the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS). This compares to 27% of businesses in the Cyber Security Breaches Survey 2023.[footnote 4] Around three in ten (29%) adhered to the Cyber Essentials standard, and a further 12% followed the Cyber Essentials Plus standard (compared to 5% and 2% respectively in the Cyber Security Breaches Survey). Just under one-fifth (18%) conformed to the ISO 27000 Standard (compared to 9% of businesses that adhered to the ISO 27001 in the Cyber Security Breaches Survey), and 14% followed any National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) standards (compared to 3% of businesses that adhered to the ISO 27001 in the Cyber Security Breaches Survey). Around one-quarter of organisations were not adhering to any of these standards (26%), and 14% were unaware.Figure 6.2 Standards or accreditations adhered to by organisationsSource: AI Cyber Security Survey. Question D2. Which of the following standards or accreditations, if any, does your organisation adhere to? Base: All (350)The Cyber Essentials standard was more likely to be adhered to by large and medium-sized businesses (49% and 44% respectively), and those in the Information and Communication sector (46%).The Cyber Essentials Plus standard was more likely to be adhered to by medium-sized businesses and those in the Information and Communication sector (25% and 23% respectively).Any National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) standards were more likely to be adhered to by large businesses (33%).The Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard was more likely to be adhered to by those in the Wholesale and Retail sector (49%) and the ISO 27000 Standard was more likely to be adhered to by those in the Information and Communication sector (31%).Meanwhile, micro businesses and those in the Professional, Scientific and Technical Activities sector were more likely to not adhere to any of these standards (40% and 42% respectively).Over the last 12 months, just over three-quarters (78%) of businesses had taken at least one of the measures listed in Figure 6.3 in an effort to identify cyber security risk. This compares to 51% of businesses that had taken at least one measure in the Cyber Security Breaches Survey 2023.[footnote 5] The mostcommon measures taken by organisations were to conduct a risk assessment covering cyber security risk (59%, compared to 29% of businesses in the Cyber Security Breaches Survey), or to invest in specific tools designed for security
monitoring, such as Intrusion Detection Systems (55%, compared to 30% of businesses in the Cyber Security Breaches Survey). Those in the Financial and Insurance Activities sector were most likely to have conducted a risk assessment covering cyber security risks (74%) and those in the Information and Communication sector were most likely to have used specific tools designed for security monitoring (75%).Just under half (48%) had conducted a cyber security vulnerability audit (compared to 15% of businesses in the Cyber Security Breaches Survey), rising to 65% of businesses in the Information and Communication sector, and 64% of those in the Financial and Insurance Activities sector.Two-fifths (40%) had tested staff awareness, for example via mock phishing exercises. This compares to 19% of businesses in the Cyber Security Breaches Survey. A third of businesses (33%) had carried out penetration testing, compared to 11% of businesses in the Cyber Security Breaches Survey. Around a quarter of businesses (24%) had used or invested in threat intelligence, compared to 9% of businesses in the Cyber Security Breaches Survey.Large businesses were more likely to have taken any of the measures listed in Figure 6.3 than the average across businesses of less than 250 employees.15% of businesses had taken none of the measures listed in the survey to identify cyber security risks to their organisation, rising to one-quarter (25%) among micro businesses. 7% were unaware if their organisation had undertaken any of these activities.Figure 6.3 Actions taken to identify cyber security risks over the last 12 monthsSource: AI Cyber Security Survey. Question D3. Which of the following, if any, have you done over the last 12 months to identify cyber security risks to your organisation? Base: All (350)7. Appendix: GlossaryArtificial Intelligence (AI): The broader field encompassing knowledge-based systems, data-driven and machine learning-enabled systems, including classic machine learning (supervised learning, unsupervised learning), deep learning, and reinforcement learning, referring to the development of systems that can perform tasks requiring human intelligence.Machine learning: Encompasses algorithms that can acquire knowledge from
data and generate classification, predictions, or pattern without explicit programming, facilitated by labelled data (supervised learning) or unlabelled data (unsupervised learning).Computer vision/ image processing and generation: The use of artificial intelligence programming to produce, generate, analyse, interpret, and manipulate digital images.Hardware related to AI: Examples include Edge Computing Chips, Quantum Hardware, Application Specific Integrated Circuits (ASIC), Neuromorphic Hardware, and Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA).Natural language processing and generation: The use of artificial intelligence programming to produce written or spoken narratives from a data set, including creating computer code or transcribing audio to text in real time.Robotic Process Automation (RPA): A software technology that makes it easy to build, deploy, and manage software robots that emulate humans actions interacting with digital systems and software.. Understanding AI uptake and sentiment among people and businesses in the UK - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk) (https://www.ons.gov.uk/businessindustryandtrade/itandinternetindustry/articles/underst andingaiuptakeandsentimentamong peopleandbusinessesintheuk/june2023), June 2023. Understanding AI uptake and sentiment among people and businesses in the UK - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk) (https://www.ons.gov.uk/businessindustryandtrade/itandinternetindustry/articles/underst andingaiuptakeandsentimentamong peopleandbusinessesintheuk/june2023), June 2023. The base size of businesses that outsourced the development of AI is low (35), therefore findings should be treated with caution.. Cyber security breaches survey 2023 - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk) (https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/cyber-security-breaches-survey-2023/cyber- security-breaches-survey-2023#chapter-3-approaches-to-cyber-security). Cyber security breaches survey 2023 - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk) (https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/cyber-security-breaches-survey-2023/cyber- security-breaches-survey-2023#chapter-3-approaches-to-cyber-security)
All content is available under the Open GovernmentLicence v3.0, except where otherwise stated	© Crown copyright
UK AI COUNCILAI ROADMAP
UK AI COUNCIL | AI ROADMAPExecutive summary	216 recommendations to help the government develop a UK National AI Strategy	4Introduction	61. Research, Development and Innovation	10The Alan Turing Institute: local presences and global reach	11Challenge-led innovation	12AI to transform research, development and innovation	142. Skills and Diversity	16What everyone needs to know	16Further, Higher and Graduate Education	17Supporting every teacher	18Lifelong learning and an online academy for AI	183. Data, Infrastructure and Public Trust	20Trustworthy and accessible data	20Public trust and good governance	22Digital Twins and Living Labs	24A globally leading role	254. National, Cross-sector Adoption	28Business as smart adopters	28Supporting high growth AI startups	29Enabling public sector adoption	30Health and social care	31Climate change	32Defence and security	33Acknowledgements	36Version 1( JA-B_DE)
2	AI ROADMAP	3The UK will only feel the full benefits of AI if all parts of society have full confidence in the science and the technologies, and in the governance and
Executivesummary
regulation that enable themA National AI Strategy is needed to prioritise and set a time frame that will position the UK for success

As Artificial Intelligence (AI) becomes embedded in people’s lives, the UK finds itself at a pivotal moment.Estimates show that AI could deliver a 10% increase in UK GDP in 2030.1 If approached correctly, this would offer huge benefits to the economy, to recovery and resilience, the environment and for people from all walks of life across all parts of the UK. This summary report by the AI Council sets out long- term ambitions and suggests near-term directions for all government departments, with the aim of cementing the UK as one of the very best places in the world to live with, work with and develop AI.The UK starts from a place of strength in research, enterprise and regulation, and with its history of recent support for AI it stands among the best in the world. The UK government’s ambition should push
for scale and reliability in areas of unique advantage. To be influential in attracting talent, shaping global markets and global governance we call on the government to build a UK National AI strategy that scales up its investment for a decade and beyond.This report has two underlying messages. The first is that we need to “double down” on recent investment the UK has made in AI. The second message is that we must look to the horizon and be adaptable to disruption. Support for AI needs to reflect the rapid pace and evolution of the science & technology and its applications. This means staying at the forefront of the development of AI and integrating approaches to ethics, security and social impacts and planning for the next 10-50 years. The UK will only feel the full benefits of AI if all parts of society have full confidence in the science and the technologies, and in the governance and
regulation that enable them. That confidence will depend on the existence of systems that ensure full accountability, clear ethics and transparency. Developing the best science and the most robust applications requires commitment to an ambitious programme of investment in talent; one that promotes cutting edge skills and does so in ways that makes AI accessible in ways that are more diverse and inclusive.Given the breadth and significance of potential AI applications, this Roadmap is concerned with overcoming the challenges of enabling change. It sets out suggested directions across four pillars: Research, Development & Innovation; Skills and Diversity, and Data, Infrastructure and Public Trust - and then, in the final section, addresses some specific measures to support adoption and the key areas of health, climate and defence.
This Roadmap and its recommendations reflects the views of the Council as well as 100+ additional experts. We recognise it will not be possible to achieve all at once, and this is why a National AI Strategy is needed to prioritise and set a time frame that will position the UK for success. In order to support the government, we are ready to convene workshops with the wider ecosystem in order to capture more detail and work together to ensure that a future National AI Strategy enables the whole of the UK to flourish.
1 The economic impact of artificial intelligence on the UK economy, PwC ( June 2017)1 
16 recommendations to help thegovernment develop a UK National AI Strategy
Research, Development and Innovation
Skills and Diversity	Data, Infrastructure and Public Trust
National, Cross-sector Adoption

1. Scale up and make sustainable public sector investment in AI; ensure consistent access to top talent from around the world; and find new ways to bring researchers, disciplines and sectors together. Build on the commitments in the government’s R&D Roadmap2 and suggestions in the soon to be published UKRI AI review3.2. Cement The Alan Turing Institute as a truly national institute, with a set of regional investments that draw on strengths from across the UK.Provide assured long term public sector funding that will give the Turing and others the confidence to plan and invest in strategic leadership for the UK in AI research, development and innovation.3. Ensure moonshots, as described in the R&D Roadmap as challenge-led, high-risk, scalable programmes, are both advancing and leveraging AI. These could tackle fundamental challenges such as creating “explainable AI”, or important goals in any area where AI can contribute strongly, such as the UK Digital Twin program or developing smart materials for energy storage in the move towards Net Zero carbon emissions.4. 
Scale up and commit to an ongoing 10 year programme of high level AI skill- building. This would include research fellowships, AI-relevant PhDs across disciplines, industry-led Masters and level 7 apprenticeships.5. Make diversity and inclusion a priority. We suggest benchmarking and forensically tracking levels of diversity to make data-led decisions about where to invest and ensure that underrepresented groups are given equal opportunity and included in all programs.6. Commit to achieving AI and data literacy for everyone. The public needs to understand the risks and rewards of AI so they can be confident and informed users. An online academy for understanding AI, with trusted materials and initiatives would support teachers, school students and lifelong learning.7. 
Consolidate and accelerate the infrastructure needed to increase access to data for AI. Invest in the relevant organisations, link general principles to specific applications, and pursue initiatives for pump priming innovation and enabling safe data sharing for valuable uses.8. Lead the development of data governance options and its uses. The UK should lead in developing appropriate standards to frame the future governance of data.9. Ensure public trust through public scrutiny. The UK must lead in finding ways to enable public scrutiny of, and input to, automated decision-making and help ensure that the public can trust AI.10. Thoughtfully position the UK with respect to other major AI nations. Building on its strengths, the UK has a crucial opportunity to become a global lead in good governance, standards and frameworks for AI and enhance bilateral cooperation with key actors.11. 
Increase buyer confidence and AI capability across all sectors and all sizes of company. Support investment for local initiatives to enable safe value- creating innovation and improve the data maturity needed for AI innovation.12. Support the UK’s AI startup vendor community. Enable greater access to data, infrastructure, skills, compute, specialist knowledge and funds.13. Enable robust public sector investments in AI, building capability in the use of data, analytics and AI to ensure intelligent procurement of AI as part of projects for public benefit.14. Use AI to meet the challenges of Net Zero carbon emissions. Work on access to data, governance, to develop cleaner systems, products and services.15. Use AI to help keep the country safe and secure. Work with government departments/agencies and defence and security companies to ensure AI is available to assess and respond to modern defence and security threats and opportunities.16. Build on the work of NHSX and others to lead the way in using AI to improve outcomes and create value in healthcare. The UK’s comparative advantage will depend on smart strategies for data sharing, new partnership models with SMEs and skill-building.1. 
2 UK Research and Development Roadmap, UK Government ( July 2020)3 [To be published early 2021]1 

Introduction
an essential part of tackling the major challenges of economic recovery following the COVID-19 pandemic, of levelling up the UK economy through the creation of jobs and prosperity beyond London and the South East, of ensuring new forms of health and social care, of reaching net zero carbon emissions, and of ensuring resilience to future economic, health, or environmental shocks. It will also create entirely new opportunities for human flourishing.These fundamental strengths and recent initiatives have helped the UK to be amongst the global leaders in many areas
coming five years to open 12 new institutes that will keep the country at the forefront of research in AI and quantum computing9, and like-minded countries such as Canada and Germany are leading on commercialisation as measured by patents.10The Council calls for a UK National AI Strategy that creates an even stronger general base of support for AI. Scotland has already embarked on an AI Strategy and the UK strategy should be created in consultation with the devolved administrations and the wider ecosystem.
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is breaking into the mainstream of societies and the global economy.The history of AI is characterised by cycles of boom and bust, with waves of excessive hype followed by “AI winters”. This time things are different: advances in machine learning and neural networks have led to great advances in fields such as computer vision and speech recognition, and natural language processing, with numerous applications used by hundreds of millions of people on a daily basis. Safely harnessed AI is revolutionising certain types of tasks, disrupting business models, and complementing and enhancing human capabilities in wholly new ways. These tremendous advances have come from increasing the sizes of training data sets, and the associated networks and
underlying algorithms, many of which have been with us in some form for a long time. This accounts for tens of billions of dollars in global annual value creation, and looks set to increase markedly over the coming decade.4The UK has fundamental strengths in AI which reach back to the intellectual origins of the science, with figures like Alan Turing, Joan Clarke, Donald Michie and many others, to its ability to debate and enact sound governance of new technologies. Successive governments, businesses and civil groups have worked hard to make increasing amounts of data and information more available in ways that combine safety and usefulness.In recent years, the UK has been the site of an array of initiatives aimed at developing and deploying AI across the
of AI, from accelerating drug discovery5 to helping businesses make decisions that accurately factor in climate volatility.6However, the next few months and years will be crucial in determining where the UK places its desired level of ambition in AI, as massive investments by governments and businesses around the world are already priming themselves to influence the global conversation. The scale of effort elsewhere must not be underestimated: Germany has committed €3.1 billion towards a national AI strategy up to 20257, and France has pledged €1.5 billion up to 2022, with almost half earmarked for research.8 While the UK has played a leading role in the development of AI, the US has recently announced $1 billion over the
The UK cannot, and need not try to, compete equally in all economic sectors so it must shape its strategy carefully to ensure it prioritises and is able to act selectively to lead and to capture markets around the world. In doing this it will need to consider its options for collaboration and competition within the international scientific and economic landscapes.
compute power, by factors of a million or more, along with modifications to the
economy for society. Building on these with focus and structure will ensure AI is4 
Some estimates show that leading nations could gain an extra 20-25% in economic growth and productivity gains through AI over the next decade. Modelling the impact of AI on the global economy, McKinsey (September 2018)5 Biotech harness AI in battle against Covid-19, Financial Times (May 2020)6 UK tech for a sustainable future, Tech Nation (2020)7 Germany AI Strategy Report, European Commission (March 2020)8 France AI Strategy Report, European Commission (February 2020)9 The Trump Administration Is Investing $1 Billion in Research Institutes to Advance Industries of the Future, The White House (August 2020)10 WIPO Technology Trends 2019: Artificial Intelligence, World Intellectual Property Organisation ( January 2019)11 Developing an AI Strategy for Scotland, Scotland’s AI Strategy (2019)1 

The Council has considered how to diffuse the development of AI across sections of society that would help to both improve the lives of its citizens and bring economic benefits in the form of recovery and resilience. This has resulted in four pillars:ï support for research, development and innovation;ï literacy in AI across the population with enhanced AI-related skills at all levels of educational and lifelong attainment;ï sound physical, digital and virtual infrastructure, including robust and flexible regulation as a form of social infrastructure, resulting in good governance that boosts public trust;ï and pragmatic approaches to national, cross-sector adoption that meaningfully advances public and private sector applications.This Roadmap sets out the requirements in each of these areas in more detail and builds on the 2017 Hall-Pesenti AI Review. Its premise is that, in most areas, what the UK needs to do is to “double down” on the best of the investments it has already made, and to accelerate what’s proved to be ‘working building’ capability across organisations and sectors. Doing this is not easy, and least of all in the face of jobs at risk that could be made more vulnerable by the twin pressures of the COVID-19 pandemic and automation.12
Fundamentally, it requires commitments of a size, and for sustained timescales, that are often only possible at times of disruption such as the one the world is going through now with its response and recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. It therefore requires a degree of collective vision and of boldness, combining this leadership with the confidence to create spaces for entrepreneurism in all parts of society and the economy in order to find new ways to use AI to benefit everyone.In a small number of important areas this Roadmap points in new directions. As AI becomes more integrated into daily life, developing trustworthy technology is vital and businesses will require a novel approach to good governance and consideration of the ethical and societal implications of AI as part of the design process, with greater multi-disciplinary and cross-disciplinary approaches throughout. The UK needs to develop a world-class enabling environment with strong but flexible legislation and well- resourced, capable regulators able to provide responsive guidance and timely oversight.This Roadmap is not a draft strategy, and nor is it an instruction manual. This is a set of recommendations and we recognise it will not be possible to achieve all at once. This is why a National AI Strategy is needed to prioritise and set a time frame. We are ready to convene workshops across all of the areas laid out in this Roadmap, and more, to capture the full spectrum of thought across the
UK in a way that would lend itself to the development of a UK National AI Strategy. We have set out a clear direction that we believe will accelerate the UK to a positive technological future and start the necessary conversations needed to create a strategy that will enable the whole of the UK to flourish.
12 Who is at risk?, The Royal Society for Arts, Manufactures and Commerce (October 2020) finds that, broadly speaking, industries with the highest level of furlough take-up are more likely to be at risk of automation.

1. Research, Development and Innovation
aspiration to be more imaginative in ways of ensuring that research and innovation is directly responsive to the needs and aspirations of society. This last point echoes strongly the views of the AI Council’s ecosystem.In addition to building on these broad directions, there are three areas which are more specific to AI and on which the government needs to take significant action.The Alan Turing Institute: local presences and global reach
Concentrating on these beginnings, an enhanced and reshaped Turing will be a crucial part of the necessary research, development and innovation infrastructure but, to play that role fully, some changes are needed. The UK’s research system as a whole cannot reach its full potential while the original membership model has the effect of inadvertently excluding excellent research teams across the four nations. The UK needs the Turing to have a full national reach so that it can play its part in levelling up and in supporting talent and great ideas wherever they start. To do this, it will need to be able to bring
AI’s full potential will only be realised in the UK if the government continues to create the conditions for leading edge research, development and innovation in AI for the public and private sectors, and if it creates the conditions for AI to work in and with multiple disciplines and areas of society and the economy.In common with some other parts of this Roadmap, what can seem like a restatement of general principles that could be taken for granted is, in fact, a challenging requirement for sustained systemic change.The government’s R&D Roadmap13 makes an excellent start in outlining some of the areas of systemic change that will particularly benefit AI. One of the most important commitments is to make the UK a place that is open and inviting to top talent. Demand for AI talent is at an
all-time high, and there is more to do to attract and retain the very best to the UK’s shores. Skills training, both at a research and workforce level, is vital to translate research, development and innovation, and suggestions are detailed in the forthcoming section.The government R&D Roadmap includes valuable commitments to strengthening the interactions between discovery and applied research, innovation, commercialisation and deployment. This is vital: funding either excellent basic or applied research in isolation risks the outputs and the people being easily transferred to other countries, so any competitive advantage can be easily and quickly lost, especially to other countries that have more resources than the UK. The R&D Roadmap also signifies support for entrepreneurs; creating a more place- based approach to research, development and innovation; and the
The first is to build on the existing success of The Alan Turing Institute as a national champion for AI research, development and innovation in the UK. In a relatively short period of time the Turing has developed to play a pivotal role in promoting AI research across sectors and in attracting talent by leveraging its growing network. Over the past year, the Turing has attracted 77 new Turing Fellows, bringing the total to 369, and 21 new research associates alongside 116 events across their research portfolio, and a student enrichment scheme intake representing 36% female and 32% from BAME backgrounds.14 It has also reached out to crowdsource best practice for data science and AI research, was pivotal in creating a new discipline in data-centric engineering, and has worked across government to provide policy advice and operational support.
together researchers, businesses, civil groups and the public sector to make great ideas work at all geographic levels and at a sector-wide scale.A new Turing model might, for example, extend both its virtual and physical presences to energise more regional and local activity. There are several ways to achieve such aims, building on the Turing’s convening role in the UK landscape to join up and build on existing teams and infrastructure. This could be delivered through Turing acting as a headquarters and convenor of a nationally network of centres-of- excellence or hubs, which may be physical or virtual, which would not only advance AI research but also development, innovation and deployment into the regions. Across these centres, skills training will be at both the research level and, most importantly, in apprenticeships, upskilling and reskilling regional
13 UK Research and Development Roadmap, UK Government ( July 2020)14 Annual Report 2019-20, The Alan Turing Institute (2020)13 

workforces to exploit the opportunities of AI across sectors of the UK economy.Models for such centres might be based on, for example, UK’s National Cyber Security Centre, or focus on regions to support AI research, development and innovation capability to support the local economy.Well-funded institutes are becoming highly valued components of national AI strategies, and as a national institute of global standing, the Turing also needs the assured long term public sector funding that will give it and others the confidence to plan and invest for the medium term and strategic leadership for the UK, with the needs of academia, businesses, civil groups and the public sector reflected in its strategic direction. A well-funded UK institute would not only signal the UK’s commitment to remaining a globally leading player over the coming decades, it could also promote the UK’s interests through collaborations with international partners and enable it to play a significant role in building the international infrastructure discussed as part of the third pillar in this Roadmap.Sustainable funding would enable the Turing to provide visible national leadership on matters of AI security and ethics, and use this leadership role and connectivity across the landscape to ensure the UK remains at the forefront of next-generation AI developments, such as those involving machine learning from small data sets, and machine learning as part of wholly new types of neural
interface technologies.15 This added focus on how to leap-frog current machine learning-based AI technologies would enable the UK, through the Turing and its network-trusted and neutral status, to also become the place for Explainable AI, bringing us closer to safe, responsible and trustworthy AI.Challenge-led innovationThe significant promise of AI and its high risk, high reward, aspirational nature lends itself to goal-directed “moonshot” programmes in the style often associated with ARPA-esque models.16a Properly designed and delivered moonshot programmes play to AI’s strengths by requiring people to work across boundaries and existing organisational structures, and to build new relationships, networks and common languages in order to develop entirely new solutions to big challenges. In addition to this, there is a need for the UK to consider further the question of how AI interacts with people, and what it means to create effective human-AI partnerships.One such moonshot, directly relevant to AI, might involve a major challenge aimed at developing and establishing appropriate methods for safe, ethical, explainable and reproducible AI which will accelerate its use across many sectors. Another would be the development of an innovation ecosystem enabled by the UK Digital Twin programme, as discussed later in this
Roadmap, within which AI would use these virtual worlds to explore real world optimisations that are beyond human scale.AI should also be built into moonshots in other sectors where it could play a major part, for example to radically accelerate materials science to develop new materials that can better store energy from renewable sources, or in solving for real-time control of the increasingly complex electricity distribution network as the country moves towards net zero emissions.Across all the potential types of challenge- based funding, programmes need to be selected and designed to draw in and accelerate AI’s integration across disciplines and sectors. One suggestion would be to select broad sectors that are more mature, and thus ripe for AI adoption than others, and use the mission-based approach to focus minds. This would bring together basic and applied research and multiple disciplines across research horizons and opportunities for systems development, helping to mature AI as a discipline.The specific vehicle for delivering moonshots is a ripe topic for discussion, but a forward-looking framework for research, development and innovation consisting of a series of labs, which conceive of and build fully engineered prototypes and platforms, could offer a flexible model of experimentation. These labs could generate vision-based
sequences of projects around moonshot challenges and could serve those with an interest in working between industry, academia and the public sector.By providing significant signals about potential future developments, moonshots create space for informed public and business engagement with the emerging science and applications. Under these circumstances the science and technology is not simply communicated to; it is inspired by, and carried out with, individuals, communities and businesses. Such space enables all those involved to explore how AI interacts with people and what it means to create human-AI partnerships. In turn, the projects will help define responsible and ethical practices to meet society’s needs and aspirations for a technology that behaves as people and businesses hope and expect: safely, securely and reliably.
15 iHuman perspective: Neural interfaces, The Royal Society (September 2019)16a The US’ Advanced Research Project Agency (ARPA) is a model designed to concentrate funding around pivotal investments in breakthrough technologies, often for national security purposes. DARPA (for Defense) is the most well-known ARPA agency in the US and is credited with developing a number of disruptive technologies such as stealth technology, the foundations of the Internet, and miniature GPS receivers.

AI to transform research, development and innovationCapitalising on the promise of AI will continue to require investment in basic research into the fundamentals of AI itself. Researchers, increasingly working across disciplines, will need to address some of the fundamental challenges that remain, such as establishing a common language through which to develop data science projects or interoperability between datasets, which can drive smart collaboration. AI systems often rely on a narrow disciplinary base, and this needs to be broadened to cover an array of domains in an intelligent way. AI technologies need to get better at extending into areas where they do not have structured data, and to navigate effectively through that.At the same time AI is transforming the nature of research itself, with examples in particle physics and bioinformatics.16b For the UK to retain its status as a global leader in research, it needs to stay well abreast of the potentially disruptive effects of AI and other forms of data science which are beginning to be incorporated into all forms of knowledge creation, including the social sciences and the humanities. Given the availability of massive data sets and computer power, such disruptions could range from game-changing increases in efficiency in routine tasks such as searching texts or large observational data sets, to entirely new forms of enquiry brought about by AI’s ability to
spot new patterns and prompt new questions and insights, often across existing disciplinary boundaries.
16b AlphaFold: a solution to a 50-year-old grand challenge in biology, DeepMind (November 2020)

2. Skills and Diversity
about ethics. It is about knowing enough to be a conscious and confident user of AI-related products; to know what questions to ask, what risks to look out for, what ethical and societal implications might arise, and what kinds of opportunities AI might provide. Without a basic literacy in AI specifically, the UK will miss out on opportunities created by AI applications, and will be vulnerable to poor consumer and public decision- making, and the dangers of over- persuasive hype or misplaced fear.Over time, AI needs to be built into the curriculum as a specialist subject. As well
demand to justify a five to tenfold increase in places compared to the numbers in the AI Review.To ensure a steady supply of skilled entrants to the workforce, and to send the right signals to young people making further academic choices, the UK should commit to scaling up its programmes significantly at all levels of education and maintain this commitment for at least a decade.Such a scale up would include AI-related Level 7 apprenticeships, Masters programmes, Centres for Doctoral
The Council’s vision is for everyone to be able to live confidently with AI, and for those who go on to work with it and to build it to do so with the very best foundation.For the most technically talented individuals we need to guarantee a best- in-class postgraduate offering to access globally attractive pathways that will contribute to the country’s renowned research base.Success will depend on increasing the diversity of people working on and with AI until those AI communities reflect the society they inhabit. It’s important to focus on diversity; not as an afterthought, but because doing so will generate crucial research questions and lead to the widest and most innovative range of future technologies which will serve the needs of the people. There are wonderful examples of emergent leadership,
creativity, and energy in promoting diversity but it is not enough. We suggest benchmarking and forensically tracking levels of diversity and inclusion in AI as the NCSC17 has recently done for cyber security, to make data-led decisions about where to invest and ensure that underrepresented groups are included in funding programs. Government must do more to encourage the best of the existing initiatives where diversity is enabled, and to expand with their own schemes and campaigns, if the needle is to be sufficiently moved.What everyone needs to knowThe UK needs to set itself challenging but realistic goals to ensure that every child leaves school with a basic sense of how AI works. This is not just about understanding the basics of coding or quantitative reasoning, or to describe the mathematical concepts; nor is it simply
as being its own subject AI needs to be part of computer science, citizenship studies, and as part of new ways of doing other subjects such as geography or history. These changes may take a decade to complete but getting there is essential. For now, the government should focus energy on the most effective existing curriculum enrichment initiatives, not as alternatives to fundamental changes to the curriculum, but because they provide opportunities to accelerate change in the short term.Further, Higher and Graduate EducationSince the AI Review in 2017, the government has invested significantly in schemes to promote graduate-level learning through Apprenticeships, Masters courses and PhD training. This is a good start, but only that. Current numbers would suggest there is unmet
Training and novel forms of PhDs. It would extend the scope of the schemes to include AI-related courses in disciplines outside those traditionally associated with data sciences, with a review of digital apprenticeship standards to identify where additional AI knowledge and skills ought to be unlocked. It must also include the postgraduate AI and data science conversion course programme announced by the government last year, whose 2,500 places for people to develop new skills or re-train. Properly implemented, this commitment would help level up access to economic development across regions. We must also ensure that no graduate student leaves university without some grounding in AI and its applications.
17 Decrypting diversity: Diversity and inclusion in cyber security, NCSC ( July 2020)17 

Meanwhile the Turing AI Fellowships programme for established researchers, an international fellowship programme for AI in the UK in a partnership between UKRI, the Office for AI, and the Turing, has already seen a successful first wave,18 alongside the first batch of Turing AI Acceleration Fellowships.19 In line with the 2017 AI Review, this programme must continue to be developed and expanded so that momentum can be built to attract world-leading talent to the UK.These efforts, directed at the supply side, would allow graduates and apprentices to advance into emerging AI professions. They would need to be delivered across the country and to be available to young people of all backgrounds, ensuring that the UK’s future AI workforce reflects the diversity of background and thought needed to develop world leading AI capabilities that tackle the issues which matter most. Success will depend on collaboration between universities, colleges and businesses, not only in terms of how academia can help support continuous learning and upskilling within businesses, but also through business support such as mentoring, real life use cases and data to academia.Supporting every teacherThe key to progress in schools is to enable teachers to have confidence in the basics themselves, so they can make the best possible choices about how to engage their students. One way to make progress relatively fast would be to
extend the work of the NCCE, supporting it to provide comprehensive curriculum resources that cover AI at all Key Stages, and providing an incentive and opportunity for teachers to learn and develop their AI knowledge. A comprehensive programme aimed at all teachers and with a clear deadline for completion would enable every teacher confidently to get to grips with AI concepts in ways that are relevant to their own teaching.As in many other subjects, learning should combine access to knowledge about AI with exercises based on tackling real-world problems in ways that encourage the skills associated with problem-solving (including creativity and resilience) and team-working. Therefore new curriculum resources need to include curated data sets that will enable teachers to create the case studies and exercises that will in turn create the familiarity that leads all young people to increased confidence and data literacy.Lifelong learning and an online academy for AILooking across society, the scale of re- skilling and up-skilling that will be required is vast when you consider a population whose working lives may last more than half a century beyond the time they left school, college or university. The UK must contend with changing business models in goods and services, and the changing nature of professions and trades, and the priority of levelling up.
These challenges point to the need for significant change in the contract between the state, individual and employer and a step change in the scale of continuous professional development and the ability to move between types of work.While these socio-economic trends cut across sectors and subjects, they represent an even more urgent challenge in AI where the required skills have recently emerged and are still changing rapidly.20 The government should consider the two following major steps.The first is extending business tax relief from investment in research, development and innovation to investment in specified forms of retraining and upskilling, including AI.A second step would be to enable the creation of an Online Academy for AI. Such an Academy could provide a key part of the social infrastructure necessary to support systemic change. Properly designed, such an Academy would provide the opportunity efficiently and creatively to meet several overlapping needs which emerge from different parts of this Roadmap. It might start by providing entry-level material to support life-long learning. Ideally, this would be accredited in a recognisable and portable way. In doing this it could also provide an entry-point and repository for online learning aimed at teachers, complementing the work of bodies such as the NCCE, and it would encourage the
growing national community of product managers retooling for the future in AI. Either separately, or integrated into the Academy, a ‘data skills observatory’ to identify and address the on-going and evolving data skills deficit function that would otherwise hinder AI innovation would also be needed.While the Academy’s main objective would be to enable more people to live and work with AI, it would also be well placed to help connect and support local initiatives involving public engagement and public dialogue as part of responsible innovation in new AI deployments, including moonshots. This sustained and distributed resource, rather than, say, a single educational or promotional campaign, would be an integral part of negotiating the benefits and the risks of AI across different applications and publics and finding new forms of settlement and new narratives. It would help to ensure that trustworthy information, in relevant and accessible forms, informed public narratives on AI across sectors and applications. It would need to be able to reach into the forefront of research, development and innovation, such as through the Turing, and to connect people and information for discussions on opportunities, the distribution of benefits and of risks, shortcomings and uncertainties.This kind of resource would in turn underpin the regulatory infrastructure that is outlined in the next section, by ensuring that public debates were consistently well-informed.
18 Welcoming world-class Turing AI Fellows to the Institute, The Alan Turing Institute (October 2019)19 New Turing AI fellows to deliver world-class AI research, UKRI (November 2020)20 Short, online courses can unblock gender and other diversity issues in digital skills education, Institute of Coding (September 2020)17 

3. Data,Infrastructure and Public Trust
deployment of suitable privacy enhancing technologies.22 This should be furthered by accelerating work on translating the intent of a data sharing agreement into an actionable legal framework, and establishing guidelines for legal frameworks around different data sharing structures such as trusts, cooperatives and contracts.It will be important to note that while some AI systems will continue to rely on access to the largest possible data sets, volume should not be the only priority for schemes to promote access: some of the next generation of AI technologies will be
licences where possible, working better with multi-modal data (big data, small data, noisy data, unstructured data) and enforcing an agreed supporting framework on what it means ethically and for society to share data for research purposes, and who owns it.Ultimately, developers of AI applications ought to consider the opening and sharing of research, analytics and data at the fundamental design stage. This should include encouraging digital research, development and innovation infrastructure, software and tools to be open and standardised; providing access
The UK should aspire to be the best place in the world to access and use safe, secure and good quality data in order to develop new applications and business models.The UK should also be the best place for the public to exercise scrutiny of, and input to, automated decision making, in order to ensure the public can trust AI. To do this, the infrastructure it will need is not only physical, such as broadband networks and high performance computing capacity, but also virtual and social, encompassing processes, people, standards, governance and practices. A systemic reimagining of data availability and governance will be required across disciplines to transform traditional practices and public acceptability.As for other infrastructure assets of national importance, the government has a key role in funding and providing data
infrastructure. An important component to this should be in creating a cross- sectoral Information Management Framework that is AI-friendly and designed for clean, codified, real-time data so that it forms the best possible basis for private and public sector innovation.Trustworthy and accessible dataAI thrives on data, and makes new demands on data collection, curation and use. The government should focus its plans to make more public sector data safely and securely available, being clear about which data will be increasingly available, under what conditions and on what timescale. In the private sector, while regulators have begun good work to audit AI for personal data protection compliance21, more work is needed to help businesses seeking to use data for AI by creating the conditions for the
designed to work with much smaller data sets. This illustrates a more general principle which is that the detailed infrastructure needed to make AI work in different markets is often very context- specific, and the UK will need a National AI Strategy that links general principles to industry-specific arrangements of governance to enable innovation and growth. One need shared by many markets, however, is in establishing data infrastructure to permit companies to safely share and access data to develop common AI-related products. The public sector should lead the way with examples of good data sharing practices.Good AI research, development and innovation relies on a bedrock of good data practices and there is much to do to improve the current position. This includes embedding data principles such as FAIR (Findable, Accessible Interoperable, Reusable), adopting open
to large-scale compute and data resources tuned to AI applications; and supporting the development and deployment of Trusted Research Environments, which enables collaboration and data access across several organisations.While previous work around best practices in data management and use has been helpful in setting the direction of travel, there remains a gap between the aspirations set out in these principles and their implementation, creating an additional barrier to the development of effective data access frameworks. Further work is needed to build a common language amongst data practitioners, building understanding of the nature of the datasets being used and how best to manage them. In many cases, data can outlive the systems that collected it, and conscious investment in trustworthy systems that can outlive the lifecycle of
21 Guidance on AI and Data Protection, ICO (2020)22 Privacy Enhancing Technologies, The Royal Society (March 2019)17 

our standard modes of data management will reap many benefits.The emergence of a small number of big players in several digital markets has sparked a timely debate on the proper role of government and regulators in preserving and enhancing competition across the digital economy. The role of data as a driver of concentration and potential barrier to entry for smaller firms has been a central theme of recent reviews.23 The government has also recognised the growing importance of data access and openness to promoting competition and innovation, having established a dedicated Digital Markets Unit to advise on the functions, processes and powers which may be needed to address the challenges posed by fast-moving digital markets.24Whatever the government’s final decision, clear and flexible regulation will be critical to supporting good data practices, and can help to level the playing field for new entrants into digital and data-driven markets. There remains much to be done in interpreting existing data rules to support research, development and innovation and well-resourced, independent regulators can assist in providing guidance.In addition to these systemic changes, the government might consider enhancing the nations’ approach to data governance: making sure data is collected, used and shared in responsible and trustworthy ways. Not appropriately
addressing data governance frameworks would maintain a fundamental barrier to the adoption and diffusion of AI technologies and inhibit the quality of wider sources of data. We recommend a coalition of institutions and experts work together to develop standard data sharing agreements compliant with data protection and intellectual property law but providing practical exemplars, especially for business-to-business data sharing that could be adapted and adopted across the economy. Without a strong system of data governance, existing tenuous public trust in data use and sharing will persist, impairing the UK’s long-term leadership ambitions.Public trust and good governanceThreaded throughout discussions about AI is the need for adaptive and informed regulation and standards as part of an enabling environment of good governance, which includes public engagement, transparency measures and responsible research and innovation on the part of businesses through the lifecycle of AI operations. Achieving such a robust system of good governance is crucial to building the public trust and confidence in AI that will be essential to its uptake and long-term public acceptability.Recent events have demonstrated that public and private sector AI and algorithmic applications continue to be plagued by public scepticism and lack
widespread legitimacy. Developing and deploying trustworthy AI will be dependent on the UK strengthening its governing environment in a manner that both provides guidance and confidence to businesses to innovate and adopt AI, and reassures the public that the use of AI is safe, secure, fair, ethical and duly overseen by independent entities. This is beginning to be addressed in the National Data Strategy,25 but further exploration and scrutiny of appropriate governance mechanisms, particularly concerning public sector adoption of AI, is overdue.We highlight one example in this section -a public interest data bill - that may serve as a method of increasing accountability through public engagement.It is clear that there remains a fundamental mismatch between the logic of the market and the logic of the law.Technology markets extract value from collective data while laws respond to individual opportunities and threats. This has a critical impact on the public acceptability of data as infrastructure - data supported by people, processes and technology - and will only worsen if it is not sufficiently addressed.One method that could begin to combine new forms of innovation and accountability is to involve the public in considering new ways to complement individual rights-based approaches such as consent. These would include new ways of ensuring public scrutiny of automated decision-making and the types of transparency that lead to
accountability: revealing the purposes and training data behind algorithms, as well as looking at their impacts. They would include public engagement, including in algorithmic impact assessments. And they would look to ensure that existing regulations and regulatory bodies had not only the capacity, but also the capability to fully consider the implications of AI in areas such as labour, environmental, and criminal law. These three tenets: (1) clear transparency about automated decision making, (2) the right to give meaningful public input and (3) the ability to enforce sanctions could be encapsulated in a Public Interest Data Bill.26Fundamental to the development of AI systems is access to data. The UK’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted gaps in the UK’s capabilities in this space, in particular around the governance of ‘happenstance’ data, generated by individuals in the course of their daily activities.27 Trustworthy access to such data can help generate insights for public policy and research, enabling the government to better understand the impact of its policy interventions in rapidly-evolving circumstances. Their expertise in the collection and management of data means the Office for National Statistics is well-placed to lead the development of governance frameworks for these new data sources.Government should enhance their role inthis respect through the National Data Strategy and associated policy frameworks.
23 ‘Unlocking digital competition’, Report of the Digital Competition Expert Panel, UK Government (2019)24 New competition regime for tech giants to give consumers more choice and control over their data, and ensure businesses are fairly treated, UK Government (November 2020)25 National Data Strategy, UK Government (September 2020). Mission 2 regards a pro-growth and trusted data regime, and Mission 3 concerns transforming the government's use of data.26 The Data Delusion: Protecting Individual Data Isn't Enough When The Harm is Collective, FSI Stanford ( July 2020)27 Data readiness: lessons from an emergency, DELVE Report No 7 (November 2020)17 
24	AI ROADMAP	DATA, INFRASTRUCTURE AND PUBLIC TRUST	25
Making the UK the best place in the world to research and use AI requires it to be world-leading in the provision of responsive regulation and governance. While fundamental principles of good governance may be fixed and apply across sectors, the details will not, and this means that the systems of governance themselves need to be ready to respond and adapt more frequently than has typically been true of systems of governance in the past. We therefore suggest commissioning an independent entity to provide recommendations on the next steps in the evolution of governance mechanisms, including impact and risk assessments, best practice principles, ethical processes and institutional mechanisms that will increase and sustain public trust.Public trust in the applications of AI and algorithms depends on the trustworthiness of these applications and those that develop and implement these. Good governance also needs to encourage good culture amongst the individuals and organisations that are responsible for the development and application of advanced information technology. At the same time, the UK needs to continue investing in data- specific regulatory capacity and algorithmic accountability, ensuring that institutions are well funded to cover the advisory, enforcement and regulatory landscapes as sector digitalisation continues at pace. UK governance should combine sector-specific expertise with cross-sector insights, bringing regulators
in different sectors together to connect with each other and begin to experiment with new ways of encouraging safe AI innovation across and within their remit.Digital Twins and Living LabsApplying AI systems responsibly inevitably requires a great deal of development before getting anywhere near the physical world. Digital twins (a realistic representation of assets, processes, systems or institutions in the built, societal or natural environments) are increasingly recognised as important in many fields as they can provide insight into how complex physical assets and citizens behave in real time and can help organisations improve decision-making and optimising processes. An expanded programme to advance digital twin capability, with interoperable data standards, could help developers explore the potential for applications in the physical world but cheaper, faster and with less risk, as well as a better understanding of the implications and impacts to society and the economy. AI thrives when stitching digital twins together, using machine learning algorithms to analyse complex patterns and make decisions between different processes and systems alongside generating new insights with newly hybridised datasets.The National Digital Twin Programme, currently being driven by the Centre for Digital Built Britain, aims to create an Information Management Framework to
enable the building of digital twins across the built environment. Building on this work, a more ambitious cross-sectoral UK Digital Twin programme, governed by the Gemini Principles28, would be a moonshot challenge and would encourage more widespread use of open synthetic data to develop AI applications in many specific potential applications where the risks to individuals or society might otherwise be large. AI could also use these digital twins to explore real world optimisations that are beyond human scale.In developing those AI applications and AI models and testing with synthetic data, there comes a point when you must begin to model and rehearse in the real world with messy, unpredictable and diverse environments. To achieve this in a safe way without causing inadvertent harm, the UK needs to create a nationwide network of living laboratories, physical environments that start as representations of the real world but more constrained.AI will provide the embedded intelligence within all manner of new smart machines, many with autonomous capabilities, that can work collaboratively with humans to transform their productivity, safety and quality of life. By enabling the fast and safe development, testing and demonstration of new AI-based goods and services, including distributed software systems and intelligence embodied in smart machines and products, businesses, researchers and
citizens can gather the data and experience necessary to inform future policy, regulation, products and services.A globally leading roleFinally, the UK should urgently and sustainably build upon its strong international position. It is one of the top three countries in terms of research publications in AI.29 This strength combined with the UK’s diplomatic weight can be a catalyst to shape international discussions, but our leading international position is not guaranteed. We should therefore strengthen existing partnerships with other like-minded countries, such as France and Canada as well as consider carefully how to increase bilateral cooperation with countries like the US and China, such as through the recent declaration signed with the US to increase collaboration on AI R&D,30 to enable effective strategic action to shape a global AI landscape. One immediate way forward is to leverage our founding membership in the Global Partnership for AI (GPAI), a scalable club of like-minded governments ready to be led by experts on tackling the most pressing priorities for collaboration, where the UK is already leading on data governance.31The UK has a pivotal opportunity to play an influential role in the coming year as it adopts the Presidency of the G7 and the 26th UN Climate Change conference.Over this period the UK should use this opportunity to leverage global collective
28 The Gemini Principles were developed by the Centre for Digital Built Britain to guide the responsible development of digital twins and a National Digital Twin for the public good. The Gemini Principles Centre for Digital Built Britain (2018)29 Global AI Talent Report 2020, (October 2020); AI Research Rankings 2019, Medium (December 2019)30 Declaration of the USA and the UK on Cooperation in AI Research and Development, UK Government (September 2020)31 An open call for input from GPAI’s Data Governance Working Group, OECD (November 2020); we understand the recommendations from this working group will be incorporated into the National Data Strategy.17 
intelligence to advise on the biggest challenges AI presents and position the UK as a centre to operationalise recommendations, including those relating to the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals.Alongside global leadership on shared challenges, the UK ought to consider its own strategic advantage as we endeavour to become less dependent on critical technologies from non-allied sources of supply. Advancements in AI products and services underpin the capacity to compete economically but is also the domain of contests between overseas power bases and other nation states, which are sometimes not well aligned to the UK interest. One way to respond to this shift in geopolitical context is to invest strategically in research, development and innovation, choosing areas of national strengths such as AI and supporting them heavily with the aim of becoming globally competitive.If we align this strategic investment with the construction of broad coalitions of interest on the global stage, the UK can increase our sovereign capabilities and attract researchers and technologists with the skills to develop leading products in a number of competitive sectors. Government should also consider how to redefine procurement and intellectual property to encourage a creative technology ecosystem to achieve these aims.

4. National, Cross-sector Adoption
The largest companies that are able to realise the potential of AI through business transformation find themselves increasing productivity, reducing costs and innovating faster to remain competitive. By ensuring the enabling foundations described in the first 10 recommendations are in place, the UK can also be a fertile ground for its existing FTSE 100 and the future 100.Supporting high growth AI startupsAs these businesses initiatives stimulate demand for AI products, we need to
the funding gap that exists at series B+ means that AI companies struggle to stay under UK ownership. Government may consider supporting at this stage to ensure companies can take foreign investments in these rounds while also staying in the UK as they grow.The UK government needs to assist startups and scaleups to compete most effectively for the best talent. The Study Visa program may need to be extended now we have left the European Union. To this end, there is a prominent role for the government to position the UK as the go- to AI startup location in the region. It’s
The preceding sections outline the pillars that would provide the basis for sustained uptake of AI across the country and the economy as a whole.This section proposes transitional and other more specific measures to boost initial take up and to evolve existing markets in the crucial areas of business adoption, startup & scale-up support, public sector adoption, health and social care, climate change, and defence.Business as smart adoptersAcross society and the economy, and since the first weeks of 2020, the COVID- 19 pandemic has accelerated the adoption of digital systems such as e- commerce platforms and marketplaces, and tools to enable remote working. The UK therefore has an opportunity to build on this momentum to showcase and reward the uptake of AI by encouraging
further investment and enabling business, especially SMEs, to be smart consumers for AI systems.Creating confidence so that business customers increasingly seek out AI solutions, knowing that they will be able to get sound advice and robust products, is crucial. There is further need to build on grants to access impartial advice on how to use digital and AI solutions to help the growth of SMEs that have been exacerbated by the COVID crisis.Scotland’s Data Lab is a good example of an initiative that fosters trusted collaboration between industry and AI expertise, having invested in 120 Collaborative Innovation Projects at approximately £12 million value over the last 5 years, and recently launched a Torch Business Advisory Service to support SMEs on their data journey.
ensure that the AI startup and scaleup vendor ecosystem thrives. Supporting AI- first businesses by providing the necessary physical infrastructure to offer services to the largest and smallest local and multinational companies would help these businesses scale, develop and become the next multi billion dollar companies.The government should encourage more initiatives like Tech Nation’s Applied AI Program32 to directly support smaller startups to grow across the UK. The community welcomed an additional £200 million from the British Business Bank which increased VC funding to high growth companies,33 and there is a compelling argument to increase this funding, or alternatively to consider public investment in promising companies that seek to advance government priorities in a similar style to the National Security Strategic Investment Fund. For scaleups,
important to spread the message that the UK has more capital and talent than anywhere else34 and a unique proximity of buyer to vendor as well as being far easier to incorporate and run a business here than in Europe.To increase the number of SMEs and build the right entrepreneurial infrastructure for AI-first companies, it is also worth exploring the possibility of building on Innovate UK’s Knowledge Transfer Partnerships (KTPs), in which the government could introduce a series of AI-specific KTPs to stimulate market ready AI research in areas of direct relevance to businesses to commercialise research.The UK currently lacks a prominent cohort of professionals who understand the complex sales and leadership skills needed to build, articulate and sell AI tools and develop leaders of AI research labs, and there is concurrently a specific
32 Applied AI, Tech Nation (2020)33 Extra £200 million backing for British businesses, British Business Bank (April 2019)34 Tech Nation Impact Report, Tech Nation (2020); UK Tech For A Changing World, Tech Nation (2020)17 

demand to increase the number of skilled product managers in AI. We recommend a marketing campaign and programs to encourage international product managers to come to the UK, and for UK citizens to focus their education or re-skilling in this direction. This would help turbo charge the UK’s ability to effectively commercialise the world class research coming out of our universities.Enabling public sector adoptionThe UK public sector will be a priority area when it comes to AI innovation. Improving policy-making processes (for example, ensuring it is more resilient to shocks to the system), and the provision of more efficient and effective public services (for example, using data-driven ‘real-time’ economic forecasts), built on strong ethical foundations, will become essential to improve the security and well-being of citizens.There is an urgent need to have a digitally and data enabled local and national government. To leverage the opportunities of AI in the public sector, there will need to be new ways of ensuring that data can be accessed and evaluated across public sector organisations. The government should ensure there is a central place for civil servants to access information about all of the AI-based tools and projects being undertaken across departments. AI
absolutely appropriate, and departments should learn rapidly from each other about what works well and what needs to evolve. In time, the focus should be on linking public sector data with private sector data, rapidly enhancing the insights that can be gained through diverse datasets and a more sophisticated adoption of AI.35Government should fund interdisciplinary pathfinder projects – requiring collaboration between industries and across government departments, with different academic disciplines – as a means of demonstrating the potential of AI technologies to support pathfinder projects and building capability in the civil service to deliver such projects.Importantly, the application of AI in the public sector should not fall explicitly on one department to lead. It may be that a Chief Information Officer embedded in the heart of government would work well to provide the strategic direction and leadership required for such a multi- stakeholder task.The huge benefits of data sharing will be worth little unless government departments are enabled to intelligently procure products that suit different contexts and services. More work is needed to demystify algorithmic decision making in government, with training programs for officials so they can suitably assess AI systems for themselves and see how it would be deployed as part of an
data analysts across government trained in data science techniques this year,36 and to enable a more thorough upskilling of AI and machine learning analysis, work should intertwine with the Turing, the Royal Society, the Royal Statistical Society and others in determining how data science and AI practitioners may be professionally standardised.Public sector bodies wishing to adopt AI often face challenges in building procurement capability. Governments have tried to enable public procurement to better support innovative goods and services, while ensuring value for money and relatively low risk. This government should continue to build on initiatives that have worked, such as GovTech and the guidelines for AI procurement,37 to allow the public sector to effectively purchase emerging tech such as AI. Greater AI adoption in the public sector through public sector procurement creates markets for data science and AI technologies to be developed, tested and deployed by government departments, to enable a pull-through of innovation from research, often via SMEs.It is important to note that evidence shows the human rights of the poorest and most vulnerable are especially at risk when public services are automated.38 As such we suggest this work is done carefully and with independent ethics
committees tasked to consider ethics, including social and economic impacts.Health and social careThe demands on healthcare are changing rapidly as populations drift, age, and their needs evolve, and with a huge reduction in the cost of measurement. With this ubiquity of such data, informed and improved interventions through prioritisation and personalisation can maximise benefit.Given the social and economic importance of health and the UK’s potential to build on market opportunities created by the NHS, the sector has been, and should continue to be, at the forefront of AI adoption. The importance of the link between health, mental health and social care has been especially clear during the COVID-19 pandemic, and we have also seen areas in which AI could have been better prepared to deal with that link if we had considered the promise of AI in this sector earlier. AI can help manage the complex information flow that is needed for the integration of these systems. NHSX, in delivering the Health Secretary’s Tech Vision39, is taking the lead in unblocking issues including (but not limited to) governance, data access and protection, and inclusion. The Council, who are supporting NHSX with their AI Lab40 and AI Awards,41 looks to NHSX to work with others across the research,
should be used in projects that are outcome-based and only where
increasingly efficient civil service. The ONS is working towards a target of 50035 
There is a fundamental need to consider transparency and data bias as public sector adoption increases, taking into account analysis and recommendations from, among others: Review on Artificial Intelligence and Public Standards, The Committee on Standards in Public Life (February 2020); CDEI review into bias in algorithmic decision-making, Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation (November 2020)36 Looking to the future at the Data Science Campus, Office for National Statistics (March 2019)37 Guidelines for AI Procurement, UK Government ( June 2020). Developed in collaboration with the World Economic Forum Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution.38 Statement on the Visit to the United Kingdom, by Professor Philip Alston, United Nations Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights, United Nations Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner (November 2018)39 The future of healthcare: our vision for digital, data and technology in health and care, UK Government (October 2018)40 The NHS AI Lab, NHSX (2020)41 Artificial Intelligence in Health and Care Award, NHSX (November 2020)17 
32	AI ROADMAP	NATIONAL, CROSS-SECTOR ADOPTION	33
development and innovation landscape to continue building towards these opportunities and developing best practice guidance for AI adoption in the healthcare sector.As the adoption of AI increases outside of the hospital setting, so too will the ‘datafication’ of networked digital technologies which create new health insights for individuals. This carries abundant opportunities for the preventative health of citizens, for example in stimulating new and more efficient ways to diagnose and prevent disease beyond clinical boundaries, but there are also significant concerns if not governed correctly. Individuals’ health quickly becomes legible to actors outside medical and clinical settings, for example inferred sensitive personal information held by online platforms, and appropriate oversight ought to be considered in how these technologies develop.We also encourage further development in areas with others in the sector where the UK can build a competitive advantage. Three particular areas stand out: the first is in creating a data strategy for health and care, which achieves clean, codified and real-time data with a strong sectoral data governance framework. The second is the opportunity to develop new models of partnership and incentives for partnerships between SMEs and the NHS that flourish and scale beyond ideation.
healthcare professionals living and working with AI technologies, building especially on the Topol review42 and NHS Digital Academy.Finally, building on the UK’s world-leading life sciences industry and increasingly digitally mature NHS, there is an opportunity to establish the UK as thego-to-place for biomedical research. With the appropriate governance in place, and through closer collaboration of the life sciences industry and the NHS, AI has the potential to empower large national trials more efficiently, including through the seamless adaptation of subjects to treatments.Climate changeAI technologies are an essential part of the toolbox for innovating to reduce greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, and to reduce the environmental impacts of goods, services and human activities. We are already seeing AI contributing to a greater grasp of complex environmental and sustainability systems, from forecasting supply and demand at real- time43 to combating illegal deforestation44 and understanding Arctic sea ice loss.45 One way to accelerate the use of AI for these purposes would be to build it into relevant moonshots, such as that on new materials for energy storage and renewables and create incentives for AI companies to address these and other
The challenges to increased adoption of AI in related sectors, particularly in energy, has been explored elsewhere46 but echo similar constraints in other sectors, notably in the accessibility, interoperability and labelling of datasets that can contribute to cross-sector cooperation on energy and climate initiatives. The reality is also that the continued development of digital technologies, including AI and complementary technologies such as 5G and the Internet of Things, create an environmental impact that also needs to be monitored.As a part of the UK’s globally leading role in AI, there is an opportunity to carve out a leading path on the global stage where others see a similar need to increase the role of AI in energy and climate for public good. The UK should consider drawing up a plan that ensures responsible AI is suitable for the planet and helps build broader awareness, inform regulation, and incentivise researchers and developers to make more conscious and accountable decisions in these areas.Ahead of COP26, the UK should consider how to develop and showcase the UK’s ability in cleantech, which spans the entire country and represents a successful, innovative path to Net Zero,47 and use its spotlight to encourage an open, international digital ecosystem of data, algorithms and insights that can generate
reliable information in real-time about the state of the environment and interactions between the economy, society and the environment.Defence and securityAI is central to a broad range of defence and security applications, which are becoming increasingly data rich and networked. They require multiple sources of information to be brought together to understand a rapidly evolving situation, to determine a timely course of action and to oversee the enactment of the response. The information involved is often multi-modal (text, audio and video) and is invariably uncertain, incomplete and contradictory. Sometimes it is also intentionally misleading. AI methods are necessary to make sense of this volume, variety and velocity of information.However, further developments arerequired to scale the underpinning fusion techniques, to have them work in closer partnership with the humans involved, and to ensure the ensuing decisions and plans can be understood and justified.The increased connectivity of all aspects of our society means that digital assets are increasingly common, and valuable and physical assets are increasingly accessible remotely. These bring tremendous benefits, but also open up
The third opportunity would be to create a better understanding of the skills and knowledge required for citizens and
Net Zero challenges.42 
The Topol Review advised the government on implementing technologies such as AI in the NHS and to enable NHS staff to make the most of them to improve services. The Topol Review, NHS (February 2019)43 Solar nowcasting with machine vision, The Alan Turing Institute (current research)44 The fight against illegal deforestation with TensorFlow, Google (March 2018)45 Understanding Arctic sea ice loss, The Alan Turing Institute (current research)46 AI Barometer Report, Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation ( June 2020)47 UK Tech For A Changing World, Tech Nation (2020)17 

opportunities for interference and disruption, leading to a requirement for a secure, connected intelligence. AI techniques are necessary to monitor the complexity of these networked systems and to determine when they are operating normally and when they are not. As cyber-attacks become increasingly sophisticated, AI is needed to detect and respond to them.We welcome the commitment to create a new MOD agency for AI, and look forward to further detail in the Integrated Review in 2021.We are now living in a challenging economic and geopolitical environment in which global tech companies hold sway over national strategic advantages. By strengthening our ties with like- minded nations, the UK can increase our capabilities in co-creating technological developments, drawing innovations from oblique application areas and developing leading products which are then adopted by our allies. The broader AI community will be required to engage in this space as the security sector becomes more pervasive, and the government will need to find ways of working across demanding security frameworks to enable wider collaboration.Part of opening up wider collaboration on this front will require new levels of internationally competitive investment in advanced hardware technologies that serve the UK ecosystem, as the driving force behind fast and secure innovation.
Co-creation – at scale – of technological developments in an application agnostic environment (benefiting from innovations from other application areas) could be a potential model. This would also provide additional benefits to improved technological export capabilities for Britain, and further benefits to attracting world-class technologists and innovators in this space, not seen in Britain since the 1980s.
Acknowledgements
AI CouncilSir Adrian Smith FRSInstitute Director and Chief Executive, The Alan Turing InstitutePresident Elect of The Royal SocietyAlice Bentinck MBECo-founder, Entrepreneur FirstAnn CairnsExecutive Vice-Chairman, MasterCardChristopher Bishop FRS FRSE FREngLaboratory Director,Microsoft Research Cambridge Professor of Computer Science, University of EdinburghClaire Craig CBEProvost, The Queen’s College OxfordDavid Lane CBE, PhD FREng FRSE Professor and Founding Director, Edinburgh Centre for RoboticsKriti SharmaFounder, AI for GoodMáire O'Neill FREngProfessor, Centre for Secure Information Technologies, Queen's University BelfastMarc WarnerChief Executive Officer, FacultySir Mark Walport FRS FRCP FRCPath FMedSci FRSEChief Executive, UK Research and Innovation, 2017 to 2020
Martin TisnéManaging Director, LuminateNeil LawrenceDeepMind Professor of Machine Learning, University of CambridgeNick Jennings CB, FREngVice-Provost for Research and Enterprise, Imperial College LondonProfessor, Artificial Intelligence, Imperial College LondonDame Patricia Hodgson DBEMember of the Board,Centre for Data Ethics and InnovationPaul Clarke CBEChief Technology Officer, Ocado Group 2012 to 2020Pete BurnapProfessor of Data Science & Cybersecurity, Cardiff UniversityPriya Lakhani OBEFounder and CEO, CENTURY TechRachel DunscombeCEO, NHS Digital AcademyVisiting Professor, Imperial College LondonTabitha GoldstaubCo-founder, CognitionX UK AI Business Champion Chair, AI CouncilDame Wendy Hall DBE, FRS FREng Regius Professor of Computer Science, University of SouthamptonUK AI Skills Champion
Wider AI ecosystemIn October 2019 the Council put out a call for any interested individuals to be part of a wider ecosystem, to contribute to the Council’s work. Over 450 people responded, and the Council is grateful to them for their contributions over the last few months, including for their views on this Roadmap. This includes:Adrian Joseph OBE, Managing Director, Group AI and Data Solutions, BTAdrian Weller, Program Director for AI, The Alan Turing InstituteAlexandra Mousavizadeh, Director, Tortoise Intelligence teamAndrew Hopper CBE FRS FIET FREng,Vice-President, The Royal SocietyBrent Hoberman CBE, Executive Chairman and Co-founder, Founders FactoryCarly Kind, Director, Ada Lovelace InstituteDemis Hassabis CBE FRS FREng FRSA,CEO and co-founder, DeepMindFrank Kelly CBE, Professor of the Mathematics of Systems, University of CambridgeGerard Grech, CEO, Tech NationGillian Docherty OBE, CEO, The Data Lab ScotlandHayaatun Sillem CBE FIET, CEO, Royal Academy of EngineeringSir Ian Diamond FBA FRSE FAcSS DL,UK National StatisticianIndra Joshi, Director of Artificial Intelligence, NHSXJeni Tennison OBE, Vice-President, Open Data InstituteJohn Spindler, CEO, Capital Enterprise
Julia Adamson, Director of Education, British Computer SocietyLila Ibrahim, COO, DeepMindProfessor Dame Lynn Gladden DBE FRS FRSC FInstP FREng, Executive Chair, EPSRCMatthew Taylor CBE FAcSS, CEO, The Royal Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and CommerceProfessor Dame Ottoline Leyser DBE FRS,Chief Executive, UK Research and InnovationSir Patrick Vallance FRS FMedSci FRCP,UK Government’s Chief Scientific AdviserPhilip Colligan, CEO, Raspberry PiRoger Taylor, Chair, Centre for Data Ethics and InnovationSaul Klein, Co-founder, LocalGlobeSimon McDougall, Director, Technology & Innovation, Information Commissioner’s OfficeSimon Peyton Jones FRS MAE, Chair, National Centre for Computing EducationStan Boland, CEO, FiveAIStian Westlake, CEO, Royal Statistical SocietyStuart Russell, Professor of Computer Science, University of California, BerkeleyLord Tim Clement Jones CBE FRSA, Co-chair, AI All-Party Parliamentary GroupVanessa Lawrence CB HonFREng FRICS, Non-Exec Director, Satellite Applications Catapult and Non-Exec Director and Trustee, The Alan Turing InstituteZoubin Ghahramani FRS,Professor of Information Engineering, University of Cambridge
BLANK PAGE
About the AI CouncilThe AI Council, an independent expert committee, provides advice to theUK Government and high-level leadership of the Artificial Intelligence ecosystem.The Office for Artificial Intelligence (a joint BEIS-DCMS unit) is secretariat to the AI Council.www.gov.uk/government/groups/ai-councilBEIS	1 Victoria Street, London, SW1H 0ET DCMS	100 Parliament Street, London, SW1A 2BQ© Crown copyright 2021You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0. To view this licence, visit OGL or email psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk. Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.Published January 2021
UK AI COUNCILAI ROADMAP
Version 1( JA-B_DE)
UK AI COUNCIL | AI ROADMAPExecutive summary	216 recommendations to help the government develop a UK National AI Strategy	4Introduction	61. Research, Development and Innovation	10The Alan Turing Institute: local presences and global reach	11Challenge-led innovation	12AI to transform research, development and innovation	142. Skills and Diversity	16What everyone needs to know	16Further, Higher and Graduate Education	17Supporting every teacher	18Lifelong learning and an online academy for AI	183. Data, Infrastructure and Public Trust	20Trustworthy and accessible data	20Public trust and good governance	22Digital Twins and Living Labs	24A globally leading role	254. National, Cross-sector Adoption	28Business as smart adopters	28Supporting high growth AI startups	29Enabling public sector adoption	30Health and social care	31Climate change	32Defence and security	33Acknowledgements	36
2	AI ROADMAPExecutive summary
As Artificial Intelligence (AI) becomes embedded in people’s lives, the UK finds itself at a pivotal moment.Estimates show that AI could deliver a 10% increase in UK GDP in 2030.1 If approached correctly, this would offer huge benefits to the economy, to recovery and resilience, the environment and for people from all walks of life across all parts of the UK. This summary report by the AI Council sets out long- term ambitions and suggests near-term directions for all government departments, with the aim of cementing the UK as one of the very best places in the world to live with, work with and develop AI.The UK starts from a place of strength in research, enterprise and regulation, and with its history of recent support for AI it stands among the best in the world. The UK government’s ambition should push
for scale and reliability in areas of unique advantage. To be influential in attracting talent, shaping global markets and global governance we call on the government to build a UK National AI strategy that scales up its investment for a decade and beyond.This report has two underlying messages. The first is that we need to “double down” on recent investment the UK has made in AI. The second message is that we must look to the horizon and be adaptable to disruption. Support for AI needs to reflect the rapid pace and evolution of the science & technology and its applications. This means staying at the forefront of the development of AI and integrating approaches to ethics, security and social impacts and planning for the next 10-50 years. The UK will only feel the full benefits of AI if all parts of society have full confidence in the science and the technologies, and in the governance and
3The UK will only feel the full benefits of AI if all parts of society have full confidence in the science and the technologies, and in the governance and regulation that enable themA National AI Strategy is needed to prioritise and set a time frame that will position the UK for success
regulation that enable them. That confidence will depend on the existence of systems that ensure full accountability, clear ethics and transparency. Developing the best science and the most robust applications requires commitment to an ambitious programme of investment in talent; one that promotes cutting edge skills and does so in ways that makes AI accessible in ways that are more diverse and inclusive.Given the breadth and significance of potential AI applications, this Roadmap is concerned with overcoming the challenges of enabling change. It sets out suggested directions across four pillars: Research, Development & Innovation; Skills and Diversity, and Data, Infrastructure and Public Trust - and then, in the final section, addresses some specific measures to support adoption and the key areas of health, climate and defence.
This Roadmap and its recommendations reflects the views of the Council as well as 100+ additional experts. We recognise it will not be possible to achieve all at once, and this is why a National AI Strategy is needed to prioritise and set a time frame that will position the UK for success. In order to support the government, we are ready to convene workshops with the wider ecosystem in order to capture more detail and work together to ensure that a future National AI Strategy enables the whole of the UK to flourish.
1 The economic impact of artificial intelligence on the UK economy, PwC ( June 2017)1 
416 recommendations to help thegovernment develop a UK National AI Strategy
Research, Development and Innovation1. Scale up and make sustainable public sector investment in AI; ensure consistent access to top talent from around the world; and find new ways to bring researchers, disciplines and sectors together. Build on the commitments in the government’s R&D Roadmap2 and suggestions in the soon to be published UKRI AI review3.2. Cement The Alan Turing Institute as a truly national institute, with a set of regional investments that draw on strengths from across the UK.Provide assured long term public sector funding that will give the Turing and others the confidence to plan and invest in strategic leadership for the UK in AI research, development and innovation.3. Ensure moonshots, as described in the R&D Roadmap as challenge-led, high-risk, scalable programmes, are both advancing and leveraging AI. These could tackle fundamental challenges such as creating “explainable AI”, or important goals in any area where AI can contribute strongly, such as the UK Digital Twin program or developing smart materials for energy storage in the move towards Net Zero carbon emissions.
Skills and Diversity4. Scale up and commit to an ongoing 10 year programme of high level AI skill- building. This would include research fellowships, AI-relevant PhDs across disciplines, industry-led Masters and level 7 apprenticeships.5. Make diversity and inclusion a priority. We suggest benchmarking and forensically tracking levels of diversity to make data-led decisions about where to invest and ensure that underrepresented groups are given equal opportunity and included in all programs.6. Commit to achieving AI and data literacy for everyone. The public needs to understand the risks and rewards of AI so they can be confident and informed users. An online academy for understanding AI, with trusted materials and initiatives would support teachers, school students and lifelong learning.1. 
AI ROADMAP	5
Data, Infrastructure and Public Trust7. Consolidate and accelerate the infrastructure needed to increase access to data for AI. Invest in the relevant organisations, link general principles to specific applications, and pursue initiatives for pump priming innovation and enabling safe data sharing for valuable uses.8. Lead the development of data governance options and its uses. The UK should lead in developing appropriate standards to frame the future governance of data.9. Ensure public trust through public scrutiny. The UK must lead in finding ways to enable public scrutiny of, and input to, automated decision-making and help ensure that the public can trust AI.10. Thoughtfully position the UK with respect to other major AI nations. Building on its strengths, the UK has a crucial opportunity to become a global lead in good governance, standards and frameworks for AI and enhance bilateral cooperation with key actors.
National, Cross-sector Adoption11. Increase buyer confidence and AI capability across all sectors and all sizes of company. Support investment for local initiatives to enable safe value- creating innovation and improve the data maturity needed for AI innovation.12. Support the UK’s AI startup vendor community. Enable greater access to data, infrastructure, skills, compute, specialist knowledge and funds.13. Enable robust public sector investments in AI, building capability in the use of data, analytics and AI to ensure intelligent procurement of AI as part of projects for public benefit.14. Use AI to meet the challenges of Net Zero carbon emissions. Work on access to data, governance, to develop cleaner systems, products and services.15. Use AI to help keep the country safe and secure. Work with government departments/agencies and defence and security companies to ensure AI is available to assess and respond to modern defence and security threats and opportunities.16. Build on the work of NHSX and others to lead the way in using AI to improve outcomes and create value in healthcare. The UK’s comparative advantage will depend on smart strategies for data sharing, new partnership models with SMEs and skill-building.1. 
2 UK Research and Development Roadmap, UK Government ( July 2020)3 [To be published early 2021]1 
6	AI ROADMAPIntroduction
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is breaking into the mainstream of societies and the global economy.The history of AI is characterised by cycles of boom and bust, with waves of excessive hype followed by “AI winters”. This time things are different: advances in machine learning and neural networks have led to great advances in fields such as computer vision and speech recognition, and natural language processing, with numerous applications used by hundreds of millions of people on a daily basis. Safely harnessed AI is revolutionising certain types of tasks, disrupting business models, and complementing and enhancing human capabilities in wholly new ways. These tremendous advances have come from increasing the sizes of training data sets, and the associated networks and compute power, by factors of a million or more, along with modifications to the
underlying algorithms, many of which have been with us in some form for a long time. This accounts for tens of billions of dollars in global annual value creation, and looks set to increase markedly over the coming decade.4The UK has fundamental strengths in AI which reach back to the intellectual origins of the science, with figures like Alan Turing, Joan Clarke, Donald Michie and many others, to its ability to debate and enact sound governance of new technologies. Successive governments, businesses and civil groups have worked hard to make increasing amounts of data and information more available in ways that combine safety and usefulness.In recent years, the UK has been the site of an array of initiatives aimed at developing and deploying AI across the economy for society. Building on these with focus and structure will ensure AI is
7
an essential part of tackling the major challenges of economic recovery following the COVID-19 pandemic, of levelling up the UK economy through the creation of jobs and prosperity beyond London and the South East, of ensuring new forms of health and social care, of reaching net zero carbon emissions, and of ensuring resilience to future economic, health, or environmental shocks. It will also create entirely new opportunities for human flourishing.These fundamental strengths and recent initiatives have helped the UK to be amongst the global leaders in many areas of AI, from accelerating drug discovery5 to helping businesses make decisions that accurately factor in climate volatility.6However, the next few months and years will be crucial in determining where the UK places its desired level of ambition in AI, as massive investments by governments and businesses around the world are already priming themselves to influence the global conversation. The scale of effort elsewhere must not be underestimated: Germany has committed €3.1 billion towards a national AI strategy up to 20257, and France has pledged €1.5 billion up to 2022, with almost half earmarked for research.8 While the UK has played a leading role in the development of AI, the US has recently announced $1 billion over the
coming five years to open 12 new institutes that will keep the country at the forefront of research in AI and quantum computing9, and like-minded countries such as Canada and Germany are leading on commercialisation as measured by patents.10The Council calls for a UK National AI Strategy that creates an even stronger general base of support for AI. Scotland has already embarked on an AI Strategy and the UK strategy should be created in consultation with the devolved administrations and the wider ecosystem.The UK cannot, and need not try to, compete equally in all economic sectors so it must shape its strategy carefully to ensure it prioritises and is able to act selectively to lead and to capture markets around the world. In doing this it will need to consider its options for collaboration and competition within the international scientific and economic landscapes.
4 Some estimates show that leading nations could gain an extra 20-25% in economic growth and productivity gains through AI over the next decade. Modelling the impact of AI on the global economy, McKinsey (September 2018)5 Biotech harness AI in battle against Covid-19, Financial Times (May 2020)6 UK tech for a sustainable future, Tech Nation (2020)7 Germany AI Strategy Report, European Commission (March 2020)8 France AI Strategy Report, European Commission (February 2020)9 The Trump Administration Is Investing $1 Billion in Research Institutes to Advance Industries of the Future, The White House (August 2020)10 WIPO Technology Trends 2019: Artificial Intelligence, World Intellectual Property Organisation ( January 2019)11 Developing an AI Strategy for Scotland, Scotland’s AI Strategy (2019)1 
8	AI ROADMAP
The Council has considered how to diffuse the development of AI across sections of society that would help to both improve the lives of its citizens and bring economic benefits in the form of recovery and resilience. This has resulted in four pillars:ï support for research, development and innovation;ï literacy in AI across the population with enhanced AI-related skills at all levels of educational and lifelong attainment;ï sound physical, digital and virtual infrastructure, including robust and flexible regulation as a form of social infrastructure, resulting in good governance that boosts public trust;ï and pragmatic approaches to national, cross-sector adoption that meaningfully advances public and private sector applications.This Roadmap sets out the requirements in each of these areas in more detail and builds on the 2017 Hall-Pesenti AI Review. Its premise is that, in most areas, what the UK needs to do is to “double down” on the best of the investments it has already made, and to accelerate what’s proved to be ‘working building’ capability across organisations and sectors. Doing this is not easy, and least of all in the face of jobs at risk that could be made more vulnerable by the twin pressures of the COVID-19 pandemic and automation.12
Fundamentally, it requires commitments of a size, and for sustained timescales, that are often only possible at times of disruption such as the one the world is going through now with its response and recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. It therefore requires a degree of collective vision and of boldness, combining this leadership with the confidence to create spaces for entrepreneurism in all parts of society and the economy in order to find new ways to use AI to benefit everyone.In a small number of important areas this Roadmap points in new directions. As AI becomes more integrated into daily life, developing trustworthy technology is vital and businesses will require a novel approach to good governance and consideration of the ethical and societal implications of AI as part of the design process, with greater multi-disciplinary and cross-disciplinary approaches throughout. The UK needs to develop a world-class enabling environment with strong but flexible legislation and well- resourced, capable regulators able to provide responsive guidance and timely oversight.This Roadmap is not a draft strategy, and nor is it an instruction manual. This is a set of recommendations and we recognise it will not be possible to achieve all at once. This is why a National AI Strategy is needed to prioritise and set a time frame. We are ready to convene workshops across all of the areas laid out in this Roadmap, and more, to capture the full spectrum of thought across the
12 Who is at risk?, The Royal Society for Arts, Manufactures and Commerce (October 2020) finds that, broadly speaking, industries with the highest level of furlough take-up are more likely to be at risk of automation.
UK in a way that would lend itself to the development of a UK National AI Strategy. We have set out a clear direction that we believe will accelerate the UK to a positive technological future and start the necessary conversations needed to create a strategy that will enable the whole of the UK to flourish.
10	AI ROADMAP1. Research, Development and Innovation
AI’s full potential will only be realised in the UK if the government continues to create the conditions for leading edge research, development and innovation in AI for the public and private sectors, and if it creates the conditions for AI to work in and with multiple disciplines and areas of society and the economy.In common with some other parts of this Roadmap, what can seem like a restatement of general principles that could be taken for granted is, in fact, a challenging requirement for sustained systemic change.The government’s R&D Roadmap13 makes an excellent start in outlining some of the areas of systemic change that will particularly benefit AI. One of the most important commitments is to make the UK a place that is open and inviting to top talent. Demand for AI talent is at an
all-time high, and there is more to do to attract and retain the very best to the UK’s shores. Skills training, both at a research and workforce level, is vital to translate research, development and innovation, and suggestions are detailed in the forthcoming section.The government R&D Roadmap includes valuable commitments to strengthening the interactions between discovery and applied research, innovation, commercialisation and deployment. This is vital: funding either excellent basic or applied research in isolation risks the outputs and the people being easily transferred to other countries, so any competitive advantage can be easily and quickly lost, especially to other countries that have more resources than the UK. The R&D Roadmap also signifies support for entrepreneurs; creating a more place- based approach to research, development and innovation; and the
11
aspiration to be more imaginative in ways of ensuring that research and innovation is directly responsive to the needs and aspirations of society. This last point echoes strongly the views of the AI Council’s ecosystem.In addition to building on these broad directions, there are three areas which are more specific to AI and on which the government needs to take significant action.The Alan Turing Institute: local presences and global reachThe first is to build on the existing success of The Alan Turing Institute as a national champion for AI research, development and innovation in the UK. In a relatively short period of time the Turing has developed to play a pivotal role in promoting AI research across sectors and in attracting talent by leveraging its growing network. Over the past year, the Turing has attracted 77 new Turing Fellows, bringing the total to 369, and 21 new research associates alongside 116 events across their research portfolio, and a student enrichment scheme intake representing 36% female and 32% from BAME backgrounds.14 It has also reached out to crowdsource best practice for data science and AI research, was pivotal in creating a new discipline in data-centric engineering, and has worked across government to provide policy advice and operational support.
Concentrating on these beginnings, an enhanced and reshaped Turing will be a crucial part of the necessary research, development and innovation infrastructure but, to play that role fully, some changes are needed. The UK’s research system as a whole cannot reach its full potential while the original membership model has the effect of inadvertently excluding excellent research teams across the four nations. The UK needs the Turing to have a full national reach so that it can play its part in levelling up and in supporting talent and great ideas wherever they start. To do this, it will need to be able to bring together researchers, businesses, civil groups and the public sector to make great ideas work at all geographic levels and at a sector-wide scale.A new Turing model might, for example, extend both its virtual and physical presences to energise more regional and local activity. There are several ways to achieve such aims, building on the Turing’s convening role in the UK landscape to join up and build on existing teams and infrastructure. This could be delivered through Turing acting as a headquarters and convenor of a nationally network of centres-of- excellence or hubs, which may be physical or virtual, which would not only advance AI research but also development, innovation and deployment into the regions. Across these centres, skills training will be at both the research level and, most importantly, in apprenticeships, upskilling and reskilling regional
13 UK Research and Development Roadmap, UK Government ( July 2020)14 Annual Report 2019-20, The Alan Turing Institute (2020)
12	AI ROADMAP
workforces to exploit the opportunities of AI across sectors of the UK economy.Models for such centres might be based on, for example, UK’s National Cyber Security Centre, or focus on regions to support AI research, development and innovation capability to support the local economy.Well-funded institutes are becoming highly valued components of national AI strategies, and as a national institute of global standing, the Turing also needs the assured long term public sector funding that will give it and others the confidence to plan and invest for the medium term and strategic leadership for the UK, with the needs of academia, businesses, civil groups and the public sector reflected in its strategic direction. A well-funded UK institute would not only signal the UK’s commitment to remaining a globally leading player over the coming decades, it could also promote the UK’s interests through collaborations with international partners and enable it to play a significant role in building the international infrastructure discussed as part of the third pillar in this Roadmap.Sustainable funding would enable the Turing to provide visible national leadership on matters of AI security and ethics, and use this leadership role and connectivity across the landscape to ensure the UK remains at the forefront of next-generation AI developments, such as those involving machine learning from small data sets, and machine learning as part of wholly new types of neural
interface technologies.15 This added focus on how to leap-frog current machine learning-based AI technologies would enable the UK, through the Turing and its network-trusted and neutral status, to also become the place for Explainable AI, bringing us closer to safe, responsible and trustworthy AI.Challenge-led innovationThe significant promise of AI and its high risk, high reward, aspirational nature lends itself to goal-directed “moonshot” programmes in the style often associated with ARPA-esque models.16a Properly designed and delivered moonshot programmes play to AI’s strengths by requiring people to work across boundaries and existing organisational structures, and to build new relationships, networks and common languages in order to develop entirely new solutions to big challenges. In addition to this, there is a need for the UK to consider further the question of how AI interacts with people, and what it means to create effective human-AI partnerships.One such moonshot, directly relevant to AI, might involve a major challenge aimed at developing and establishing appropriate methods for safe, ethical, explainable and reproducible AI which will accelerate its use across many sectors. Another would be the development of an innovation ecosystem enabled by the UK Digital Twin programme, as discussed later in this
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND INNOVATION	13
Roadmap, within which AI would use these virtual worlds to explore real world optimisations that are beyond human scale.AI should also be built into moonshots in other sectors where it could play a major part, for example to radically accelerate materials science to develop new materials that can better store energy from renewable sources, or in solving for real-time control of the increasingly complex electricity distribution network as the country moves towards net zero emissions.Across all the potential types of challenge- based funding, programmes need to be selected and designed to draw in and accelerate AI’s integration across disciplines and sectors. One suggestion would be to select broad sectors that are more mature, and thus ripe for AI adoption than others, and use the mission-based approach to focus minds. This would bring together basic and applied research and multiple disciplines across research horizons and opportunities for systems development, helping to mature AI as a discipline.The specific vehicle for delivering moonshots is a ripe topic for discussion, but a forward-looking framework for research, development and innovation consisting of a series of labs, which conceive of and build fully engineered prototypes and platforms, could offer a flexible model of experimentation. These labs could generate vision-based
sequences of projects around moonshot challenges and could serve those with an interest in working between industry, academia and the public sector.By providing significant signals about potential future developments, moonshots create space for informed public and business engagement with the emerging science and applications. Under these circumstances the science and technology is not simply communicated to; it is inspired by, and carried out with, individuals, communities and businesses. Such space enables all those involved to explore how AI interacts with people and what it means to create human-AI partnerships. In turn, the projects will help define responsible and ethical practices to meet society’s needs and aspirations for a technology that behaves as people and businesses hope and expect: safely, securely and reliably.
15 iHuman perspective: Neural interfaces, The Royal Society (September 2019)16a The US’ Advanced Research Project Agency (ARPA) is a model designed to concentrate funding around pivotal investments in breakthrough technologies, often for national security purposes. DARPA (for Defense) is the most well-known ARPA agency in the US and is credited with developing a number of disruptive technologies such as stealth technology, the foundations of the Internet, and miniature GPS receivers.
14	AI ROADMAP
AI to transform research, development and innovationCapitalising on the promise of AI will continue to require investment in basic research into the fundamentals of AI itself. Researchers, increasingly working across disciplines, will need to address some of the fundamental challenges that remain, such as establishing a common language through which to develop data science projects or interoperability between datasets, which can drive smart collaboration. AI systems often rely on a narrow disciplinary base, and this needs to be broadened to cover an array of domains in an intelligent way. AI technologies need to get better at extending into areas where they do not have structured data, and to navigate effectively through that.At the same time AI is transforming the nature of research itself, with examples in particle physics and bioinformatics.16b For the UK to retain its status as a global leader in research, it needs to stay well abreast of the potentially disruptive effects of AI and other forms of data science which are beginning to be incorporated into all forms of knowledge creation, including the social sciences and the humanities. Given the availability of massive data sets and computer power, such disruptions could range from game-changing increases in efficiency in routine tasks such as searching texts or large observational data sets, to entirely new forms of enquiry brought about by AI’s ability to
spot new patterns and prompt new questions and insights, often across existing disciplinary boundaries.
16b AlphaFold: a solution to a 50-year-old grand challenge in biology, DeepMind (November 2020)
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND INNOVATION	15
16	AI ROADMAP2. Skills and Diversity
The Council’s vision is for everyone to be able to live confidently with AI, and for those who go on to work with it and to build it to do so with the very best foundation.For the most technically talented individuals we need to guarantee a best- in-class postgraduate offering to access globally attractive pathways that will contribute to the country’s renowned research base.Success will depend on increasing the diversity of people working on and with AI until those AI communities reflect the society they inhabit. It’s important to focus on diversity; not as an afterthought, but because doing so will generate crucial research questions and lead to the widest and most innovative range of future technologies which will serve the needs of the people. There are wonderful examples of emergent leadership,
creativity, and energy in promoting diversity but it is not enough. We suggest benchmarking and forensically tracking levels of diversity and inclusion in AI as the NCSC17 has recently done for cyber security, to make data-led decisions about where to invest and ensure that underrepresented groups are included in funding programs. Government must do more to encourage the best of the existing initiatives where diversity is enabled, and to expand with their own schemes and campaigns, if the needle is to be sufficiently moved.What everyone needs to knowThe UK needs to set itself challenging but realistic goals to ensure that every child leaves school with a basic sense of how AI works. This is not just about understanding the basics of coding or quantitative reasoning, or to describe the mathematical concepts; nor is it simply
17
about ethics. It is about knowing enough to be a conscious and confident user of AI-related products; to know what questions to ask, what risks to look out for, what ethical and societal implications might arise, and what kinds of opportunities AI might provide. Without a basic literacy in AI specifically, the UK will miss out on opportunities created by AI applications, and will be vulnerable to poor consumer and public decision- making, and the dangers of over- persuasive hype or misplaced fear.Over time, AI needs to be built into the curriculum as a specialist subject. As well as being its own subject AI needs to be part of computer science, citizenship studies, and as part of new ways of doing other subjects such as geography or history. These changes may take a decade to complete but getting there is essential. For now, the government should focus energy on the most effective existing curriculum enrichment initiatives, not as alternatives to fundamental changes to the curriculum, but because they provide opportunities to accelerate change in the short term.Further, Higher and Graduate EducationSince the AI Review in 2017, the government has invested significantly in schemes to promote graduate-level learning through Apprenticeships, Masters courses and PhD training. This is a good start, but only that. Current numbers would suggest there is unmet
demand to justify a five to tenfold increase in places compared to the numbers in the AI Review.To ensure a steady supply of skilled entrants to the workforce, and to send the right signals to young people making further academic choices, the UK should commit to scaling up its programmes significantly at all levels of education and maintain this commitment for at least a decade.Such a scale up would include AI-related Level 7 apprenticeships, Masters programmes, Centres for Doctoral Training and novel forms of PhDs. It would extend the scope of the schemes to include AI-related courses in disciplines outside those traditionally associated with data sciences, with a review of digital apprenticeship standards to identify where additional AI knowledge and skills ought to be unlocked. It must also include the postgraduate AI and data science conversion course programme announced by the government last year, whose 2,500 places for people to develop new skills or re-train. Properly implemented, this commitment would help level up access to economic development across regions. We must also ensure that no graduate student leaves university without some grounding in AI and its applications.
17 Decrypting diversity: Diversity and inclusion in cyber security, NCSC ( July 2020)17 
18	AI ROADMAP
Meanwhile the Turing AI Fellowships programme for established researchers, an international fellowship programme for AI in the UK in a partnership between UKRI, the Office for AI, and the Turing, has already seen a successful first wave,18 alongside the first batch of Turing AI Acceleration Fellowships.19 In line with the 2017 AI Review, this programme must continue to be developed and expanded so that momentum can be built to attract world-leading talent to the UK.These efforts, directed at the supply side, would allow graduates and apprentices to advance into emerging AI professions. They would need to be delivered across the country and to be available to young people of all backgrounds, ensuring that the UK’s future AI workforce reflects the diversity of background and thought needed to develop world leading AI capabilities that tackle the issues which matter most. Success will depend on collaboration between universities, colleges and businesses, not only in terms of how academia can help support continuous learning and upskilling within businesses, but also through business support such as mentoring, real life use cases and data to academia.Supporting every teacherThe key to progress in schools is to enable teachers to have confidence in the basics themselves, so they can make the best possible choices about how to engage their students. One way to make progress relatively fast would be to
extend the work of the NCCE, supporting it to provide comprehensive curriculum resources that cover AI at all Key Stages, and providing an incentive and opportunity for teachers to learn and develop their AI knowledge. A comprehensive programme aimed at all teachers and with a clear deadline for completion would enable every teacher confidently to get to grips with AI concepts in ways that are relevant to their own teaching.As in many other subjects, learning should combine access to knowledge about AI with exercises based on tackling real-world problems in ways that encourage the skills associated with problem-solving (including creativity and resilience) and team-working. Therefore new curriculum resources need to include curated data sets that will enable teachers to create the case studies and exercises that will in turn create the familiarity that leads all young people to increased confidence and data literacy.Lifelong learning and an online academy for AILooking across society, the scale of re- skilling and up-skilling that will be required is vast when you consider a population whose working lives may last more than half a century beyond the time they left school, college or university. The UK must contend with changing business models in goods and services, and the changing nature of professions and trades, and the priority of levelling up.
SKILLS AND DIVERSITY	19
These challenges point to the need for significant change in the contract between the state, individual and employer and a step change in the scale of continuous professional development and the ability to move between types of work.While these socio-economic trends cut across sectors and subjects, they represent an even more urgent challenge in AI where the required skills have recently emerged and are still changing rapidly.20 The government should consider the two following major steps.The first is extending business tax relief from investment in research, development and innovation to investment in specified forms of retraining and upskilling, including AI.A second step would be to enable the creation of an Online Academy for AI. Such an Academy could provide a key part of the social infrastructure necessary to support systemic change. Properly designed, such an Academy would provide the opportunity efficiently and creatively to meet several overlapping needs which emerge from different parts of this Roadmap. It might start by providing entry-level material to support life-long learning. Ideally, this would be accredited in a recognisable and portable way. In doing this it could also provide an entry-point and repository for online learning aimed at teachers, complementing the work of bodies such as the NCCE, and it would encourage the
growing national community of product managers retooling for the future in AI. Either separately, or integrated into the Academy, a ‘data skills observatory’ to identify and address the on-going and evolving data skills deficit function that would otherwise hinder AI innovation would also be needed.While the Academy’s main objective would be to enable more people to live and work with AI, it would also be well placed to help connect and support local initiatives involving public engagement and public dialogue as part of responsible innovation in new AI deployments, including moonshots. This sustained and distributed resource, rather than, say, a single educational or promotional campaign, would be an integral part of negotiating the benefits and the risks of AI across different applications and publics and finding new forms of settlement and new narratives. It would help to ensure that trustworthy information, in relevant and accessible forms, informed public narratives on AI across sectors and applications. It would need to be able to reach into the forefront of research, development and innovation, such as through the Turing, and to connect people and information for discussions on opportunities, the distribution of benefits and of risks, shortcomings and uncertainties.This kind of resource would in turn underpin the regulatory infrastructure that is outlined in the next section, by ensuring that public debates were consistently well-informed.
18 Welcoming world-class Turing AI Fellows to the Institute, The Alan Turing Institute (October 2019)19 New Turing AI fellows to deliver world-class AI research, UKRI (November 2020)20 Short, online courses can unblock gender and other diversity issues in digital skills education, Institute of Coding (September 2020)17 
20	AI ROADMAP3. Data,Infrastructure and Public Trust
The UK should aspire to be the best place in the world to access and use safe, secure and good quality data in order to develop new applications and business models.The UK should also be the best place for the public to exercise scrutiny of, and input to, automated decision making, in order to ensure the public can trust AI. To do this, the infrastructure it will need is not only physical, such as broadband networks and high performance computing capacity, but also virtual and social, encompassing processes, people, standards, governance and practices. A systemic reimagining of data availability and governance will be required across disciplines to transform traditional practices and public acceptability.As for other infrastructure assets of national importance, the government has a key role in funding and providing data
infrastructure. An important component to this should be in creating a cross- sectoral Information Management Framework that is AI-friendly and designed for clean, codified, real-time data so that it forms the best possible basis for private and public sector innovation.Trustworthy and accessible dataAI thrives on data, and makes new demands on data collection, curation and use. The government should focus its plans to make more public sector data safely and securely available, being clear about which data will be increasingly available, under what conditions and on what timescale. In the private sector, while regulators have begun good work to audit AI for personal data protection compliance21, more work is needed to help businesses seeking to use data for AI by creating the conditions for the
21
deployment of suitable privacy enhancing technologies.22 This should be furthered by accelerating work on translating the intent of a data sharing agreement into an actionable legal framework, and establishing guidelines for legal frameworks around different data sharing structures such as trusts, cooperatives and contracts.It will be important to note that while some AI systems will continue to rely on access to the largest possible data sets, volume should not be the only priority for schemes to promote access: some of the next generation of AI technologies will be designed to work with much smaller data sets. This illustrates a more general principle which is that the detailed infrastructure needed to make AI work in different markets is often very context- specific, and the UK will need a National AI Strategy that links general principles to industry-specific arrangements of governance to enable innovation and growth. One need shared by many markets, however, is in establishing data infrastructure to permit companies to safely share and access data to develop common AI-related products. The public sector should lead the way with examples of good data sharing practices.Good AI research, development and innovation relies on a bedrock of good data practices and there is much to do to improve the current position. This includes embedding data principles such as FAIR (Findable, Accessible Interoperable, Reusable), adopting open
licences where possible, working better with multi-modal data (big data, small data, noisy data, unstructured data) and enforcing an agreed supporting framework on what it means ethically and for society to share data for research purposes, and who owns it.Ultimately, developers of AI applications ought to consider the opening and sharing of research, analytics and data at the fundamental design stage. This should include encouraging digital research, development and innovation infrastructure, software and tools to be open and standardised; providing access to large-scale compute and data resources tuned to AI applications; and supporting the development and deployment of Trusted Research Environments, which enables collaboration and data access across several organisations.While previous work around best practices in data management and use has been helpful in setting the direction of travel, there remains a gap between the aspirations set out in these principles and their implementation, creating an additional barrier to the development of effective data access frameworks. Further work is needed to build a common language amongst data practitioners, building understanding of the nature of the datasets being used and how best to manage them. In many cases, data can outlive the systems that collected it, and conscious investment in trustworthy systems that can outlive the lifecycle of
21 Guidance on AI and Data Protection, ICO (2020)22 Privacy Enhancing Technologies, The Royal Society (March 2019)17 
22	AI ROADMAP
our standard modes of data management will reap many benefits.The emergence of a small number of big players in several digital markets has sparked a timely debate on the proper role of government and regulators in preserving and enhancing competition across the digital economy. The role of data as a driver of concentration and potential barrier to entry for smaller firms has been a central theme of recent reviews.23 The government has also recognised the growing importance of data access and openness to promoting competition and innovation, having established a dedicated Digital Markets Unit to advise on the functions, processes and powers which may be needed to address the challenges posed by fast-moving digital markets.24Whatever the government’s final decision, clear and flexible regulation will be critical to supporting good data practices, and can help to level the playing field for new entrants into digital and data-driven markets. There remains much to be done in interpreting existing data rules to support research, development and innovation and well-resourced, independent regulators can assist in providing guidance.In addition to these systemic changes, the government might consider enhancing the nations’ approach to data governance: making sure data is collected, used and shared in responsible and trustworthy ways. Not appropriately
addressing data governance frameworks would maintain a fundamental barrier to the adoption and diffusion of AI technologies and inhibit the quality of wider sources of data. We recommend a coalition of institutions and experts work together to develop standard data sharing agreements compliant with data protection and intellectual property law but providing practical exemplars, especially for business-to-business data sharing that could be adapted and adopted across the economy. Without a strong system of data governance, existing tenuous public trust in data use and sharing will persist, impairing the UK’s long-term leadership ambitions.Public trust and good governanceThreaded throughout discussions about AI is the need for adaptive and informed regulation and standards as part of an enabling environment of good governance, which includes public engagement, transparency measures and responsible research and innovation on the part of businesses through the lifecycle of AI operations. Achieving such a robust system of good governance is crucial to building the public trust and confidence in AI that will be essential to its uptake and long-term public acceptability.Recent events have demonstrated that public and private sector AI and algorithmic applications continue to be plagued by public scepticism and lack
DATA, INFRASTRUCTURE AND PUBLIC TRUST	23
widespread legitimacy. Developing and deploying trustworthy AI will be dependent on the UK strengthening its governing environment in a manner that both provides guidance and confidence to businesses to innovate and adopt AI, and reassures the public that the use of AI is safe, secure, fair, ethical and duly overseen by independent entities. This is beginning to be addressed in the National Data Strategy,25 but further exploration and scrutiny of appropriate governance mechanisms, particularly concerning public sector adoption of AI, is overdue.We highlight one example in this section -a public interest data bill - that may serve as a method of increasing accountability through public engagement.It is clear that there remains a fundamental mismatch between the logic of the market and the logic of the law.Technology markets extract value from collective data while laws respond to individual opportunities and threats. This has a critical impact on the public acceptability of data as infrastructure - data supported by people, processes and technology - and will only worsen if it is not sufficiently addressed.One method that could begin to combine new forms of innovation and accountability is to involve the public in considering new ways to complement individual rights-based approaches such as consent. These would include new ways of ensuring public scrutiny of automated decision-making and the types of transparency that lead to
accountability: revealing the purposes and training data behind algorithms, as well as looking at their impacts. They would include public engagement, including in algorithmic impact assessments. And they would look to ensure that existing regulations and regulatory bodies had not only the capacity, but also the capability to fully consider the implications of AI in areas such as labour, environmental, and criminal law. These three tenets: (1) clear transparency about automated decision making, (2) the right to give meaningful public input and (3) the ability to enforce sanctions could be encapsulated in a Public Interest Data Bill.26Fundamental to the development of AI systems is access to data. The UK’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted gaps in the UK’s capabilities in this space, in particular around the governance of ‘happenstance’ data, generated by individuals in the course of their daily activities.27 Trustworthy access to such data can help generate insights for public policy and research, enabling the government to better understand the impact of its policy interventions in rapidly-evolving circumstances. Their expertise in the collection and management of data means the Office for National Statistics is well-placed to lead the development of governance frameworks for these new data sources.Government should enhance their role inthis respect through the National Data Strategy and associated policy frameworks.
23 ‘Unlocking digital competition’, Report of the Digital Competition Expert Panel, UK Government (2019)24 New competition regime for tech giants to give consumers more choice and control over their data, and ensure businesses are fairly treated, UK Government (November 2020)25 National Data Strategy, UK Government (September 2020). Mission 2 regards a pro-growth and trusted data regime, and Mission 3 concerns transforming the government's use of data.26 The Data Delusion: Protecting Individual Data Isn't Enough When The Harm is Collective, FSI Stanford ( July 2020)27 Data readiness: lessons from an emergency, DELVE Report No 7 (November 2020)17 
24	AI ROADMAP
Making the UK the best place in the world to research and use AI requires it to be world-leading in the provision of responsive regulation and governance. While fundamental principles of good governance may be fixed and apply across sectors, the details will not, and this means that the systems of governance themselves need to be ready to respond and adapt more frequently than has typically been true of systems of governance in the past. We therefore suggest commissioning an independent entity to provide recommendations on the next steps in the evolution of governance mechanisms, including impact and risk assessments, best practice principles, ethical processes and institutional mechanisms that will increase and sustain public trust.Public trust in the applications of AI and algorithms depends on the trustworthiness of these applications and those that develop and implement these. Good governance also needs to encourage good culture amongst the individuals and organisations that are responsible for the development and application of advanced information technology. At the same time, the UK needs to continue investing in data- specific regulatory capacity and algorithmic accountability, ensuring that institutions are well funded to cover the advisory, enforcement and regulatory landscapes as sector digitalisation continues at pace. UK governance should combine sector-specific expertise with cross-sector insights, bringing regulators
in different sectors together to connect with each other and begin to experiment with new ways of encouraging safe AI innovation across and within their remit.Digital Twins and Living LabsApplying AI systems responsibly inevitably requires a great deal of development before getting anywhere near the physical world. Digital twins (a realistic representation of assets, processes, systems or institutions in the built, societal or natural environments) are increasingly recognised as important in many fields as they can provide insight into how complex physical assets and citizens behave in real time and can help organisations improve decision-making and optimising processes. An expanded programme to advance digital twin capability, with interoperable data standards, could help developers explore the potential for applications in the physical world but cheaper, faster and with less risk, as well as a better understanding of the implications and impacts to society and the economy. AI thrives when stitching digital twins together, using machine learning algorithms to analyse complex patterns and make decisions between different processes and systems alongside generating new insights with newly hybridised datasets.The National Digital Twin Programme, currently being driven by the Centre for Digital Built Britain, aims to create an Information Management Framework to
DATA, INFRASTRUCTURE AND PUBLIC TRUST	25
enable the building of digital twins across the built environment. Building on this work, a more ambitious cross-sectoral UK Digital Twin programme, governed by the Gemini Principles28, would be a moonshot challenge and would encourage more widespread use of open synthetic data to develop AI applications in many specific potential applications where the risks to individuals or society might otherwise be large. AI could also use these digital twins to explore real world optimisations that are beyond human scale.In developing those AI applications and AI models and testing with synthetic data, there comes a point when you must begin to model and rehearse in the real world with messy, unpredictable and diverse environments. To achieve this in a safe way without causing inadvertent harm, the UK needs to create a nationwide network of living laboratories, physical environments that start as representations of the real world but more constrained.AI will provide the embedded intelligence within all manner of new smart machines, many with autonomous capabilities, that can work collaboratively with humans to transform their productivity, safety and quality of life. By enabling the fast and safe development, testing and demonstration of new AI-based goods and services, including distributed software systems and intelligence embodied in smart machines and products, businesses, researchers and
citizens can gather the data and experience necessary to inform future policy, regulation, products and services.A globally leading roleFinally, the UK should urgently and sustainably build upon its strong international position. It is one of the top three countries in terms of research publications in AI.29 This strength combined with the UK’s diplomatic weight can be a catalyst to shape international discussions, but our leading international position is not guaranteed. We should therefore strengthen existing partnerships with other like-minded countries, such as France and Canada as well as consider carefully how to increase bilateral cooperation with countries like the US and China, such as through the recent declaration signed with the US to increase collaboration on AI R&D,30 to enable effective strategic action to shape a global AI landscape. One immediate way forward is to leverage our founding membership in the Global Partnership for AI (GPAI), a scalable club of like-minded governments ready to be led by experts on tackling the most pressing priorities for collaboration, where the UK is already leading on data governance.31The UK has a pivotal opportunity to play an influential role in the coming year as it adopts the Presidency of the G7 and the 26th UN Climate Change conference.Over this period the UK should use this opportunity to leverage global collective
28 The Gemini Principles were developed by the Centre for Digital Built Britain to guide the responsible development of digital twins and a National Digital Twin for the public good. The Gemini Principles Centre for Digital Built Britain (2018)29 Global AI Talent Report 2020, (October 2020); AI Research Rankings 2019, Medium (December 2019)30 Declaration of the USA and the UK on Cooperation in AI Research and Development, UK Government (September 2020)31 An open call for input from GPAI’s Data Governance Working Group, OECD (November 2020); we understand the recommendations from this working group will be incorporated into the National Data Strategy.17 
26	AI ROADMAPintelligence to advise on the biggest challenges AI presents and position the UK as a centre to operationalise recommendations, including those relating to the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals.Alongside global leadership on shared challenges, the UK ought to consider its own strategic advantage as we endeavour to become less dependent on critical technologies from non-allied sources of supply. Advancements in AI products and services underpin the capacity to compete economically but is also the domain of contests between overseas power bases and other nation states, which are sometimes not well aligned to the UK interest. One way to respond to this shift in geopolitical context is to invest strategically in research, development and innovation, choosing areas of national strengths such as AI and supporting them heavily with the aim of becoming globally competitive.If we align this strategic investment with the construction of broad coalitions of interest on the global stage, the UK can increase our sovereign capabilities and attract researchers and technologists with the skills to develop leading products in a number of competitive sectors. Government should also consider how to redefine procurement and intellectual property to encourage a creative technology ecosystem to achieve these aims.
DATA, INFRASTRUCTURE AND PUBLIC TRUST	27
28	AI ROADMAP4. National, Cross-sector Adoption
The preceding sections outline the pillars that would provide the basis for sustained uptake of AI across the country and the economy as a whole.This section proposes transitional and other more specific measures to boost initial take up and to evolve existing markets in the crucial areas of business adoption, startup & scale-up support, public sector adoption, health and social care, climate change, and defence.Business as smart adoptersAcross society and the economy, and since the first weeks of 2020, the COVID- 19 pandemic has accelerated the adoption of digital systems such as e- commerce platforms and marketplaces, and tools to enable remote working. The UK therefore has an opportunity to build on this momentum to showcase and reward the uptake of AI by encouraging
further investment and enabling business, especially SMEs, to be smart consumers for AI systems.Creating confidence so that business customers increasingly seek out AI solutions, knowing that they will be able to get sound advice and robust products, is crucial. There is further need to build on grants to access impartial advice on how to use digital and AI solutions to help the growth of SMEs that have been exacerbated by the COVID crisis.Scotland’s Data Lab is a good example of an initiative that fosters trusted collaboration between industry and AI expertise, having invested in 120 Collaborative Innovation Projects at approximately £12 million value over the last 5 years, and recently launched a Torch Business Advisory Service to support SMEs on their data journey.
29
The largest companies that are able to realise the potential of AI through business transformation find themselves increasing productivity, reducing costs and innovating faster to remain competitive. By ensuring the enabling foundations described in the first 10 recommendations are in place, the UK can also be a fertile ground for its existing FTSE 100 and the future 100.Supporting high growth AI startupsAs these businesses initiatives stimulate demand for AI products, we need to ensure that the AI startup and scaleup vendor ecosystem thrives. Supporting AI- first businesses by providing the necessary physical infrastructure to offer services to the largest and smallest local and multinational companies would help these businesses scale, develop and become the next multi billion dollar companies.The government should encourage more initiatives like Tech Nation’s Applied AI Program32 to directly support smaller startups to grow across the UK. The community welcomed an additional £200 million from the British Business Bank which increased VC funding to high growth companies,33 and there is a compelling argument to increase this funding, or alternatively to consider public investment in promising companies that seek to advance government priorities in a similar style to the National Security Strategic Investment Fund. For scaleups,
the funding gap that exists at series B+ means that AI companies struggle to stay under UK ownership. Government may consider supporting at this stage to ensure companies can take foreign investments in these rounds while also staying in the UK as they grow.The UK government needs to assist startups and scaleups to compete most effectively for the best talent. The Study Visa program may need to be extended now we have left the European Union. To this end, there is a prominent role for the government to position the UK as the go- to AI startup location in the region. It’s important to spread the message that the UK has more capital and talent than anywhere else34 and a unique proximity of buyer to vendor as well as being far easier to incorporate and run a business here than in Europe.To increase the number of SMEs and build the right entrepreneurial infrastructure for AI-first companies, it is also worth exploring the possibility of building on Innovate UK’s Knowledge Transfer Partnerships (KTPs), in which the government could introduce a series of AI-specific KTPs to stimulate market ready AI research in areas of direct relevance to businesses to commercialise research.The UK currently lacks a prominent cohort of professionals who understand the complex sales and leadership skills needed to build, articulate and sell AI tools and develop leaders of AI research labs, and there is concurrently a specific
32 Applied AI, Tech Nation (2020)33 Extra £200 million backing for British businesses, British Business Bank (April 2019)34 Tech Nation Impact Report, Tech Nation (2020); UK Tech For A Changing World, Tech Nation (2020)17 
30	AI ROADMAP
demand to increase the number of skilled product managers in AI. We recommend a marketing campaign and programs to encourage international product managers to come to the UK, and for UK citizens to focus their education or re-skilling in this direction. This would help turbo charge the UK’s ability to effectively commercialise the world class research coming out of our universities.Enabling public sector adoptionThe UK public sector will be a priority area when it comes to AI innovation. Improving policy-making processes (for example, ensuring it is more resilient to shocks to the system), and the provision of more efficient and effective public services (for example, using data-driven ‘real-time’ economic forecasts), built on strong ethical foundations, will become essential to improve the security and well-being of citizens.There is an urgent need to have a digitally and data enabled local and national government. To leverage the opportunities of AI in the public sector, there will need to be new ways of ensuring that data can be accessed and evaluated across public sector organisations. The government should ensure there is a central place for civil servants to access information about all of the AI-based tools and projects being undertaken across departments. AI should be used in projects that are outcome-based and only where
absolutely appropriate, and departments should learn rapidly from each other about what works well and what needs to evolve. In time, the focus should be on linking public sector data with private sector data, rapidly enhancing the insights that can be gained through diverse datasets and a more sophisticated adoption of AI.35Government should fund interdisciplinary pathfinder projects – requiring collaboration between industries and across government departments, with different academic disciplines – as a means of demonstrating the potential of AI technologies to support pathfinder projects and building capability in the civil service to deliver such projects.Importantly, the application of AI in the public sector should not fall explicitly on one department to lead. It may be that a Chief Information Officer embedded in the heart of government would work well to provide the strategic direction and leadership required for such a multi- stakeholder task.The huge benefits of data sharing will be worth little unless government departments are enabled to intelligently procure products that suit different contexts and services. More work is needed to demystify algorithmic decision making in government, with training programs for officials so they can suitably assess AI systems for themselves and see how it would be deployed as part of an increasingly efficient civil service. The ONS is working towards a target of 500
NATIONAL, CROSS-SECTOR ADOPTION	31
data analysts across government trained in data science techniques this year,36 and to enable a more thorough upskilling of AI and machine learning analysis, work should intertwine with the Turing, the Royal Society, the Royal Statistical Society and others in determining how data science and AI practitioners may be professionally standardised.Public sector bodies wishing to adopt AI often face challenges in building procurement capability. Governments have tried to enable public procurement to better support innovative goods and services, while ensuring value for money and relatively low risk. This government should continue to build on initiatives that have worked, such as GovTech and the guidelines for AI procurement,37 to allow the public sector to effectively purchase emerging tech such as AI. Greater AI adoption in the public sector through public sector procurement creates markets for data science and AI technologies to be developed, tested and deployed by government departments, to enable a pull-through of innovation from research, often via SMEs.It is important to note that evidence shows the human rights of the poorest and most vulnerable are especially at risk when public services are automated.38 As such we suggest this work is done carefully and with independent ethics
committees tasked to consider ethics, including social and economic impacts.Health and social careThe demands on healthcare are changing rapidly as populations drift, age, and their needs evolve, and with a huge reduction in the cost of measurement. With this ubiquity of such data, informed and improved interventions through prioritisation and personalisation can maximise benefit.Given the social and economic importance of health and the UK’s potential to build on market opportunities created by the NHS, the sector has been, and should continue to be, at the forefront of AI adoption. The importance of the link between health, mental health and social care has been especially clear during the COVID-19 pandemic, and we have also seen areas in which AI could have been better prepared to deal with that link if we had considered the promise of AI in this sector earlier. AI can help manage the complex information flow that is needed for the integration of these systems. NHSX, in delivering the Health Secretary’s Tech Vision39, is taking the lead in unblocking issues including (but not limited to) governance, data access and protection, and inclusion. The Council, who are supporting NHSX with their AI Lab40 and AI Awards,41 looks to NHSX to work with others across the research,
35 There is a fundamental need to consider transparency and data bias as public sector adoption increases, taking into account analysis and recommendations from, among others: Review on Artificial Intelligence and Public Standards, The Committee on Standards in Public Life (February 2020); CDEI review into bias in algorithmic decision-making, Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation (November 2020)36 Looking to the future at the Data Science Campus, Office for National Statistics (March 2019)37 Guidelines for AI Procurement, UK Government ( June 2020). Developed in collaboration with the World Economic Forum Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution.38 Statement on the Visit to the United Kingdom, by Professor Philip Alston, United Nations Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights, United Nations Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner (November 2018)39 The future of healthcare: our vision for digital, data and technology in health and care, UK Government (October 2018)40 The NHS AI Lab, NHSX (2020)41 Artificial Intelligence in Health and Care Award, NHSX (November 2020)17 
32	AI ROADMAP
development and innovation landscape to continue building towards these opportunities and developing best practice guidance for AI adoption in the healthcare sector.As the adoption of AI increases outside of the hospital setting, so too will the ‘datafication’ of networked digital technologies which create new health insights for individuals. This carries abundant opportunities for the preventative health of citizens, for example in stimulating new and more efficient ways to diagnose and prevent disease beyond clinical boundaries, but there are also significant concerns if not governed correctly. Individuals’ health quickly becomes legible to actors outside medical and clinical settings, for example inferred sensitive personal information held by online platforms, and appropriate oversight ought to be considered in how these technologies develop.We also encourage further development in areas with others in the sector where the UK can build a competitive advantage. Three particular areas stand out: the first is in creating a data strategy for health and care, which achieves clean, codified and real-time data with a strong sectoral data governance framework. The second is the opportunity to develop new models of partnership and incentives for partnerships between SMEs and the NHS that flourish and scale beyond ideation.The third opportunity would be to create a better understanding of the skills and knowledge required for citizens and
healthcare professionals living and working with AI technologies, building especially on the Topol review42 and NHS Digital Academy.Finally, building on the UK’s world-leading life sciences industry and increasingly digitally mature NHS, there is an opportunity to establish the UK as thego-to-place for biomedical research. With the appropriate governance in place, and through closer collaboration of the life sciences industry and the NHS, AI has the potential to empower large national trials more efficiently, including through the seamless adaptation of subjects to treatments.Climate changeAI technologies are an essential part of the toolbox for innovating to reduce greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, and to reduce the environmental impacts of goods, services and human activities. We are already seeing AI contributing to a greater grasp of complex environmental and sustainability systems, from forecasting supply and demand at real- time43 to combating illegal deforestation44 and understanding Arctic sea ice loss.45 One way to accelerate the use of AI for these purposes would be to build it into relevant moonshots, such as that on new materials for energy storage and renewables and create incentives for AI companies to address these and other Net Zero challenges.
NATIONAL, CROSS-SECTOR ADOPTION	33
The challenges to increased adoption of AI in related sectors, particularly in energy, has been explored elsewhere46 but echo similar constraints in other sectors, notably in the accessibility, interoperability and labelling of datasets that can contribute to cross-sector cooperation on energy and climate initiatives. The reality is also that the continued development of digital technologies, including AI and complementary technologies such as 5G and the Internet of Things, create an environmental impact that also needs to be monitored.As a part of the UK’s globally leading role in AI, there is an opportunity to carve out a leading path on the global stage where others see a similar need to increase the role of AI in energy and climate for public good. The UK should consider drawing up a plan that ensures responsible AI is suitable for the planet and helps build broader awareness, inform regulation, and incentivise researchers and developers to make more conscious and accountable decisions in these areas.Ahead of COP26, the UK should consider how to develop and showcase the UK’s ability in cleantech, which spans the entire country and represents a successful, innovative path to Net Zero,47 and use its spotlight to encourage an open, international digital ecosystem of data, algorithms and insights that can generate
reliable information in real-time about the state of the environment and interactions between the economy, society and the environment.Defence and securityAI is central to a broad range of defence and security applications, which are becoming increasingly data rich and networked. They require multiple sources of information to be brought together to understand a rapidly evolving situation, to determine a timely course of action and to oversee the enactment of the response. The information involved is often multi-modal (text, audio and video) and is invariably uncertain, incomplete and contradictory. Sometimes it is also intentionally misleading. AI methods are necessary to make sense of this volume, variety and velocity of information.However, further developments arerequired to scale the underpinning fusion techniques, to have them work in closer partnership with the humans involved, and to ensure the ensuing decisions and plans can be understood and justified.The increased connectivity of all aspects of our society means that digital assets are increasingly common, and valuable and physical assets are increasingly accessible remotely. These bring tremendous benefits, but also open up
42 The Topol Review advised the government on implementing technologies such as AI in the NHS and to enable NHS staff to make the most of them to improve services. The Topol Review, NHS (February 2019)43 Solar nowcasting with machine vision, The Alan Turing Institute (current research)44 The fight against illegal deforestation with TensorFlow, Google (March 2018)45 Understanding Arctic sea ice loss, The Alan Turing Institute (current research)46 AI Barometer Report, Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation ( June 2020)47 UK Tech For A Changing World, Tech Nation (2020)17 
34	AI ROADMAP
opportunities for interference and disruption, leading to a requirement for a secure, connected intelligence. AI techniques are necessary to monitor the complexity of these networked systems and to determine when they are operating normally and when they are not. As cyber-attacks become increasingly sophisticated, AI is needed to detect and respond to them.We welcome the commitment to create a new MOD agency for AI, and look forward to further detail in the Integrated Review in 2021.We are now living in a challenging economic and geopolitical environment in which global tech companies hold sway over national strategic advantages. By strengthening our ties with like- minded nations, the UK can increase our capabilities in co-creating technological developments, drawing innovations from oblique application areas and developing leading products which are then adopted by our allies. The broader AI community will be required to engage in this space as the security sector becomes more pervasive, and the government will need to find ways of working across demanding security frameworks to enable wider collaboration.Part of opening up wider collaboration on this front will require new levels of internationally competitive investment in advanced hardware technologies that serve the UK ecosystem, as the driving force behind fast and secure innovation.
Co-creation – at scale – of technological developments in an application agnostic environment (benefiting from innovations from other application areas) could be a potential model. This would also provide additional benefits to improved technological export capabilities for Britain, and further benefits to attracting world-class technologists and innovators in this space, not seen in Britain since the 1980s.
NATIONAL, CROSS-SECTOR ADOPTION	35
36	AI ROADMAPAcknowledgements
AI CouncilSir Adrian Smith FRSInstitute Director and Chief Executive, The Alan Turing InstitutePresident Elect of The Royal SocietyAlice Bentinck MBECo-founder, Entrepreneur FirstAnn CairnsExecutive Vice-Chairman, MasterCardChristopher Bishop FRS FRSE FREngLaboratory Director,Microsoft Research Cambridge Professor of Computer Science, University of EdinburghClaire Craig CBEProvost, The Queen’s College OxfordDavid Lane CBE, PhD FREng FRSE Professor and Founding Director, Edinburgh Centre for RoboticsKriti SharmaFounder, AI for GoodMáire O'Neill FREngProfessor, Centre for Secure Information Technologies, Queen's University BelfastMarc WarnerChief Executive Officer, FacultySir Mark Walport FRS FRCP FRCPath FMedSci FRSEChief Executive, UK Research and Innovation, 2017 to 2020
Martin TisnéManaging Director, LuminateNeil LawrenceDeepMind Professor of Machine Learning, University of CambridgeNick Jennings CB, FREngVice-Provost for Research and Enterprise, Imperial College LondonProfessor, Artificial Intelligence, Imperial College LondonDame Patricia Hodgson DBEMember of the Board,Centre for Data Ethics and InnovationPaul Clarke CBEChief Technology Officer, Ocado Group 2012 to 2020Pete BurnapProfessor of Data Science & Cybersecurity, Cardiff UniversityPriya Lakhani OBEFounder and CEO, CENTURY TechRachel DunscombeCEO, NHS Digital AcademyVisiting Professor, Imperial College LondonTabitha GoldstaubCo-founder, CognitionX UK AI Business Champion Chair, AI CouncilDame Wendy Hall DBE, FRS FREng Regius Professor of Computer Science, University of SouthamptonUK AI Skills Champion
37
Wider AI ecosystemIn October 2019 the Council put out a call for any interested individuals to be part of a wider ecosystem, to contribute to the Council’s work. Over 450 people responded, and the Council is grateful to them for their contributions over the last few months, including for their views on this Roadmap. This includes:Adrian Joseph OBE, Managing Director, Group AI and Data Solutions, BTAdrian Weller, Program Director for AI, The Alan Turing InstituteAlexandra Mousavizadeh, Director, Tortoise Intelligence teamAndrew Hopper CBE FRS FIET FREng,Vice-President, The Royal SocietyBrent Hoberman CBE, Executive Chairman and Co-founder, Founders FactoryCarly Kind, Director, Ada Lovelace InstituteDemis Hassabis CBE FRS FREng FRSA,CEO and co-founder, DeepMindFrank Kelly CBE, Professor of the Mathematics of Systems, University of CambridgeGerard Grech, CEO, Tech NationGillian Docherty OBE, CEO, The Data Lab ScotlandHayaatun Sillem CBE FIET, CEO, Royal Academy of EngineeringSir Ian Diamond FBA FRSE FAcSS DL,UK National StatisticianIndra Joshi, Director of Artificial Intelligence, NHSXJeni Tennison OBE, Vice-President, Open Data InstituteJohn Spindler, CEO, Capital Enterprise
Julia Adamson, Director of Education, British Computer SocietyLila Ibrahim, COO, DeepMindProfessor Dame Lynn Gladden DBE FRS FRSC FInstP FREng, Executive Chair, EPSRCMatthew Taylor CBE FAcSS, CEO, The Royal Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and CommerceProfessor Dame Ottoline Leyser DBE FRS,Chief Executive, UK Research and InnovationSir Patrick Vallance FRS FMedSci FRCP,UK Government’s Chief Scientific AdviserPhilip Colligan, CEO, Raspberry PiRoger Taylor, Chair, Centre for Data Ethics and InnovationSaul Klein, Co-founder, LocalGlobeSimon McDougall, Director, Technology & Innovation, Information Commissioner’s OfficeSimon Peyton Jones FRS MAE, Chair, National Centre for Computing EducationStan Boland, CEO, FiveAIStian Westlake, CEO, Royal Statistical SocietyStuart Russell, Professor of Computer Science, University of California, BerkeleyLord Tim Clement Jones CBE FRSA, Co-chair, AI All-Party Parliamentary GroupVanessa Lawrence CB HonFREng FRICS, Non-Exec Director, Satellite Applications Catapult and Non-Exec Director and Trustee, The Alan Turing InstituteZoubin Ghahramani FRS,Professor of Information Engineering, University of Cambridge


About the AI CouncilThe AI Council, an independent expert committee, provides advice to theUK Government and high-level leadership of the Artificial Intelligence ecosystem.The Office for Artificial Intelligence (a joint BEIS-DCMS unit) is secretariat to the AI Council.www.gov.uk/government/groups/ai-councilBEIS	1 Victoria Street, London, SW1H 0ET DCMS	100 Parliament Street, London, SW1A 2BQ© Crown copyright 2021You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0. To view this licence, visit OGL or email psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk. Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.Published January 2021
CollectionAlgorithmic Transparency Recording Standard HubThe CDDO and RTA are helping publicsector organisations provide clear information about algorithmic tools they use to support decisions.From: Government Digital Service (/government/organisations/government-digital- service), Department for Science, Innovation and Technology (/government/organisations/department-for-science-innovation-and-technology)  and Central Digital and Data Office (/government/organisations/central-digital-and-data-officPublished 5 January 2023Last updated 17 December 2024 —The Algorithmic Transparency Recording Standard helps public sector organisations provide clear information about the algorithmic tools they use, and why they’re using them.Algorithmic transparency means being open about how algorithmic tools support decisions. This includes providing information on algorithmic tools and algorithm- assisted decisions in a complete, open, understandable, easily-accessible, and free format.The Hub is made up of:The Algorithmic Transparency Recording Standard and template for completing a record (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/algorithmic- transparency-template)Guidance on using and completing algorithmic transparency records (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/guidance-for-
org anisations-using-the-algorithmic-transparency-recording- standard) A repository of published transparency records(https://www.gov.uk/algorithmic-transparency-records) Scope and exemptions policy for mandatory use of the Algorithmic Transparency Recording Standard (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/algorithmic- transparency-recording-standard-mandatory-scope-and- exemptions-policy)The Algorithmic Transparency Recording Standard is part of the government’s National Data Strategy. The strategy has a commitment to explore an appropriate and effective way to deliver greater transparency on algorithm-assisted decision making in the public sector. The National AI Strategy reiterated this commitment, with an action to conduct research that will help develop a cross- government standard for algorithmic transparency.In the AI white paper consultation response (https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/ai-regulation-a- pro-innovation-approach-policy-proposals/outcome/a-pro- innovation-approach-to-ai-regulation-g overnment-response) published in February 2024, we announced that use of the ATRS will become a requirement for all central government departments, with an intent to extend this to the broader public sector over time.The Central Digital and Data Office (https://www.gov.uk/government/org anisations/central-digital- and-data-office) (CDDO) and Responsible Technology Adoption Unit (RTA) developed the Standard collaboratively by working with civil society groups and external experts. It’s also informed by a public engagement study (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/cdei-publishes- commissioned-research-on-algorithmic-transparency-in-the- public-sector) run by the RTA and Britain Thinks.The Standard has been piloted with a variety of public sector organisations across the UK and the published pilot records are available on our report collection page (https://www.gov.uk/algorithmic-transparency-records).Following the pilots, the Standard was updated to reflect feedback, and we plan to review it every 6 months.Get in touch with us at algorithmic-
transparency@dsit.gov.ukPublished 5 January 2023Last updated 17 December 2024 + show all updatesAll content is available under the Open GovernmentLicence v3.0, except where otherwise stated	© Crown copyright
Industry Security NoticeNumber 2023/17 (Issued: 14/12/2023)Subject: Arrangements for the Handling and Transmission of Classified and Protected Information Concerning the Canadian Surface Combatant Frigate and UK Type 26 FrigateIntroduction1. This Industry Security Notice (ISN) is an update and replacement to ISN 2022/03 due to an update of the UK OFFICIAL and OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE Security Conditions.2. The purpose of this ISN is to inform contractors/suppliers of the specific arrangements that have been mutually agreed between the Government of Canada (CAN) and the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (UK) for the handling and transmission procedures for Classified and Protected Information at UK OFFICIAL (UK O), UK OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE (UK OS) and Canadian PROTECTED A & B levels between our two countries in relation to the Cooperation in the Development, Production and Follow on Support of the Canadian Surface Combatant (CSC) / Type 26 (T26) Frigate Programs.3. This mutual arrangement is in accordance with respective national security laws, regulations and the bilateral Industrial Security Arrangement (ISA) between the Government of Canada and the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland concerning the Protection of Classified and Protected Information which was signed on 7 September 2016. The ISA provides a government-to-government assurance for the Exchange and Protection of Classified and PROTECTED Information between CAN and UK authorities and respective suppliers under their jurisdiction.Arrangements4. The following arrangements have been agreed that sets out the policies, practices and procedures for the handling and transmission of Classified and PROTECTED Information related to the CSC/T26 Frigate program. By implementing these arrangements, Classified and PROTECTED Information may be provided and transmitted on a need-to-know basis subject to national release approval procedures from the Program Management Offices. The attached Annex F is provided in support of the following instructions:1. 
a. On a government-to-government level, it is recognised that there is currently no security classification equivalence for UK O and UK OS and CAN PROTECTED A & B markings. PROTECTED A & B information provided in accordance with CAN regulations will be supported by contract clauses to define the minimum security requirements for the protection of such information and as identified in the Program Security Instructions. Access to and protection of UK O and UK OS classified information will be supported by the UK O and UK OS Security Conditions. Canadian contractors will be required to handle and protect UK OS classified information in accordance with the “UK OFFICIAL and UK OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE Security Conditions” attached to ISN 2023/12 or any later edition of the Security Aspects Letter and Contractual Security Conditions ISN and any additional handling instructions provided by the CSC Program Management Office (PMO CSC).b. UK contractors will be required to handle and protect PROTECTED A & B information in accordance with the contract clauses and handling instructions that will be provided by CAN to inform recipients of the minimum security requirements for the protection of such information. PROTECTED A & B classified information should be handled and protected by CAN contractors in line with their national industrial security program policy.c. In general, access to PROTECTED A & B and UK O and UK OS classified information will be limited to those personnel who as a minimum, have been subjected to basic recruitment checks which should establish proof of identity, nationality, right to work, employment history and a check of criminal records as permitted under UK and CAN national laws, regulations and policies. (i.e. within the UK, the Baseline Personnel Security Standard (BPSS) will apply). For PROTECTED information, detailed requirements will be identified in CAN contract clauses and handling instructions.d. Canadian suppliers are not required to hold a Facility Security Clearance (FSC) or any other organization screening for access to UK O and UK OS classified information. Similarly, suppliers to UK MOD are not required to hold an FSC (i.e. FSC/List X) for access to PROTECTED information but must meet the requirements identified in the contract clause handling instruction provided by the Canadian International Industrial Security Directorate. The involvement of suppliers (e.g. subcontractors) outside of CAN and UK will be subject to national release approval procedures from the respective Program Management Offices.e. Classified information at UK OS level may be transmitted physically by UK contractors direct to CAN contractors in accordance with national procedures, which, may include the use of commercial couriers. Such transmission is subject to obtaining the necessary release approval from the UK PMO/information owner and the inclusion of the UK OS Securitya. 
Conditions at Annex to the Security Aspects Letter and Contractual Security Conditions ISN.f. Transmission of UK OS classified information by electronic means must be protected using cryptographic devices that have been approved by the UK MOD Security Authorities and/or respective PMOs. The availability of nationally approved cryptographic devices may be obtained from the respective Security Authorities. Classified information at the UK O level may be transmitted electronically in clear text subject to any ‘Handling Instruction’ provided by the UK PMO/information owner. Specific methods of transmission will be identified in the Program Security Instructions.g. When no longer required, or when a contract is completed, UK O and UK OS classified information may be retained subject to the contractual requirements/conditions. Disposal of such information must be via nationally approved methods of destruction, standards and/or as stipulated in the contractual conditions. Such disposal/destruction methods relate to information in paper or electronic form.h. The physical transfer of classified information/material as freight between the UK and CAN will be subject to approval of a Transportation Plan/Movement Plan by the respective CAN and UK PMO’s and Security Authorities.5. For UK suppliers, general advice on the handling and transmission of classified information can be sought from the following UK MOD Security Authorities:UK Competent Security AuthorityDefence Equipment and Support – PSyA-Security Advice Centre, Poplar-1, ~2004, MOD Abbey Wood, Bristol BS34 8JH E: DESPSyA-SecurityAdviceCentre@mod.gov.ukUK Designated Security AuthorityMinistry of Defence – Chief Operating Officer - Directorate of Security and Resilience (COO-DSR-IIPCSy), Level 4B, Main Building, Whitehall, London SW1A 2HBE: COO-DSR-IIPCSy@mod.gov.ukAction by Industry6. Suppliers based in the UK are required to follow the arrangements provided herein when releasing UK O and UK OS classified information to Canadian suppliers. Further advice for release of classified information to a supply chain1. 
outside of the UK can be sought from the Security Authorities listed above as necessary.Validity / Expiry Date7. This ISN is valid with immediate effect and remains so until further notice.MOD Point of Contact Details8. Ministry of Defence, Chief Operating Officer - Directorate of Security and Resilience (COO DSR-IIPCSy), Level 4B, Main Building, Whitehall, London SW1A 2HBE: COO-DSR-IIPCSy@mod.gov.uk
Department for Science, Innovation & TechnologyClosed call for evidenceCall for views on the Cyber Security of AIUpdated 2 August 2024
© Crown copyright 2024This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gov.uk.Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.This publication is available at https://www.gov.uk/government/calls-for-evidence/call-for-views-on-the-cyber-security-of-ai/call-for-views- on-the-cyber-security-of-ai
Ministerial forewordViscount Camrose, Minister for AI and Intellectual PropertyArtificial Intelligence (AI) is a vital technology for the UK economy and for supporting people’s everyday lives. AI is enabling organisations to provide better services to customers and offer people quicker access to information. The UK AI market is predicted to grow to over $1 trillion by 2035 and we are well positioned to continue to take advantage of the relentless improvements in AI capabilities. As adoption continues to grow across society, we must ensure that end-users are protected from cyber security risks. This is essential when so many other AI risks stem from an insecure system.Organisations in the UK face a complex cyber security landscape and we want to ensure that they have the confidence to adopt AI into their infrastructure. Currently, 47% of organisations who use AI do not have any specific AI cyber security practices or processes in place. It is therefore imperative that we ensure that AI is designed, developed, deployed and maintained securely.AI is identified in the UK’s National Cyber Strategy as a technology vital to cyber power and is listed as a critical technology in the UK’s Science and Technology Framework. This work on the cyber security of AI sits alongside wider government world-leading efforts to ensure the benefits of AI can be realised safely and securely. This includes hosting the world’s first AI Safety Summit in 2023; establishing the AI Safety Institute, the first government-backed organisation of its kind; and being the first government to publish an assessment of advanced AI’s capabilities and risks. Successful collaboration with our international partners will continue to underpin everything that we are doing on AI safety and security.As is the case for other areas of technology, from consumer ‘internet of things’ products to semiconductors, the UK advocates a secure by design approach. It is imperative that developers of software, including AI, are building security into the design process as well as across the entire lifecycle. In line with our approach, our work in this space is critical to set baseline cyber security requirements and ensure that these are adopted across the software and AI supply chain.I am therefore pleased to introduce this Call for Views on the Cyber Security of AI and a separate Call for Views on Software Resilience as a continuation of the UK’s leadership in this area. The government is proposing to take forward a two-part intervention on AI in the form of a voluntary Code of Practice that will be taken into a global standards development organisation for further development and sets baseline security requirements for stakeholders in the AI supply chain. Outputs from both these Call for Views will drive improved security behaviour across the software supply chain and increase confidence in organisations who adopt software products and services.Your engagement with this Call for Views will help the government develop and take-forward efforts to build a safer UK, where we can all benefit from AI. It will also support our ongoing work with industry and international partners because we recognise international alignment is crucial for this area. I look forward to continuing discussions on how the government, international partners, industry and civil society should collaborate and prioritise efforts to secure AI. Thank you for your contribution to this critical and generation-defining technology
area.Viscount CamroseParliamentary Under Secretary of StateDepartment for Science, Innovation and TechnologyExecutive summaryAI is transforming our daily lives. As the technology continues to evolve and be embedded, it is crucial that we ensure cyber security is a key underpinning of AI safety. This Call for Views sets out specific interventions to help secure AI, so that the many benefits of AI can be realised.This work has primarily focused specifically on the cyber security risks to AI, rather than wider issues such as safety or the cyber security risks that stem from AI. This work is relevant to all AI technologies, regardless of the sector in which AI is used or the form of AI technology, because security is an essential component and should be considered across the entire AI lifecycle. This work sits alongside wider government activity on AI, much of which is noted in the AI regulation white paper response (see Chapter 2).The government is proposing to take forward a two-part intervention in the form of a voluntary Code of Practice that will be taken into a global standards development organisation for further development. The proposed voluntary Code sets baseline security requirements for all AI technologies and distinguishes actions that need to be taken by different stakeholders across the AI supply chain.The voluntary Code of Practice was developed by the Department for Science, Innovation & Technology (DSIT) and is based on the National Cyber Security Centre’s (NCSC) Guidelines for secure AI system development which were published in November 2023, alongside the US Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency and other international cyber partners. The guidelines were co-sealed by agencies from 18 countries. The voluntary Code has also been informed by research we commissioned, including a risk assessment and a mapping of cyber security research in this area. Stakeholder engagement is a key component of our approach and will continue to be embedded throughout this Call for Views process and beyond.We want to enable AI developers to be able to distinguish themselves from their competitors by highlighting their commitment to security. We also recognise the importance of developing international alignment and ensuring that stakeholders that make up the AI supply chain have a clear understanding of what they need to implement. To that end, we’ve been engaging closely with international partners and mapped recommendations by industry and other governments to ensure this document sits in support of their efforts. We are also involved in various standards development organisations and multilateral fora to promote the need for security as part of discussions on AI (see Annex B).This publication is intended as the starting point of a much more extensive dialogue with our stakeholders, including industry and international partners. The cyber security of AI requires a global approach, as the risks cross international borders, and so international engagement has been a key element of our approach. We are now holding a Call for Views for 12 weeks until 9 August 2024 to gather feedback on the proposed interventions, including the Code of Practice and the intention to develop a global standard. The feedback will be used to inform UK government policy and our next steps.1: IntroductionBackground1.1 Artificial Intelligence (AI) has become a part of our daily lives and is used by organisations and individuals as a powerful tool to enhance the way we work, interact with data and achieve outcomes. As developers of AI continue to push the boundaries of what models and systems can achieve, it is imperative we address the risks AI presents so that we can continue to unlock the opportunities it offers.[footnote 1]1.2 In the UK, we are already seeing the vast benefits of AI. The UK is home to the third largest number of AI unicorns and start-ups in the world[footnote 2] and the AI industry in the UK employs over 50,000 people while contributing £3.7 billion to the economy.[footnote 3] AI is also bringing innovation to many sectors, such astransport, agriculture and crime prevention by helping to: detect fraud through machine learning algorithms that can identify suspicious transactions in real time;[footnote4]
 optimise public transportation systems by predicting passenger demand; and[footnote 5] improve organisations cyber security practices through the detection of threats.[footnote 6]1.3 As with any technology, the continued evolution and uptake of AI will also present challenges. To address these challenges, the government set out its pro-innovation and pro-safety regulatory framework, which will ensure that we are able to maximise the opportunities and minimise the risks of this fast-moving technology. The AI regulation white paper outlined five cross-sectoral principles to be applied by existing UK regulators, and a new central function to bring coherence and address regulatory gaps.[footnote 7]1.4 One of the five key principles of the framework is Safety, Security and Robustness. This means that AI systems should function in a robust, secure and safe way throughout the AI lifecycle, and risks should be continually identified, assessed and managed. To achieve this, we need to support developers and deployers of AI systems in addressing cyber security risks to their systems, which in turn will protect users of AI, and strengthen public trust.1.5 This is vital because cyber security is an essential precondition for the safety of AI systems and is required to ensure, amongst other things, privacy, reliability, and the secure use of models.1.6 It is imperative that we work towards a global solution for addressing the risks to AI models and systems. This requires a focus on collaborating with international partners to achieve consensus on baseline security requirements (see Annex B for further information on the international landscape).1.7 To complement international efforts to drive the adoption of cyber security in AI, we have set out in this document a proposed two-part intervention (Chapter 3) to create, firstly, a voluntary Code of Practice, that will then be used as the basis for the development of a global technical standard. This approach will focus on developing international alignment on baseline security requirements for AI models and systems.Scope1.8 This Call for Views is focused on addressing the cyber security risks to AI rather than wider issues relating to AI, such as safety or the cyber security risks that stem from AI. There is specific work on these areas being led by other parts of government (see the AI regulation white paper response for more details).[footnote 8]1.9 Security is an essential component underpinning all types of AI. Therefore, the scope of this Call for Views as well as the voluntary Code of Practice and proposed technical standard, includes all AI technologies, including frontier AI. We have ensured that this work aligns with other parts of government that are examining and addressing the risks associated with frontier AI. This reflects the scope of the AI Safety Summit 2023, the AI regulation white paper and the discussion paper on Frontier AI: Capabilities and Risks.1.10 We have also focused on the entire AI lifecycle because vulnerabilities in AI systems are not constrained to just one phase of the AI system. We have included below a diagram taken from the risk assessment that DSIT commissioned as an illustration of the different parts of the lifecycle process for creating an AI system.[footnote 9]Rationale1.11 As part of the Government’s commitment to deliver the National Cyber Strategy, the Department for Science, Innovation and Technology (DSIT) has undertaken extensive work with the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) to make AI systems more secure. This work should also be viewed within the context of the Government’s wider ambitions to make the United Kingdom a global AI superpower, as set out in the National AI Strategy.1.12 We advocate a secure by design approach across all digital technologies which places the responsibility on those that develop technology to build robust security into their systems (further detail on this approach is set out in Chapter 2). Millions of people and organisations are using AI models every day to access better services and information. We must ensure that these models and systems are deployed with security built in by design. Without security, the continued rapid adoption and embedding of AI will result in vulnerabilities being widespread with implications for users and their data, as well as possible national security issues if services relying on AI were compromised or became unavailable.1.13 We will continue to be actively involved in multilateral initiatives such as the G7, G20, OECD and UN. It is vital that cyber security is a core part of any international agreements and discussions among governments and other stakeholders. Further details on this can be found within Annex B. Our research and work on the voluntary Code of Practice will inform these multilateral discussions.1.14 We recognise the value of global technical standards in promoting good practices in cyber security. Technical standards developed through a consensus-based multi-stakeholder standards development process promote global interoperability and ensure stakeholders have alignment for baseline cyber security requirements.1.1 
1.15 We recognise that work on technical standards relating to AI is underway within multiple global standards development organisations and there is currently a limited focus on baseline security requirements for AI which must be addressed.[footnote 10] Further details on our proposed approach involving the development of technical standards can be found in Chapter 3.1.16 The UK is well positioned to drive forward these crucial discussions within international fora and in global standard development organisations because the UK has consistently demonstrated leadership in championing and developing cyber security for emerging technologies (detailed in Chapter 2). Our approach and proposed interventions have been determined by a comprehensive evidence base. We have also conducted a multi- stakeholder approach to ensure that our proposals are tested thoroughly with experts. This process within the context of AI is set out in more detail below.Methodology1.16 Our work has focused on three areas: Identifying and evaluating the cyber security vulnerabilities and risks to AI. Identifying and evaluating what research and recommendations have been published on addressing the cyber security risks to AI (this informed the development of policy options set out in Annex E). Understanding business attitudes towards adopting AI, their views on what is expected from AI developers and their cyber security approach for protecting their infrastructure within the context of AI.1.17 The content in this Call for Views is supported by various research studies commissioned by DSIT that form part of our robust evidence base. Alongside this Call for Views, we are publishing: a mapping of existing research on the cyber security of AI; a risk assessment of vulnerabilities across the AI lifecycle and how they could be exploited by malicious actors; and a business survey of 350 UK organisations to understand the cyber security processes organisations are implementing for AI technologies. Through this research we are ensuring that our proposed interventions are based on data and can meaningfully address the cyber security risks to AI.Further detail on our research is set out in Annex A.[footnote 11]1.18 In light of the various work being undertaken internationally, we have engaged with international partners, experts within standards development organisations, as well as other stakeholder groups, to ensure our work was thoroughly tested and complements wider international activity. We commissioned a further literature review which mapped both technical and general recommendations made by industry and other governments. This ensured that publications by the international community informed the development of the Code of Practice, and the requirements were written in the context of various initiatives (further detail can be found in Chapter 3 and Annex F).1.19 This Call for Views is the start of further dialogue with industry and international partners to ensure that users can securely benefit from AI. This work should be viewed in the broader scope of the Government’s initiatives in cyber security. The subsequent section offers a summary of various related Government activity linked to AI and cyber security.2: Our technology security programme2.1 All cyber security Codes of Practice produced by DSIT are part of the Government’s broader approach to improve baseline cyber security practices and cyber resilience across the UK. They sit alongside various other levers which have been used by the Government to deliver on the objectives of the current, as well as previous, National Cyber Strategies. The Codes of Practice provide guidance ranging from the development of baseline cyber security advice which all organisations should follow, moving progressively towards more product or domain-specific advice due to the increasing risk and evolving threat landscape. A modular approach has been developed to help organisations easily identify which Codes – and within those Codes, which provisions – arerelevant to them according to both their business functions, and the types of technologies they either use or manufacture.[footnote 12]2.2 In the case of the voluntary Code contained within this Call for Views, our expectation is that relevant organisations should, at a minimum, also adhere to the provisions in both the Software and Cyber Governance Codes of Practice. While the Cyber Governance Code of Practice sets the baseline expectations for all organisations using digital technologies, the Software Code will also be relevant since software is an integral part of how AI models and systems function. Organisations deemed in scope of this Code would also be expected to assess whether their circumstances warrant consideration of adherence to additional cyber Codes published by the UK Government which may cover specific products or services relevant to them.2.3 As noted above, this work on AI is closely linked to the Government’s recent publication on software resilience due to the inherent overlap between these technology areas. The Government previously held a Call for Views on software resilience and security for businesses and organisations in 2023. The feedback we received on the software resilience Call for Views highlighted the need for a voluntary Code of Practice that set2.1 
clear expectations with regards to the cyber security responsibilities of software vendors.[footnote 13]The UK’s Approach to Cyber Security2.4 The UK, as a global leader in cyber security, is committed to creating a safe online environment for its citizens. A foundational pillar of this approach is to ensure that both existing and emerging technologies are secure by design. By setting baseline cyber security expectations and incorporating them into the development of digital technologies at inception, we are laying the groundwork for efforts to safeguard users and businesses against evolving cyber threats, and to provide consumers with confidence in the technologies that they use. However, security also needs to be considered throughout the lifecycle of a technology, and the distinct security challenges presented by individual technologies need to be recognised and assessed.2.5 DSIT has led several initiatives that embed a “secure by design” approach, contributing to the UK’s strategic advantage and global cyber security leadership. These include: The creation of the world’s first mandatory and enforceable security requirements for consumer technology through the Product Security and Telecommunications Infrastructure (PSTI) Act.[footnote 14] This work built on the UK’s Code of Practice for Consumer IoT, published in 2018. Delivering the world’s first App and App Store Privacy and Security Code of Practice, which is being implemented by all major app store operators.[footnote 15] Building on the Capability Hardware Enhanced Risk Introduction Set Computer (RISC) Instructions (CHERI) research from the University of Cambridge, we have worked with Arm to develop a processor prototype thatintegrates CHERI capabilities to enable fine-grained protection of memory. This forms part of our Digital Security by Design programme.[footnote 16]2.6 A secure by design approach is only the first step towards UK-wide cyber resilience. To build on this, we must also focus on cultivating the necessary cyber security skills. This entails aligning our cyber skills development initiatives more closely with the needs of Critical National Infrastructure (CNI) sectors, the specific risks associated with new and emerging technologies which are being adopted, and with the resilience measures that we expect of organisations across the economy. In doing so, we are seeking to foster a skilled workforce capable of deploying the baseline cyber security expectations we set across diverse sectors of the economy.2.7 Another key part of building a more cyber resilient UK is identifying and mitigating cyber risks as they proliferate across digital supply chains. By providing guidance, we can help businesses and organisations better manage risks associated with the digital products and services on which they rely. Our work in this space includes: Cyber Essentials Certification, which is a Government backed scheme to certify that organisations have taken the minimum steps to protect themselves against the most common cyber attacks. The Cyber Assessment Framework, which supports organisations as they seek to assess cyber risks to essential functions. This is aimed at critical organisations such as those in CNI sectors. The Cyber Governance Code of Practice, which sets the baseline expectations for all organisations using digital technologies.2.8 Our ability to safeguard businesses and communities from cyber threats hinges upon our ability to both nurture technological and human capabilities, and to recognise and address complex risks on a macro scale. By prioritising secure by design, skill development, and targeted measures which improve resilience across all sectors of our economy, we seek to pave the way for a more secure cyber landscape in the UK.Supporting government activity on AI2.9 The work outlined in this Call for Views forms part of the Governments’ efforts to enable safe and trustworthy AI. An overview of the various activities being taken on AI can be found in the recently published AI regulation white paper response.[footnote 17] The response sets out how Government is implementing the regulatoryframework, including by preparing and upskilling the UK’s regulators, setting out the case for targeted binding measures on developers of highly capable general purpose AI systems, and preventing the misuse of AI technologies. We have set out below the key interlinking areas of work that are being taken forward within DSIT.2.10 The UK hosted the first AI Safety Summit in November 2023. Representatives from 28 nations, including the US, EU, and China endorsed the Bletchley Declaration, an ambitious agreement to support an internationally inclusive network of scientific research on advanced AI safety and ensure the benefits of technology can be harnessed for the good of all. Cyber security was an important aspect of the Summit and included in key documents such as the ‘Emerging processes for AI safety’ policy paper and the Bletchley Declaration itself.2.1 
2.11 During the Summit, the UK Government announced the creation of the AI Safety Institute (AISI), which will also be fundamental in informing the UK’s regulatory framework. AISI’s three core functions are to develop and conduct evaluations on advanced AI systems, drive foundational AI safety research and facilitate information exchange.2.12 The Summit also emphasised the importance of understanding the risks associated with AI and this work has sought to expand this area in collaboration with the activities being taken forward by the Central AI Risk Function (CAIRF). CAIRF brings together policymakers and AI experts with a mission to identify, assess, report on and prepare for AI associated risks on an ongoing basis. CAIRF will: Maintain a holistic view of risks across the AI ecosystem by monitoring current and emerging AI risks facing the UK and assessing their likelihood and impact. Report on AI risk to inform government intervention and regularly report assessments of risks and mitigations to Ministers and ensure coordination and interoperability with the National Security Risk Assessment (NSRA). Ensure that HMG can effectively respond to AI risks and issues if discovered.2.13 Data is the beating heart of AI and is the foundation for modelling, training and developing AI systems. Various functions across the UK government are taking a leading role in ensuring that AI and data can be used for good, safely. Our proposed Code of Practice and global standard will complement this work.[footnote 18]2.14 Our work on the cyber security of AI, which is the focus of this Call for Views, builds on existing and developing efforts to tackle risks stemming from the misuse of AI technologies. Taken together, this demonstrates the UK government’s ambition to ensure that the benefits of AI innovation can be realised safely and responsibly.3: Voluntary Code of Practice and Global Standard3.1 Based on the evidence available, set out in Annex A, we have determined that a two-part intervention based on a voluntary Code of Practice and a global standard will help address the cyber security risks to AI. Subject to feedback received, this will require finalising a voluntary Code of Practice and developing a global standardbased on this Code.[footnote 19]3.2 It is the Government’s intention, subject to the feedback of this consultation, to submit an updated voluntary Code of Practice to the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) in September 2024 to help inform the development of this global standard on baseline cyber security for AI systems and models. Taking the voluntary Code of Practice and research (outlined in 1.17) from this work into a standards organisation will ensure the future standard is of a high quality and informed by data and extensive global feedback.3.3 This Call for Views will only be the start of the process for stakeholders to contribute to this work. In addition to this Call for Views, we will continue to actively seek feedback and engagement as our work progresses. We also encourage stakeholders to participate in the standards development process, and to note that there will be a consultation phase for national standards bodies as part of ETSI’s typical standards development process.3.4 In addition to this Code of Practice, several other options (set out in Annex E) have been considered in support of the programme’s objectives. The Government created a criteria to assess the effectiveness of each policy option, including the voluntary Code of Practice and the creation of a global standard. Each intervention was tested to determine if it would address the issues raised from the evidence findings and promote baseline security practices in the development of AI models and systems.Rationale for a Code of Practice and global standard3.5 A key aim of the current and previous National Cyber Strategy has been to build international support for a “secure by design” approach as well as baseline security requirements across various areas of technology. [footnote 20] A Code of Practice and global standard would help achieve this objective (as set out in Chapter 1). Moreover;There are clear risks to AI and it is important that these are addressed so that millions of consumers and organisations can benefit from AI technologies. Baseline security requirements will help reduce the number of cyber attacks and therefore protect users’ data and the economy.Many organisations that are implementing, or considering adopting, AI do not have a clear understanding of what security expectations they should have from developers. A Code and technical standard will enable cyber security companies and certification firms to help companies with testing and assuring their products and services. This will enable users to more easily verify that the products they use are securely designed and developed, giving them greater confidence.We want to create a market ecosystem where AI supply chain stakeholders are looking to use security as a differentiator between their competitors. A technical global standard will help enhance an organisation’s
reputation and drive better practices across the industry. We want to ensure the UK continues to be a leader in AI and that our market is prepared for further developments in AI. As part of this, we support the ambitions of AI developers to create more sophisticated models and systems and view cyber security as a key enabler of this. A voluntary Code and technical standard will ensure innovation and safety in AI can develop in tandem.AI Cyber Security Code of PracticeBackgroundThis proposed voluntary Code of Practice was developed by DSIT and is based on NCSC’s Guidelines for secure AI system development which were published in November 2023, alongside the US Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency and other international cyber partners. The Code has also been informed by an assessment of the cyber security risks to AI as well as a literature review that mapped accessible technical recommendations made by industry and other governments. The findings of the literature review have been used to map relevant publications to the Code’s principles to offer an indication of where there are crossovers.[footnote 21]The Code sets out practical steps for stakeholders across the AI supply chain, particularly Developers and System Operators, to protect end-users. The Code applies to all AI technologies and will help ensure that security is effectively built into AI models and systems as well as across the AI lifecycle. We have applied this broad scope because a lot of the complexity in an AI system resides out of the model, and there is a significant dependency on data. It is important for stakeholders to note that this voluntary Code sits in support of the UK Government’s wider efforts for AI and regulations, such as UK data protection law. Stakeholders across the AI supply chain must ensure that they comply with their regulatory obligations. Considering the direct interlinkage between data and security within the context of an AI model and system; both areas are addressed through the Code’s requirements.Our expectation is that organisations in scope would, at a minimum, also adhere to the provisions in both the Software and Cyber Governance Codes of Practice. While the Cyber Governance Code of Practice sets the baseline expectations for all organisations using digital technologies as part of their business function, the Software Code will also be relevant since software is an integral part of how AI models and systems function. Organisations deemed in scope of this Code would also be expected to assess whether their circumstances warrant consideration of adherence to additional Codes covering more specific products or services depending on their business function.Millions of businesses and consumers are using AI models and systems, and it is important that they, and the global economy, can benefit from the opportunities provided by AI. It is therefore essential that as new updates are rolled out and new products come to market, security is a core consideration throughout the AI lifecycle. The Code is intended to help inform the policy and practices that organisations currently have in place.Furthermore, we recognise that several industry and standards bodies, as well as other countries, have compiled recommendations to address the cyber security risks to AI. This voluntary Code of Practice is designed to be complementary to, and supportive of, those efforts. This is particularly important when working groups have been set up in various standards development organisations, including the Secure AI Technical Committee in the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI).As set out in the Call for Views document, we are encouraging feedback from global stakeholders. This is because the Government’s intention, depending on the feedback received during the Call for Views, is to submit the updated voluntary Code to ETSI in September 2024 to help inform the development of a global standard.This Code will be reviewed, and if necessary updated, where there are changes in the technology itself, the risk landscape and the regulatory regimes.[footnote 22] We are therefore proposing monitoring and evaluation activitiesto assess uptake of the Code’s principles among key stakeholders (see Call for Views document – points 3.6 and 3.7).AudienceAn indication is given for each principle within this voluntary Code as to which stakeholder is primarily responsible for implementation. The stakeholders are defined as:Stakeholder	DefinitionsDevelopers	This encompasses any type of business or organisation across any sector as well as individuals that are responsible for creating an AI model and/or system. This applies to all AI technologies and both proprietary and open-source models. For context, a business or organisation that creates an AI model and who is also responsible for embedding/deploying that model/system in their organisation would be defined in this voluntary Code to be both a Developer and a System Operator.
System Operators
This includes any type of business or organisation across any sector that has responsibility for embedding / deploying an AI model and system within their infrastructure. This applies to all AI technologies and both proprietary and open-source models. This term also includes those businesses that provide a contractual service to organisations to embed / deploy an AI model and system for business purposes.

Data controllers
This includes any type of business, organisation or individual that control data permissions and the integrity of data that is used for any AI model or system to function. In the context of an AI system, there could be multiple data controllers involved because some data used to create a model could come from the organisation that is deploying/embedding the system in their infrastructure and other data could be from public databases and other sources.
End-users	This encompasses any employee within an organisation or business and UK consumers who use an AI model and system for any purpose, including to support their work and day-to-day activities. This applies to all AI technologies and both proprietary and open-source models. End- users are not expected or required to implement this Code. This stakeholder group has been created because the voluntary Code has placed expectations on Developers, System Operators and Data controllers to help inform and protect end-users.The table below gives examples of common cases involving different types of organisations that are relevant to this voluntary Code of Practice as well as the Software Resilience voluntary Code of Practice.Stakeholder Groups	Guidance
Software vendors who also offer AI services to customers/end-users
These organisations are a Developer and therefore are in scope of this Code and the Software Resilience Code of Practice.

Software vendors who use AI in their own infrastructure which has been created by an external provider
These organisations are a System Operator and therefore are in scope of relevant parts of the Code and the Software Resilience Code of Practice.

Software vendors who create AI in-house and implement it within their infrastructure
These organisations are a Developer and System Operator and therefore are in scope of this Code and the Software Resilience Code of Practice.

Software vendors who only use third-party AI (components) for their in-house use
These organisations are a System Operator and therefore are in scope of relevant parts of the Code and the Software Resilience Code of Practice.

Organisation that creates an AI system for in-house use
These organisations are a Developer and therefore are in scope of this Code.

Organisation that only uses third-party AI components
These organisations are a System Operator and therefore are in scope of relevant parts of the Code.
AI Vendors	Organisations that offer or sell models and components, but do not play a role in developing or deploying them, are not in scope of this Code. These organisations are in scope of the Software Code of Practice and Cyber Governance Code.What does the terminology mean in the voluntary Code of Practice?We have used “shall” and “should” terminology for each provision in the voluntary Code to align with the wording used by standards development organisations.[footnote 23] The table below sets out the definitions of these words in the context of the voluntary nature of this Code of Practice.Term	DefinitionShall	Indicates a requirement for the voluntary Code Should	Indicates a recommendation for the voluntary CodeCan/could	Indicates where something is possible, for example, that an organisation or individual is able to do something
Code of Practice PrinciplesSecure DesignPrinciple 1: Raise staff awareness of threats and risksPrimarily applies to: System Operators, Developers, and Data Controllers[NIST 2022, NIST 2023, ASD 2023, WEF 2024, OWASP 2024, MITRE 2024, Google 2023, ESLA 2023, Cisco2022, Deloitte 2023, Microsoft 2022]1.1. Organisations shall establish and maintain a continuous security awareness program to educate their staff about the evolving threat landscape specific to AI systems.1.1.1. The AI-Security security awareness content shall be reviewed and updated where necessary at least every six months.1.1.2. AI-specific security awareness training could be incorporated into existing infosec training for staff.1.2. Developer organisations should provide their staff with regular updates on the latest security threats and vulnerabilities that could impact AI systems1.2.1. These updates should be communicated through multiple channels, such as security bulletins, newsletters, or internal knowledge-sharing platforms, to ensure broad dissemination and understanding among the staff.1.3. Developers shall receive training in secure coding techniques specific to AI development, with a focus on preventing and mitigating security vulnerabilities in AI algorithms, models, and associated software.1.3.1 Developer training should also include content on how developers may leverage AI/LLMs to improve code security1.4 Developers shall receive awareness training in the characteristics of machine learning and AI systems in general that make them especially complex (and hence particularly vulnerable to technical debt and security issues) – these often include convoluted data dependencies, multi-layered software architectures, and intricate configurations.Principle 2: Design your system for security as well as functionality and performance[footnote 24]Primarily applies to: System Operator[OWASP 2024, MITRE 2024, WEF 2024, ENISA 2023, NCSC 2023, BSI1 2023, Cisco 2022, Microsoft 2022, G72023, HHS 2021, OpenAI2 2024, ASD 2023, ICO 2020]2.1 As part of deciding whether to create an AI system, a System Operator shall determine and document the business requirements and/or problem they are seeking to address.2.1.1 Data controllers shall be part of internal discussions when determining the requirements and data needs of an AI system.NCSC Guidelines for Secure AI System Development - other areas to consider include: The complexity of the model they are using, specifically the chosen architecture and number of parameters. The model’s chosen architecture and number of parameters will, among other factors, affect how much training data it requires and how robust it is to changes in input data when in use. The appropriateness of the model for their use case and/or feasibility of adapting it to their specific need (for example by fine-tuning). The ability to align, interpret and explain their model’s outputs (for example for debugging, audit or regulatory compliance); there may be benefits to using simpler, more transparent models over large and complex ones which are more difficult to interpret. The characteristics of training dataset(s), including size, integrity, quality, sensitivity, age, relevance and diversity the value of using model hardening (such as adversarial training), regularisation and/or privacy enhancing techniques. The provenance and supply chains of components including the model or foundation model, training data and associated tools. See NCSC Machine Learning Principles (https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/machine-learning) for more information.2.2 To support the process of preparing data for an AI system, Developers shall document and audit trail the creation, operation, and life cycle management of models, datasets and prompts incorporated into the system.2.1 
2.3 If a Developer and/or System Operator decides to use an external Application Programming Interface (API), they shall apply appropriate controls to data that can be sent to services outside of their organisation’s control, such as requiring users to log in and confirm before sending potentially sensitive information.2.4 Data controllers shall ensure that the intended usage of the system is appropriate with the sensitivity of the data it was controlled on as well as the controls intended to ensure the safety of data.2.5 Where the AI system will be interacting with other systems, (be they internal or external), Developers and System Operators shall ensure that the permissions used by the system are only provided as required for functionality and are risk assessed.This includes ensuring identities used by the AI system are constrained in scope and privilege to the access required. This includes external AI and non-AI fail-safes if necessary.2.6 If a System Operator chooses to work with an external model provider, they shall undertake a due diligence assessment of that provider’s security.This assessment could involve implement scanning and isolation/sandboxing when importing third-party models, serialised weights or untrusted third-party code.2.7 If a Developer and/or System Operator decides to use an external library, they shall complete a due diligence assessment.[footnote 25]This assessment could consider whether the model can be obtained as a safe model and if not, then doing checks to ensure the library has controls that prevent the system loading untrusted models without immediately exposing itself to arbitrary code execution.Principle 3: Model the threats to your system[footnote 26]Primarily applies to: Developers and System Operators[OWASP 2024, WEF 2024, Nvidia 2023, ENISA 2023, Google 2023, G7 2023, NCSC 2023, Deloitte 2023]3.1 Developers and System Operators shall undertake modelling of the threats to a system as part of their risk management process.NCSC Guidelines for Secure AI System Development: This modelling could include understanding the potential impacts to all AI-responsible stakeholders, end-users, and wider society if an AI component becomes compromised or behaves unexpectedly. Additionally, the modelling could be informed by AI-specific attacks and failure modes, as well as more traditional IT system attacks. The modelling could factor the total range of possible outputs, (including worst case scenarios), from AI components and their impact on the system.3.1.1 The risk management process shall be conducted to address any security risks that arise when a new setting or configuration option is implemented at any stage of the AI lifecycle.3.1.2 As part of this process, Developers shall create a document that includes a list of adversarial motivations and possible attack routes in line with those motivations.The type of attacks could include indirect attacks where attackers poison data which might later be used by, or sent to, the model.3.1.3 Developers shall manage the risks associated with models that provide multiple functionality, where increased functionality leads to increased risk. For example, where a multi-modal model is being used but only single modality is used for system function.3.2 Data controllers should conduct a data protection impact assessment when necessary as a measure under UK data protection obligations to determine what controls are needed.3.3 Where threats are identified that cannot be resolved by Developers, this shall be communicated to System Operators and End-users to allow them to appropriately threat model their systems.3.4 Where third-party organisations have responsibility for risks identified within an organisations infrastructure, System Operators should attain assurance that these parties are able to address the risk.3.5 System Operators should seek to apply controls to risks identified through the analysis based on a range of considerations, including the cost of implementation in line with their corporate risk tolerance.3.6 Developers and System Operators should recognise and accept that a level of risk will remain despite the application of controls to mitigate against them, and continuously monitor and review their system infrastructure according to risk appetite.Principle 4: Ensure decisions on user interactions are informed by AI-specific risks[footnote 27]Primarily applies to: Developers and System Operators
[OWASP 2024, MITRE 2024, BSI1 2023, Microsoft 2022]4.1 Developers and System Operators shall ensure that their system provides effective safeguards around model outputs through non-AI components and processes.This could also include the use of trained human oversight.4.2 Developers shall take steps to validate that the designed controls specified by the Data Controller have been built into the system.4.3 Developers should consider placing limits on the rate of model access (e.g. via APIs) to prevent attacks based on experimentation, and limit resource usage for single model inputs to prevent the overuse of resources.4.4 Developers and System Operators should ensure end-users are aware of prohibited use cases of the AI system.4.5 Developers and System Operators should be transparent with end-users about known limitations or potential failure modes to protect against overreliance.4.6 If a Developer offers an API to external customers or collaborators, they shall apply appropriate controls that mitigate attacks on the AI system via the API.Secure DevelopmentPrinciple 5: Identify, track and protect your assets[footnote 28]Primarily applies to: Developers, System Operators and Data Controllers[OWASP 2024, Nvidia 2023, NCSC 2023, BSI1 2023, Cisco 2022, Deloitte 2023, Amazon 2023, G7 2023, ICO2020]5.1 Developers, Data Controllers and System Operators shall know where their assets reside and have assessed and accepted any associated risks as they evolve.These assets could include AI models, data (including user feedback), prompts, software, documentation, logs and assessments (including information about potentially unsafe capabilities and failure modes).5.2 Developers, Data Controllers and System Operators shall have processes and tools to track, authenticate, manage version control and secure their assets.5.3 System Operators shall have the ability to restore their systems to a known good state in the event of compromise.5.4 All responsible stakeholders in this Code shall take steps to protect sensitive data, such as training or test data, against unauthorised access (see 6.2 and 6.2.1 for details on securing your data and other assets).5.4.1 Developers, Data Controllers and System Operators shall apply checks and sanitisation to data and inputs when designing the model [based on their access to said data and inputs and where those data and inputs are stored]. This shall be repeated when model revisions are made in response to user feedback or continuous learning [See principle 6 for relevant provisions for open source].Principle 6: Secure your infrastructure[footnote 29]Primarily applies to: Developers and System Operators[OWASP 2024, MITRE 2024, WEF 2024, NCSC 2023, Microsoft 2022, ICO 2020]6.1 Alongside implementing essential cyber security practices for securing system infrastructure[footnote 30], Developers and System Operators shall adopt appropriate access controls to their APIs, models and data, and to their training and processing pipelines.[footnote 31]6.2 Developers and System Operators shall create segregated environments to enforce sensitivity and threat boundaries.6.2.1 Developers, System Operators and Data Controllers shall create segregated environments for storing critical data, such as sensitive, training or test data [where this training data is not based on publicly available data – see 7.3.1 and 7.3.2].6.2.2 Developers shall also create a segregated environment for where research is done and where production models are developed and/or accessed.Stakeholders could use containerisation and virtualisation as methods for segregation. See NCSC containerisation guidance: https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/using-containerisation (https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/using-containerisation)6.3 Developers and System Operators shall implement and publish an effective vulnerability disclosure process6.1 
to support a transparent and open culture within the organisation.[footnote 32]6.4 Developers and System Operators shall create an incident management plan.Principle 7: Secure your supply chain[footnote 33]Primarily applies to: Developers, System Operators and Data Controllers [OWASP 2024, NCSC 2023, Microsoft 2022, ASD 2023]7.1 Developers and System Operators shall require suppliers to adhere to the same security expectations and requirements that they apply to other software components to develop new software/AI products. This shall align with their risk management policies.7.2 If a component is not produced in-house, Developers and System Operators should acquire and maintain well-secured and well-documented hardware and software components (for example, models, data, software libraries, modules, middleware, frameworks, and external APIs) from verified commercial, open-source, and other third-party developers to ensure robust security in your systems.7.2.1 Developers that choose to use any models, or components, which are not well-documented or secured shall be able to justify why, (for example if there was no other supplier for said component), and be prepared to share this explanation with end-users, and System Operators if required.Particular attention should be given to the use of open-source models, where the responsibility of model maintenance and security becomes complex.7.3 Developers and System Operators should be prepared to failover to alternate solutions for mission-critical systems, if their security criteria are not met.[footnote 34]7.3.1 Where training data has been sourced from publicly available sources, Developers and Data controllers shall need to validate that such training data will not compromise the integrity of their security protocols.7.3.2 Data controllers should continually monitor the source of publicly available data that could be used for creating a model, such as for changes in the data sources that may risk creating vulnerabilities.Principle 8: Document your data, models and prompts[footnote 35]Primarily applies to: Developers[OWASP 2024, WEF 2024, NCSC 2023, Cisco 2022, Microsoft 2022, ICO 2020]8.1 Developers shall document and maintain a clear audit trail of their model design and post-deployment maintenance plans.8.1.1 Developers should ensure that the document includes security-relevant information, such as the sources of training data (including fine-tuning data and human or other operational feedback), intended scope and limitations, guardrails, cryptographic hashes or signatures, retention time, suggested review frequency and potential failure modes.8.1.2 Developers should pay particular attention to document areas of model and system complexity that could lead to unexpected security issues, including details of software dependencies and configurations.8.2 Developers should ensure that model outputs include only the necessary information for downstream purposes and do not include additional meta-data that might be used for honing attacks against the model.Principle 9: Conduct appropriate testing and evaluation[footnote 36]Primarily applies to: Developers[OWASP 2024, WEF 2024, Nvidia 2023, NCSC 2023, ENISA 2023, Google 2023, G7 2023]9.1 Developers shall ensure that no models, applications or systems are released that haven’t been tested as part of a security assessment process.9.2 Developers shall validate that AI models perform as intended through testing.9.2.1 Developers shall work closely with System Operators for post-deployment testing when maintaining a system. (see 2.1.2 for more details)9.2.2 Evaluations of AI systems should involve red teaming or other adversarial testing as part of a whole system approach.9.2.3 Evaluations of AI systems should be undertaken by suitably skilled testers. Where possible, this should be an independent external evaluation.9.1.1 
9.3 Developers should perform benchmarking as part of their risk management process throughout the AI development lifecycle (see principle 2 for more detail).9.4 Developers should ensure that the findings from the testing and evaluation are shared with System Operators, to inform their own testing and evaluation.Secure DeploymentPrinciple 10: Communication and processes associated with end-users[footnote 37]Primarily applies to: Developers and System Operators10.1 In the context of AI, Developers shall state clearly to end-users (where possible) which aspects of security the end-user is responsible for and are transparent about where and how their data might be used, accessed or stored (for example, if it is used for model retraining, or reviewed by employees or partners).10.2 Developers should ensure that the organisation proactively supports affected End-users and System Operators during and following a cyber security incident to contain and mitigate the impacts of an incident. The process for undertaking this should be documented and agreed in contracts with end-users.10.3 Developers should provide end-users with guidance on how to use, manage, integrate, and configure the software product or service securely.10.3.1 In the context of AI, this should include the appropriate use of your model or system, which includes highlighting limitations and potential failure modes.10.3.2 Moreover, Developers shall inform end-users of additional AI model functionality, and allow an opt-out option.Secure MaintenancePrinciple 11: Maintain regular security updates for AI model and systems[footnote 38]Primarily applies to: Developers and System Operators [ICO 2020]11.1 Developers and System Operators shall ensure that when documenting their project requirements, their plans include conducting regular security audits and updates and working with external providers (where needed) to achieve this.11.2 Developers shall provide security updates and patches, where possible, and notify System Operators and End-users of the security updates.11.2.1 In instances where updates can’t be provided, Developers shall have mechanisms for escalating issues to the wider community, particularly customers and other Developers.To help deliver this, they could publish bulletins responding to vulnerability disclosures, including detailed and complete common vulnerability enumeration.11.3 Developers should treat major system updates as though a new version of a model has been developed, and therefore undertake a new testing and evaluation process for each to help protect users.11.4 Developers should support System Operators to evaluate and respond to model changes, (for example by providing preview access via beta-testing and versioned APIs).Principle 12: Monitor your system’s behaviour Primarily applies to: Developers and System Operators[OWASP 2024, WEF 2024, Nvidia 2023, ENISA 2023, BSI1 2023, Cisco 2022, Deloitte 2023, G7 2023, Amazon2023, ICO 2020]12.1 In line with privacy and data protection requirements, Systems Operators should log all inputs and outputs to/from their AI system to enable auditing, compliance obligations, investigation and remediation in the case of compromise or misuse.12.2 System Operators and Developers should also consider logging internal states of their AI models where they feel this could better enable them to address security threats, or to enable future security analytics.12.3 System Operators and Developers should monitor the performance of their models and system over time so that they can detect sudden or gradual changes in behaviour that could affect security.This can be achieved by using tools that detect anomalous inputs that will skew outputs, without knowing what malicious input looks like. There are specific methods that could be implemented to mitigate input that is out of distribution or invalid, such as outlier detection, anomaly detection, novelty detection, and open set recognition.
12.4 System Operators and Developers should analyse their logs to ensure that AI models continue to produce desired outputs over time.Monitoring and Evaluation3.6 The Code has been designed in line with our pro-innovation approach. Our intention is to allow flexibility via a principles-based approach when implementing the provisions and adaptation overtime as the area develops to reduce the burden on stakeholders in the AI supply chain. Further details on its scope and the stakeholders that must adhere to it can be found within the Code.3.7 The proposed Code of Practice would be voluntary; however, we will continue to work closely with interested stakeholders to determine if regulatory action is needed for AI in the future. To help support this, the Government’s intention is to undertake monitoring and evaluation uptake of the Code and its effectiveness at encouraging the outcomes that we hope to see in the AI ecosystem.4: How to respond to the Call for Views and our next steps4.1 DSIT will be holding an 12-week Call for Views on the document from 15 May to 9 August 2024. Stakeholders are invited to provide specific feedback on the interventions and make recommendations regarding other policy options via an online survey form. Please see Annex D for the full Call for Views Survey Questionnaire. We encourage stakeholders, particularly in the AI supply chain, to provide data on the financial and wider impacts associated with the implementation of the Government’s proposed interventions. All data will be treated confidentially, and participants will have the opportunity to identify themselves when they submit their responses or to be anonymous.4.2 During the Call for Views, DSIT will be organising workshops with industry bodies and holding meetings with international counterparts as part of our efforts to promote this work. We are also planning to attend UK and international conferences, including on specific panels so that we can present our approach to a global audience. If you would like to bring any related events/conferences to our attention or if you have any questions on the online survey please contact AIcybersecurity@dsit.gov.uk (by 9 August 2024). You can also submit written comments to the AI Cyber Security Call for Views, Secure Code and Standards, Cyber Security & Digital Identity Directorate, Department for Science, Innovation & Technology, Level 4, 100 Parliament Street, Westminster, London, SW1A 2BQ. DSIT plans to arrange workshops with industry to help gather feedback.4.3 Following the Call for Views, we will review the feedback provided. We plan to publish a response which provides an overview of the key themes from the Call for Views and DSIT’s future direction of travel. If there is support for a global technical standard, we will look to take this forward alongside increasing our participation across global standard development organisations.Annex A: Research findingsOverview of research studies and objectivesThe research field of AI Security is still nascent and has developed for the last 5 years. DSIT has commissioned targeted research to establish an initial evidence base to inform the development of our policy interventions, notably the Code of Practice.[footnote 39]The specific studies involved:An assessment of the cyber security risks to AI (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/research-on-the-cyber- security-of-ai/cyber-security-risks-to-artificial-intelligence) by Grant Thornton and Manchester Metropolitan University was completed in February 2024.A survey of 350 UK businesses to understand how org anisations are approaching AI (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/research-on-the-cyber-security-of-ai/ai-cyber-security-survey-main-report), particularly regarding cyber security. The survey was conducted by IFF Research and ran from January to February 2024.A literature review mapping the technical and policy recommendations made by industry and other governments. This was completed in February 2024, conducted by Professor Peter Garraghan of Mindgard, using information published since 2020.[footnote 40]A literature review of research on the cyber security of AI
(https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/663cf1b2bd01f5ed3279388e/Study_of_research_and_guidance_on_the_c yber_security_of_AI_-_Queens_University_Belfast_literature_review.pdf) involving an in-depth analysis of more than 415 publications, completed in February 2024 by Queen’s University Belfast.The key findings from the research are outlined below. The vulnerabilities and threats across various AI technologies are broadly similar to each other. The exploitation of vulnerabilities in an AI system can have a substantial impact on end-users, such as the loss of sensitive data linked to consumers and employees as well as providing malicious actors with a way of breaching an organisation’s infrastructure. Organisations generally lack awareness and understanding of what security should be built into models and systems and whether practices/processes should be in place when adopting AI to protect their organisations. Key organisations, governments and standards development organisations advocate for security requirements for AI models and systems. Vulnerabilities found in AI systems can enable the models and systems to be weaponised which can result in cyber attacks and significant harms on users.[footnote 41] The majority of the research conducted in the field of the Security of AI is being conducted by academic institutions. Out of the 415 sources on the cyber security of AI fully analysed by Queens University Belfast, only 28% were created by industry organisations.Threats to AI technologiesThe assessment of the cyber security risks to AI was commissioned to provide DSIT with an up-to-date analysis of the risk landscape of AI technologies. The assessment was formed from the findings of two literature reviews and subsequent interviews. The first literature review mapped and evaluated any previous research on the cyber security risks of AI, including known vulnerabilities. The second literature review examined government and industry reports to help frame the study.The assessment found that there were vulnerabilities throughout the AI lifecycle, across design, development, deployment and maintenance. The assessment also highlighted that there are significant commonalities in the defensive threats that are faced across all AI technologies.The assessment also examined how each of the vulnerabilities could be exploited and outlined the potential impacts that could result from this. These impacts included risking sensitive user data and breaches of an organisation’s network.The assessment mapped the various cyber attacks that had been conducted against AI technologies based on proof-of-concept publications and real-life case studies. It identified a total of 22 examples. Although only a few incidents were real-life examples, the assessment clearly highlighted the substantial effect that vulnerabilities can have on the safety of end-users.Organisational awareness of cyber security for AI systemsThe IFF Research survey was made up of 350 businesses who were either considering or had already adopted an AI technology within their infrastructure[footnote 42]. The survey included various cyber security questions, including whether the businesses had specific cyber security practices or processes in place for AI. Notably, nearly half of respondents (47%) had no specific cyber security practices in place specifically for AI and 13% were unsure. Of those without, or not intending to have, specific AI cyber security practices or processes, there were a few key reasons as to why they had not adopted specific practices. 14% had not considered it or did not know enough about it, and 14% said they do not use AI for anything sensitive. These findings highlight that a significant number of organisations lack cyber security practices for AI.The survey also asked participants whether there were specific cyber security requirements or features that they expect to be built into AI companies’ models and systems. Two fifths (39%) of respondents stated no and a third (33%) were unsure. This further highlights that businesses in the UK lack cyber security knowledge of AI practices and processes.Security requirements for AI models and systems are neededMindgard’s literature review sought to identify any recommendations that would help address the cyber security risks to AI. The report identified 67 sources that described 45 unique recommendations. These recommendations were divided into two categories, technical and general. It was evident that security requirements are seen as essential for this policy area, based on the overlapping requirements highlighted by
industry and governments. Notably, the author stated “there is evidence that many of the reported cyber security risks within AI strongly justify the need to identify, create, and adopt new recommendations to address them.” The assessment of cyber security risks to AI also highlighted this finding, as the report linked vulnerabilities, and their exploitation routes, to poor design and development practices.Based on the findings set out in this Annex, the evidence has suggested there is rationale for the Government to intervene to improve the security of AI.Annex B: Global approach to AIThe Prime Minister set out the government’s approach to managing frontier AI risk in October 2023. He stated: “My vision, and our ultimate goal, should be to work towards a more international approach to safety, where we collaborate with partners to ensure AI systems are safe before they are released”. International collaboration is a core element of this work to ensure that the cyber security requirements for AI are internationally aligned where appropriate. This annex details some key multilateral initiatives and international developments informing our thinking during this programme of work. We will continue to engage with a broad range of countries via bilateral dialogues as well as multilateral fora and initiatives.This international and collaborative approach underpins the UK’s effort as an established leader on AI, as demonstrated by hosting the first ever AI Safety Summit in 2023. Following the White House Voluntary AI commitments and building on the AI Safety Summit, the NCSC published their Guidelines for Secure AI System Development.[footnote 43] Endorsed by 18 countries, these Guidelines were developed by NCSC and CISA alongside industry experts and 23 international agencies and ministries, with representation from across the world. We will continue to promote international conversations on AI cyber security in the lead up to future AI Safety Summits. We will also continue to engage with a broad range of countries via bilateral dialogues and multilateral fora and initiatives to further inform our own thinking.MultilateralThe UK is taking a proactive role within multilateral discussions that link to AI cyber security and promote safe and responsible AI development, deployment and use across the world to protect citizens and our democratic values. These multilateral initiatives include:G7: Under Japan’s Presidency, the G7 launched the “Hiroshima AI Process” to address the risks, challenges and opportunities posed by AI. The UK was an active participant in the Hiroshima Process and will look to build on this positive progress under Italy’s Presidency.G20: In September 2023, as part of India’s G20 Presidency, the UK Prime Minister agreed to and endorsed the New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration, reaffirming the UK’s commitment to the 2019 G20 AI Principles and emphasised the importance of a governance approach that balances the benefits and risks of AI and promotes responsible AI for achieving the UN Sustainable Development Goals. The UK will work closely with Brazil on their AI ambitions as part of their 2024 G20 Presidency, which will centre on AI for inclusivesustainable development.[footnote 44]Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence (GPAI): The UK continues to actively shape GPAI’s multi- stakeholder project-based activities to guide the responsible development and use of AI grounded in human rights, inclusion, diversity, innovation, and economic growth. The UK was pleased to attend the December 2023 GPAI Summit in New Delhi, represented by the Minister for AI, Viscount Camrose, and to both endorse the GPAI New Delhi Ministerial Declaration and host a side-event on ohttps://beisgov.sharepoint.com/:x:/r/sites/CyberResilienceTeam-OS/Shared%20Documents/Communications%20%26%20core%20script/Cyber%20security%20forward%20look%20of%20   d=w20fc10c3dddd4ed4a0eccaa797eb8ee3&csf=1&web=1&e=0ribeLutcomes and next steps following the AISafety Summit. The UK has also begun a two-year mandate as a Steering Committee member and will work with India’s Chairmanship to ensure GPAI is reaching its full potential.Council of Europe: The UK is continuing to work closely with like-minded nations on a Council of Europe Convention on AI to protect and promote human rights, democracy, and the rule of law. The Convention offersan opportunity to ensure these important values are codified internationally as one part of a wider approach to effective international governance.[footnote 45]OECD: The UK is an active member of the Working Party on AI Governance (AIGO) and recognises its role in supporting the implementation of the OECD AI Principles and enabling the exchange of experience and best practice across member countries. In 2024, the UK will support the revision of the OECD AI Principles and continue to provide case studies from the UK’s Portfolio of AI Assurance Techniques to the OECD’s Catalogue of Tools and Metrics of Tools for Trustworthy AI.UN and its associated agencies: Given the organisation’s unique role in convening a wide range of nations, the UK recognises the value of the UN-led discussions on AI and engages regularly to shape global norms on AI. In July 2023, the UK initiated and chaired the first UN Security Council briefing session on AI, and the Deputy Prime Minister chaired a session on frontier AI risks at UN High Level Week in September 2023. The
UK continues to collaborate with a range of partners across UN AI initiatives, including negotiations for the Global Digital Compact, which aims to facilitate the Sustainable Development Goals through technologies such as AI, monitoring the implementation of the UNESCO Recommendation on the Ethics of AI, and engaging constructively at the International Telecommunication Union, which hosted the ‘AI for Good’ Summit in July 2023. The UK will also continue to work closely with the UN AI Advisory Body and is closely reviewing its interim report: Governing AI for Humanity.Technical StandardsTechnical standards are an important tool in supporting global governance of technology, international trade, and technology innovation and can be a tool alongside or in place of regulation. The AI regulation white paper identified a key role for technical standards and assurance techniques to support the implementation of the proposed AI regulatory framework, while enhancing global interoperability. Work on technical standards relating to AI is underway within multiple global standards development organisations, and the UK government is an active participant in these discussions. Cyber security standards, supported by industry and international partners, have an important role to play in driving change and protecting users. The UK actively works to uphold integrity in and reinforce the multi-stakeholder, industry-led global digital standards ecosystem which is open, transparent, and consensus-based. The UK aims to support innovation and strengthen a multi-stakeholder, industry-led model for the development of AI technical standards, including through initiatives such as the UK’s AI Standards Hub.[footnote 46]Working groups exploring aspects of AI are active in multiple standards development organisations, including the British Standards Institute (BSI), the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), the International Organization for Standardisation (ISO), the European Committee for Standardization (CEN), the European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardisation (CENELEC), the International Telecommunications Union (ITU), the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Standards Association (IEEE SA), the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) and the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). We are actively monitoring a number of these working groups and considering how we can effectively support efforts on technical standards relating to AI cyber security. At ETSI, we have led the creation of documents on secure AI principles, including the ETSI GR SAI 002 on Data Supply Chain Security.We welcome any contributions that AI developers and companies can make towards identifying, and coming to a consensus, on best practice. Several high-profile organisations and AI developers have produced documentation which we have used to inform the Code of Practice. We want to continue to work with UK industry leaders to ensure that we stay at the forefront of AI security.We welcome international engagement and dialogue on this topic and will collaborate, support and share information with the international community as we all look to ensure we extract the best from AI and realise its full potential.Annex C: Glossary of termsAI or AI system or AI technologies: products and services that are ‘adaptable’ and ‘autonomous’.AI ecosystem: the complex network of actors and processes that enable the use and supply of AI throughout the AI life cycle (including supply chains, markets, and governance mechanisms).AI life cycle: all events and processes that relate to an AI system’s lifespan, from inception to decommissioning, including its design, research, training, development, deployment, integration, operation, maintenance, sale, use and governance.AI risks: The potential negative or harmful outcomes arising from the development or deployment of AI systems.Application Programming Interface (API): A set of rules and protocols that enables integration and communication between AI systems and other software applications.Capabilities: The range of tasks or functions that an AI system can perform and the proficiency with which it can perform them.Evaluations: systematic assessments of an AI system’s performance, capabilities, or safety features. These could include benchmarking.Foundation model: a type of AI model that is trained on a vast quantity of data and is adaptable for use on a wide range of tasks. Foundation models can be used as a base for building more specific AI models.Frontier AI: For the AI Safety Summit, we defined frontier AI as models that can perform a wide variety of tasks and match or exceed the capabilities present in today’s most advanced models.
Input [to an AI system]: The data or prompt fed into an AI system, often some text or an image, which the AI system processes before producing an output.Large Language Models (LLMs): Machine learning models trained on large datasets that can recognise, understand, and generate text and other content.Prompt: an input to an AI system, often a text-based question or query, that the system processes before it produces a response.Segregated environments: Segregation is a process that separates critical environments and other less sensitive environments.Weights: parameters in a model are akin to adjustable dials in the algorithm, tweaked during training to help the model make accurate predictions or decisions based on input data, ensuring it learns from patterns and information it has seen before.Annex D: Call for views survey questionnaireDemographicsQ1. Are you responding as an individual or on behalf of an organisation? Individual OrganisationQ2. [if individual] Which of the following statements best describes you? Cyber security/IT professional  Developer of AI components  Software engineer Data scientist  Data engineer Senior leader in a company  Consumer expert Academic Interested member of the public Government official (including regulator)  Other (please specify)Q3. [if organisation/business] Which of the following statements describes your organisation? Select all that apply. Organisation/Business that develops AI for internal use only Organisation/Business that develops AI for consumer and/or enterprise use  Organisation/Business that does not develop AI, but has adopted AI Organisation/Business that plans to adopt AI in the future  Organisation/Business that has no plans to adopt AI A cyber security provider  An educational institution  A consumer organisation  A charity Government Other (please specify)Q4. [if organisation], What is the size of your organisation?Micro (fewer than 10 employees) Small (10-49 employees)Medium (50-499 employees)Large (500+ employees)
Q5. [if individual], Where are you based? England  Scotland  Wales Northern Ireland Europe (excluding England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland)  North America South America  Africa Asia Oceania Other (please specify)Q6. [if organisation], Where is your organisation headquartered? England  Scotland  Wales Northern Ireland Europe (excluding England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland)  North America South America  Africa Asia Oceania Other (please specify)Call for Views QuestionsQuestion 7:Q7. In the Call for Views document, the Government has set out our rationale for why we advocate for a two-part intervention involving the development of a voluntary Code of Practice as part of our efforts to create a global standard focused on baseline cyber security requirements for AI models and systems. The Government intends to align the wording of the voluntary Code’s content with the future standard developed in the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI).Do you agree with this proposed approach? Yes  No Don’t know[If no], please provide evidence (if possible) and reasons for your answer.Q8. In the proposed Code of Practice, we refer to and define four stakeholders that are primarily responsible for implementing the Code. These are Developers, System Operators, Data Controllers (and End-users).Do you agree with this approach? Yes  No Don’t knowPlease outline the reasons for your answer.Q9. Do the actions for Developers, System Operators and Data Controllers within the Code of Practice provide stakeholders with enough detail to support an increase in the cyber security of AI models and systems?Yes NoDon’t know
Please outline the reasons for your answer.The next questions are going to ask you specifically about the Code of Practice that has been designed and proposed by DSIT. There will be a question on whether you support the inclusion of each principle in the Code of Practice and whether you have any feedback on the provisions in each principle.Q.10 Do you support the inclusion of Principle 1: “Raise staff awareness of threats and risks within the Code of Practice?” Yes  No Don’t know[If Yes], please set out any changes you would suggest on the wording of any provisions in the principle. [If No], please provide the reasons for your answer.Q11. Do you support the inclusion of Principle 2: “Design your system for security as well as functionality and performance” within the Code of Practice? Yes  No Don’t know[If Yes], please set out any changes you would suggest on the wording of any provisions in the principle. [If No], please provide the reasons for your answer.Q12. Do you support the inclusion of Principle 3: “Model the threats to your system” within the Code of Practice? Yes  No Don’t know[If Yes], please set out any changes you would suggest on the wording of any provisions in the principle. [If No], please provide the reasons for your answer.Q13. Do you support the inclusion of Principle 4: “Ensure decisions on user interactions are informed by AI- specific risks” within the Code of Practice? Yes  No Don’t know[If Yes], please set out any changes you would suggest on the wording of any provisions in the principle. [If No], please provide the reasons for your answer.Q14. Do you support the inclusion of Principle 5: “Identify, track and protect your assets” within the Code of Practice? Yes  No Don’t know[If Yes], please set out any changes you would suggest on the wording of any provisions in the principle. [If No], please provide the reasons for your answer.Q15. Do you support the inclusion of Principle 6: “Secure your infrastructure” within the Code of Practice? Yes  No Don’t know[If Yes], please set out any changes you would suggest on the wording of any provisions in the principle.
[If No], please provide the reasons for your answer.Q16. Do you support the inclusion of Principle 7 “Secure your supply chain” within the Code of Practice? Yes  No Don’t know[If Yes], please set out any changes you would suggest on the wording of any provisions in the principle. [If No], please provide the reasons for your answer.Q17. Do you support the inclusion of Principle 8: “Document your data, models and prompts” within the Code of Practice? Yes  No Don’t know[If Yes], please set out any changes you would suggest on the wording of any provisions in the principle. [If No], please provide the reasons for your answer.Q18. Do you support the inclusion of Principle 9: “Conduct appropriate testing and evaluation” within the Code of Practice? Yes  No Don’t know[If Yes], please set out any changes you would suggest on the wording of any provisions in the principle. [If No], please provide the reasons for your answer.Q19. Do you support the inclusion of Principle 10: “Communication and processes associated with end-users” within the Code of Practice? Yes  No Don’t know[If Yes], please set out any changes you would suggest on the wording of any provisions in the principle. [If No], please provide the reasons for your answer.Q20. Do you support the inclusion of Principle 11: “Maintain regular security updates for AI models and systems” within the Code of Practice? Yes  No Don’t know[If Yes], please set out any changes you would suggest on the wording of any provisions in the principle. [If No], please provide the reasons for your answer.Q21. Do you support the inclusion of Principle 12: “Monitor your system’s behaviour and inputs” within the Code of Practice? Yes  No Don’t know[If Yes], please set out any changes you would suggest on the wording of any provisions in the principle. [If No], please provide the reasons for your answer.Q22. Are there any principles and/or provisions that are currently not in the proposed Code of practice that should be included?
 Yes  No Don’t know[If Yes], please provide details of these principles and/or provisions, alongside your reasoning.Q23. [If you are responding on behalf of an organisation] Where applicable, would there be any financial implications, as well as other impacts, for your organisation to implement the baseline requirements? Yes  No Don’t know[If yes], please provide any data to explain this. This will help the Government to quantify the impact of the Code and its requirements on different types of organisations.Q24. Do you agree with DSIT’s analysis of alternative actions the Government could take to address the cyber security of AI, which is set out in Annex E within the Call for Views document? Yes  No Don’t know[If no], please provide further details to support your answer.Q25. Are there any other policy interventions not included in the list in Annex E of the Call for Views document that the Government should take forward to address the cyber security risks to AI? Yes  No Don’t know[If yes], please provide further details to support your answer.Q26. Are there any other initiatives or forums, such as in the standards or multilateral landscape, that that the Government should be engaging with as part of its programme of work on the cyber security of AI? Yes  No Don’t know[If yes], please provide evidence (if possible) and reasons for your answer.Q27. Are there any additional cyber security risks to AI, such as those linked to Frontier AI, that you would like to raise separate from those in the Call for Views publication document and DSIT’s commissioned risk assessment (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/research-on-the-cyber-security-of-ai/cyber-security-risks-to-artificial- intelligence). Risk is defined here as “The potential for harm or adverse consequences arising from cyber security threats and vulnerabilities associated with AI systems”. Yes  No[If yes], please provide evidence (if possible) and reasons for your answer.Q28. Thank you for taking the time to complete the survey. We really appreciate your time. Is there any other feedback that you wish to share? Yes  No[If yes], Please set out your additional feedback.Annex E: Other interventions considered
Criteria that informed the development of the policy interventionsThe Government has created criteria to assess the effectiveness of each policy option. Each intervention was tested to determine if it would address the issues raised from the evidence findings (see Annex A) and promote the behaviours we want developers of AI models (see above) and those seeking to deploy AI to follow. We have included questions in the Call for Views questionnaire to gather further information to enhance our knowledge on the potential efficacy and impacts of each proposed intervention.Benefit vs Cost (to businesses, consumers and government) / potential value for moneyWe evaluated each intervention within the context of its impact on addressing the cyber risks to AI. We used the business survey results on costs and resources to inform our understanding, which will be supplemented by responses to questions in the Call for Views. We also considered each policy intervention based on if it would still be effective if there were significant changes to the Government’s plans or funding arrangements.Likely effectiveness and measurabilityEffectiveness was viewed in terms of whether each intervention would ultimately reduce the threat to users, improve AI security and how it will drive improved security for an organisation that utilises AI. Equally, it also consisted of evaluating whether the proposal could be measured to assess its impact.Barriers to ImplementationWe assessed each intervention in terms of its likelihood of adoption and support from key stakeholders and its ease of implementation. As part of this, we considered the timescale of implementation and whether there were factors faced by different stakeholder groups that needed to be considered.Unintended consequencesWe considered whether our proposed interventions would introduce the right incentives we wish AI developers and organisations to adopt, without introducing negative consequences as a side effect.Consistency with international approachesGiven the global reach of technology, we have focussed on aligning each intervention with international efforts. This aspect involved evaluating how an action could either foster international cooperation or potentially contradict or interfere with strategies adopted globally.Equity and Impact (on consumers and businesses in the market)We evaluated the impact of each intervention in terms of whether it disproportionately affected specific groups. This included examination of whether the intervention lessened competition and contributed to creating monopoly positions within the market. This should be viewed within the context of the government’s support for digital innovation (see below).Pro-innovation approachWe examined whether each policy option reduced the incentives for research and development within AI. We also examined whether the policy would prohibit or restrict products or services offered by AI companies and thus create further barriers of entry into the market. We are taking this pro-innovation approach as AI is already bringing extensive benefits to society, and we want to ensure future opportunities are not impeded by this work.Interventions that were considered by GovernmentA number of options have been considered in support of the programme’s objectives. The options set out below were considered against the criteria that informed the development of policy interventions.Measure	Rationale
Business Guidance
The responsibility for securing AI does not fall solely on one stakeholder in the AI Supply Chain. Therefore, we would welcome feedback on whether additional guidance is needed to supplement the proposed voluntary of Code of Practice; for example, this could be guidance targeted at a particular stakeholders or a particular phase of the AI lifecycle. This should be considered within the context of the significant guidance that has already been developed to date by NCSC to support organisations.

Consulting on regulation of proposed security requirements
As set out in the AI white paper response, the Government has committed resources to supporting regulators and, noted that in the future, there will be a need for a highly targeted set of binding measures that apply to the most powerful AI systems. However, it is critical that the Government understands the evidence more fully before we advance regulation. Additionally, based on previous work, it is essential that the UK works continues to work with international partners to build international consensus for baseline security requirements in this area. We will keep regulation under consideration but believe our work to finalise the voluntary Code of Practice and support efforts in global standards bodies should be the priority.

Creating a certification scheme based on the security requirements
It is important that any certification scheme is led by industry considering the various companies both in the UK and globally who provide an important service to help businesses assure products and services against specific requirements. Moreover, it is essential that international support is developed for baseline security requirements first so that any future certification scheme is based on principles that have consensus. We are therefore engaging with various countries as well as in standards development organisations and multilateral fora to promote
for AI companies
this work and the Code’s requirements.

Create a guide for AI developers to complete and provide for customers
The Government considered whether it would be useful for organisations to be provided with specific information on what steps an AI company had taken to secure their product. Based on engagements with stakeholders, the Government didn’t progress forward with this guide because of the burden it would put on organisations, and it could have brought about potential liability concerns. Additionally, we found that it would not necessarily drive the adoption of better security practices in comparison to a Code of Practice. The Government remains committed to increasing transparency in this field and welcome thoughts from stakeholders on how this could be addressed in the future.

Guidance for AI developers
In November 2023, NCSC published their Secure AI Guidelines for AI developers which provided useful information to help inform the development of models and systems. Based on our evidence and stakeholder engagement, the Code will be the most suitable document to lead on from this because it sets out the specific actions that stakeholders across the AI supply chain need to implement to help protect users. We considered whether guidance targeted at a particular phase of the lifecycle may be useful, but based on the findings of DSIT’s risk assessment, it was clear that there were risks in each phase that needed to be addressed. The Government welcomes feedback from AI developers if they believe further information on a particular area would be useful.

Guidance for consumers
While we advocate every user to take action to ensure their own digital safety and security, the Government is not progressing with this intervention because the burden for taking action to ensure a user is safe should not fall on a consumer in the first instance in the supply chain. The Code as well as the need for models and systems to be secure by design is essential if we want to ensure that consumers, businesses and the wider economy can continue to benefit from AI.

Awareness campaign targeted at organisations and users to increase understanding of security in context of AI
We recognise that there are many businesses in the UK who have not implemented AI within their infrastructure, and this may be because of a lack of understanding of what security requirements they should expect from AI developers as well as if they should have specific cyber security practices for AI models. However, our engagement and previous work has shown that the Code is a more effective lever to drive change because if we can ensure that the market is adopting the requirements then the burden on taking action will be significantly reduced on users. However, we would recommend that businesses take stock of DSIT’s Cyber Governance Code, NCSC’s Business Toolkit as well as NCSC’s specific AI guidance for businesses to help inform their commercial decisions.
Annex F: Bibliography of relevant publications mapped to principles by Mindgard[Amazon, 2023] Amazon, AWS Cloud Adoption Framework for Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, and Generative AI, Amazon White Paper, 2023.[ASD, 2023] Australian Signals Directorate, An introduction to Artificial Intelligence, 2023. [BSI1, 2023] Federal Office in Information Security, AI Security Concerns in a Nutshell, 2023. [Cisco, 2022]Cisco, The Cisco Responsible AI Framework, 2022. Online:https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/doing_business/trust-center/docs/cisco-responsible-artificial-   intelligence-framework.pdf (https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/doing_business/trust-center/docs/cisco- responsible-artificial-intelligence-framework.pdf)[Deloitte, 2023] Deloitte, Safeguarding Generative Artificial Intelligence with Cybersecurity Measures, 2023. [ESLA, 2023] ESLA, European Lighthouse on Secure and Safe AI, 2023.[ENISA, 2023] ENISA, Multilayer Framework for Good Cybersecurity Practices for AI, ENISA, 2023.[Google, 2023] Google, Google Secure AI Approach Framework (SAIF), 2023. Online: https://services.google.com/fh/files/blogs/google_secure_ai_framework_approach.pdf (https://services.google.com/fh/files/blogs/google_secure_ai_framework_approach.pdf)[G7, 2023] G7 Hiroshima Summit, Hiroshima Process International Code of Conduct for Organizations Developing Advanced AI Systems, 2023.[HHS, 2021] United States Department of Health and Human Services, Trustworthy AI (TAS) Playbook, 2021. [ICO, 2020] Information Commissioner’s Office, Guidance on AI Auditing Frameworks, ICO, 2020.
[Microsoft, 2022] Microsoft, Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Security, Microsoft Learn, 2022.[MITRE, 2024] MITRE, MITRE ATLAS: Mitigations. Accessed: January 10th 2024. Online: https://atlas.mitre.org /mitigations/ (https://atlas.mitre.org /mitigations/)[NCSC, 2023] NCSC, Guidelines for Secure AI Systems Development, 2023. Online: https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/files/Guidelines-for-secure-AI-system-development.pdf  (https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/files/Guidelines-for-secure-AI-system-development.pdf)[NIST, 2022] NIST, AI Risk Management Framework: Second Draft, 2022. Online: https://www.nist.gov/system/files/documents/2022/08/18/AI_RMF_2nd_draft.pdf (https://www.nist.gov/system/files/documents/2022/08/18/AI_RMF_2nd_draft.pdf)[NIST, 2023] A. Vassilev, A. Oprea, A. Fordyce, H. Anderson, Adversarial Machine Learning – A Taxonomy and Terminology of Attacks and Mitigations, NIST, 2023[OpenAI2, 2024] OpenAI, Introducing ChatGPT, Online: https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt(https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt), Accessed: January 9th 2024.[OWASP, 2024] OWASP, OWASP AI Exchange. Accessed January 12th 2024. Online: https://owaspai.org/(https://owaspai.org /)[WEF, 2024] World Economic Forum, IBM, The Presidio AI Framework, 2024. Online: https://www3.weforum.org /docs/WEF_Presidio_AI%20Framework_2024.pdf (https://www3.weforum.org /docs/WEF_Presidio_AI%20Framework_2024.pdf)1. We define AI developers as those organisations or individuals who design, build, train, adapt, or combine AI models and applications. In the context of the AI Cyber Security Code of Practice, this includes the companies and organisations, development teams, model engineers, data scientists, data engineers and AI designers who are responsible for creating a model and system.2. The Global AI Index (https://www.tortoisemedia.com/intelligence/global-ai/), Tortoise Media, 2023.3. UK unveils world leading approach to innovation in first artificial intelligence white paper to turbocharg e g rowth, (https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-unveils-world-leading-approach-to-innovation-in-first-artificial- intelligence-white-paper-to-turbocharg e-g rowth) Department for Science, Innovation & Technology, 2023.4. Artificial Intelligence in Banking Industry: A Review on Fraud Detection, Credit Management, and Document Processing (https://researchberg .com/index.php/rrst/article/view/37), ResearchBerg Review of Science and Technology, 2018.5. Frontier AI: capabilities and risks (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/frontier-ai-capabilities-and-risks- discussion-paper), Department for Science, Innovation and Technology, 2023.6. The near-term impact of AI on the cyber threat (https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/report/impact-of-ai-on-cyber-threat), National Cyber Security Centre, 2024.7. A pro-innovation approach to AI regulation (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ai-regulation-a-pro- innovation-approach/white-paper), Department for Science, Innovation & Technology, 2023.8. See AI Regulation White Paper Response for more details.9. See cyber security AI risk assessment document: Cyber Security Risks to Artificial Intelligence (http://xn--https- ix3b/www.gov.uk/government/publications/research-on-the-cyber-security-of-ai/cyber-security-risks-to-artificial-intelligence- systems), Department for Science, Innovation & Technology, 2024. More info here: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/research-on-the-cyber-security-of-ai  (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/research-on-the-cyber-security-of-ai)10. Such discussions are happening within the British Standards Institute (https://www.bsigroup.com/en-GB/) (BSI), the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (https://www.etsi.org /) (ETSI), the InternationalOrg anization for Standardisation (https://www.iso.org /home.html) (ISO), the European Committee for Standardization (https://www.cencenelec.eu/about-cen/) (CEN), the European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardisation (https://www.cencenelec.eu/) (CENELEC), the International Telecommunications Union (https://www.itu.int/en/Pages/default.aspx) (ITU).11. Research on the cyber security of AI (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/research-on-the-cyber-security-of- ai), Department for Science, Innovation & Technology, 2024.12. Cyber security codes of practice (https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/cyber-security-codes-of-practice), Department for Science, Innovation & Technology, 2024.13. Government response to the call for views on software resilience and security for businesses andorg anisations (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/government-response-on-software-resilience-and-security), Department for Science, Innovation & Technology, 2024.14. The UK Product Security and Telecommunications Infrastructure (Product Security) regime (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-uk-product-security-and-telecommunications-infrastructure-product- security-regime), Department for Science, Innovation & Technology, 2023.15. Code of practice for app store operators and app developers (updated)1. 
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/code-of-practice-for-app-store-operators-and-app-developers/code-of- practice-for-app-store-operators-and-app-developers-new-updated-version#the-code-of-practice), Department for Science, Innovation & Technology, 2023.16. Capability Hardware Enhanced RISC Instructions (CHERI) (https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/research/security/ctsrd/cheri/), University of Cambridge, Department of Computer Science and Technology.17. A pro-innovation approach to AI regulation: government response (https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/ai- regulation-a-pro-innovation-approach-policy-proposals/outcome/a-pro-innovation-approach-to-ai-regulation-g overnment- response#:~:text=The%20white%20paper%20proposed%20five,and%20leading%20AI%20safety%20experts.), Department for Science, Innovation & Technology, 2024.18. A pro-innovation approach to AI regulation: government response (https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/ai- regulation-a-pro-innovation-approach-policy-proposals/outcome/a-pro-innovation-approach-to-ai-regulation-g overnment- response), Department for Science, Innovation & Technology, 2024: this includes the Responsible Technology Adoption Unit, the Information Commissioners Office, States Threat to Data Directorate.19. This follows on from National Cyber Security Centre’s (NCSC) publication of their Guidelines for Secure AI Development (https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/guidelines-secure-ai-system-development), 2023. The Code is based on this document and the findings of the research.20. National Cyber Strateg y (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-cyber-strateg y-2022/national-cyber- security-strategy-2022), Cabinet Office, 2022.21. Research on the cyber security of AI (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/research-on-the-cyber-security-of- ai), Department for Science, Innovation & Technology, 2024.22. Standards, Specifications and Reports (https://www.etsi.org /standards/types-of- standards#:~:text=ETSI%20Technical%20Specification%20(TS)%20%E2%80%93,the%20document%20contains%20expl anatory%20material), ETSI.23. Foreword – supplementary information (https://www.iso.org /foreword-supplementary-information.html), ISO and A Guide to Writing World Class Standards(https://www.etsi.org /images/files/Brochures/AGuideToWritingWorldClassStandards.pdf), ETSI, 2020.24. See Guideline on “Design your system for security as well as functionality and performance” in Guidelines for secure AI system development (https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/guidelines-secure-ai-system-development), NCSC, 2023. Additionally, Software Vendors should review Principle 1 on “Secure design and development” for further requirements in the Software Code of Practice.25. Guidelines for secure AI System Development (https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/guidelines-secure-ai-system- development), NCSC, 2023: This will help ensure the library has controls that prevent the system loading untrusted models without immediately exposing themselves to arbitrary code execution.26. See “Model the threats to your system” and “Raise staff awareness of threats and risks” in Guidelines for secure AI system development (https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/guidelines-secure-ai-system-development), NCSC, 2023. Additionally, Software Vendors should review Principle 1 on “Secure design and development” for further requirements in the Software Code of Practice.27. See “Design your system for security as well as functionality and performance” in Guidelines for secure AI system development (https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/guidelines-secure-ai-system-development), NCSC, 2023. Additionally, Software Vendors should review Principle 1 on “Secure design and development” for further requirements in the Software Code of Practice.28. See “Identify, track and protect your assets” in Guidelines for secure AI system development (https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/guidelines-secure-ai-system-development), NCSC, 2023. Additionally, Software Vendors should review Principle 1 on “Secure design and development” for further requirements in the Software Code of Practice.29. See “Secure your infrastructure” in Guidelines for secure AI system development(https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/guidelines-secure-ai-system-development), NCSC, 2023.30. Organisations should review DSIT’s Cyber Governance Code of Practice (https://www.gov.uk/government/calls- for-evidence/cyber-g overnance-code-of-practice-call-for-views), NCSC’s Business Toolkit (https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/board-toolkit) and Cyber Essentials (https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/cyberessentials/overview).31. Strategies include: encryption of data at rest, technical access controls for the data to limit access according to least privilege principles, centralised access controls for the data, operational security to protect stored data, logging and monitoring to detect suspicious manipulation of data (e.g. outside of office hours).32. Software Vendors should review Principle 3 on Secure deployment and maintenance for further requirements in Software Code of Practice.33. See “Secure your supply chain” in Guidelines for secure AI system development, (https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/guidelines-secure-ai-system-development) NCSC, 2023. Additionally, Software Vendors should review Principle 1 on “Secure design and development” for further requirements in the Software Code of Practice34. See Supply chain security guidance (https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/supply-chain-security), NCSC, 2018, and frameworks such as Safeguarding artifact integrity across any software supply chain (https://slsa.dev/), Supply Chain Levels for Software Artifacts (SLSA), for tracking attestations of the supply chain and software development life cycles.
35. See “Document your data, models and prompts” in Guidelines for secure AI system development, (https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/guidelines-secure-ai-system-development) NCSC, 2023. Additionally, Software Vendors should review Principle 1 on “Secure design and development” for further requirements in the Software Code of Practice.36. See “Release AI responsibly” in Guidelines for secure AI system development (https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/guidelines-secure-ai-system-development), NCSC, 2023. Additionally, Software Vendors should review Principle 1 on “Secure design and development” for further requirements in the Software Code of Practice. See also AI Safety Institute (https://www.gov.uk/government/org anisations/ai-safety- institute) for testing AI models at the Frontier.37. See “Make it easy for users to do the right things” and “Develop incident management procedures (for further information)“ in Guidelines for secure AI system development (https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/guidelines- secure-ai-system-development), NCSC, 2023. Additionally, Software Vendors should review Principle 4 on “Communication with customers” for further requirements in the Software Code of Practice.38. See “Follow a secure by design approach to updates” in Guidelines for secure AI system development (https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/guidelines-secure-ai-system-development), NCSC, 2023. Additionally, Software Vendors should review Principle 3 on “Secure deployment and maintenance” for further requirements in the Software Code of Practice.39. Research on the cyber security of AI (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/research-on-the-cyber-security-of- ai), Department for Science, Innovation & Technology, 202440. A few research papers published from 2014 onwards were also included. See Cyber security for AI recommendations (https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/663cf205bd01f5ed32793891/Cyber_Security_for_AI_recommendations_-_Mindgard_Report.pdf), Department for Science, Innovation & Technology, 2024.41. pro-innovation approach to AI regulation: government response (https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/ai- regulation-a-pro-innovation-approach-policy-proposals/outcome/a-pro-innovation-approach-to-ai-regulation-g overnment- response), Department for Science, Innovation & Technology, 2024: See work linked to this area which is being led by DSIT‘s AI Directorate and Cabinet Office.42. The survey focused on seven key sectors, and therefore findings are not representative of the overall business population.43. FACT SHEET: Biden-Harris Administration Secures Voluntary Commitments from Leading Artificial Intelligence Companies to Manage the Risks Posed by AI (https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements- releases/2023/07/21/fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-secures-voluntary-commitments-from-leading-artificial- intelligence-companies-to-manage-the-risks-posed-by-ai/), The White House, 2023.44. G20 New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration, (https://www.mea.gov.in/Images/CPV/G20-New-Delhi-Leaders- Declaration.pdf) Ministry of External Affairs, 2023.45. CAI – Committee on Artificial Intelligence (https://www.coe.int/en/web/artificial-intelligence/cai), Council of Europe.46. About the AI Standards Hub (https://aistandardshub.org /the-ai-standards-hub/), The AI Standards Hub.All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated	© Crown copyright
United Kingdom Security VettingFormChange of Personal Circumstances - Financial Issues: ProcessUpdated 24 April 2024
Crown copyright 2024is publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where herwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-  ence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gov.uk.here we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from e copyright holders concerned.is publication is available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/change-of-personal- cumstances-questionnaire-financial-issues/change-of-personal-circumstances-financial-issues- ocess
If you hold a DV, SC or CTC security clearance and there is a significant change in your financial circumstances, you should inform UKSV of this change.Please be aware that you should now inform UKSV of a Change of Personal Circumstances (CPC) via the NSVS portal. All clearance holders are asked to use the CPC portal service. If you are unable to access the portal, please contact the UKSV Helpdesk (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/united-kingdom-security- vetting-contact-us) for support.All holders of a valid clearance can access the CPC portal service via NSVS.https://nsv.mod.uk/(https://nsv.mod.uk/)Copies of the Change of Personal Circumstances Questionnaire: Financial Issues and the Financial Questionnaire (form NSV003) are no longer retained on gov.uk. Clearance holders should access and complete these forms using the CPC portal process.If your organisation has specific prior agreement with UKSV that a manual form is required for a CPC you can request these forms, in these exceptional circumstances only, by contacting uksv-cpcs@cabinetoffice.gov.uk to explain your situation and request the appropriate forms for submission by email.Please note that the old UKSV-CPC-Grp@mod.gov.uk CPC mailbox was permanently closed from 1st December 2022.If you are submitting any information via an email form that directly relates to National Security or is protected information please do ensure that you reclassify this document as Official Sensitive and protect it accordingly. In these instances we would advise you to send the information via secure email rather than over the open internet.Where an email form will be accompanied by a completed Financial Questionnaire (form NSV003), consideration should be given to the statement below prior to sending.Before you send this information electronically, we must make you aware that if you are sending it over the internet (i.e. from a non-secure mailbox) then it may be open to abuse because it is transmitted over an unsecured network. Where possible you should use a work email on a secure network.
All content is available under the Open GovernmentLicence v3.0, except where otherwise stated	© Crown copyright
Industry Security NoticeNumber 2024/08 (Issued 16/08/2024)Subject: Changes to the MOD Form 680 process to incorporate US ITAR.Introduction1. The United Kingdom is adapting its existing Ministry of Defence Form 680 (now to be referred to as F680) security process to become the administrative vehicle through which it will review and enable the release of United States International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) controlled defence articles, including technical data, to foreign persons within or outside of the UK.2. The F680 is primarily a security procedure, that enables the UK Government to control when, how, and if Defence Related Classified Material is released by UK defence contractors, suppliers or companies to foreign entities, generally for the purposes of export promotion or sales of equipment or services.3. As part of the UK-US export control reforms, the UK has secured a commitment from the US for an exemption from the ITAR to enable easier defence trade between the UK, US, and Australia, bringing significant benefits to UK industry and reducing barriers to collaboration.Amendments4. To achieve these reforms it was necessary to amend the F680 process to incorporate the requirement for a UK contractor, supplier or company to apply for and receive an F680 approval to release ITAR material to any foreign entity, including where these transfers occur within the UK borders.5. Therefore, in addition to those already required to obtain F680 approval, namely:a. Those FSC cleared companies and,a. 
b. Those obligated to comply with the UK OFFICIAL and OFFICIAL- SENSITIVE Security Conditions;this requirement adds:c. Those Contractors who become part of the AUKUS Authorised User Community and,d. Those UK companies dealing with US ITAR controlled material.6. The F680 application form on SPIRE has been updated with mandatory questions requesting confirmation that the application includes the release of defence articles including technical data subject to controls under the ITAR. If yes, applicants will then need to provide the relevant references for the licence, agreement, or authorisation under which the ITAR material was received from the US. Applicants will also be required to detail how long the ITAR material will be in their possession, which will help inform therequirement for an F680 assurance inspection which the UK MOD has also introduced to enable the exemption from ITAR.7. This F680 change in coverage is not expected to affect any existing approvals, exemptions of conditions established with the US Government inrelation to ITAR. It also is not expected to affect any releases under any other US Government controls (e.g. FMS, EAR, PSA, etc.).8. The current F680 online system (administered through the SPIRE Export Licensing system) cannot process applications where there is no foreign recipient. Accordingly, there is no requirement for F680 approval for releases of ITAR material to other UK recipients.9. It is also envisaged that there will not normally be a requirement for F680 approval for releases of ITAR material, to US recipients, however, we understand there are some instances where US Government approval is required prior to the release of ITAR material from the UK to the US. Accordingly, in these instances, a F680 could be expected to also be applicable.Action by Industry10. These	changes	will		take	effect	from		16th		August	2024,	with		an implementation	period	lasting		until		the	1st	September	2024.	This1. 
implementation period allows industry to apply for and receive F680 approval for foreign releases of ITAR material that are required during or immediately after this period.11. These changes will affect new F680 applications only. Existing F680 approvals will not need to be amended/re-submitted.12. Industry will be expected to raise new F680 applications for foreign releases of their ITAR material, in addition to any approvals received from the US.Validity/Expiry DateThis ISN is valid with immediate effect and remains so until further notice.MOD Point of Contact DetailsThe Export Control Joint Unit MOD Team (ECJU MOD) are the implementing authority for the F680 process. All questions should be directed to them in the first instance:Export Control Joint Unit MOD Team Department for Business and Trade Old Admiralty Building,Admiralty Place, Whitehall, London,SW1A 2DYE-mail: ECJU-MODTeam@mod.gov.ukThe MOD Directorate of Security and Resilience have been responsible for the development of the F680 policy requirement and its amendment to include ITAR material:Ministry of Defence,Chief Operating Officer, Directorate of Security and Resilience (COO-DSR- IIPCSy),Level 4, Zone B, Main Building, Whitehall,London. SW1A 2HBE-mail: COO-DSR-IIPCSy@mod.gov.uk
 Chapter 1 IntroductionRevision to Emergency PreparednessCivil Contingencies Act Enhancement ProgrammeMarch 2012
Chapter 1 (Introduction) of Emergency Preparedness, Revised Version
12.1. Part 1 of the Civil Contingencies Act 2004 (“the Act”) establishes a consistent level of civil protection activity across the UK. Consistency is sought too in the way the function is carried out between the local Category 1 and 2 responders as partners covered by the Act, and in different parts of the country.12.2. The Act provides a basic framework defining what tasks should be performed and how co-operation should be conducted.12.3. Local responders work to a common framework, and make their own decisions in the light of local circumstances and priorities about what planning arrangements are appropriate in their areas.Purpose12.4. The purpose of Emergency Preparedness is to accompany Part 1 of the Act, and its supporting Regulations (The Civil Contingencies Act 2004 (Contingency Planning) Regulations 2012) (the Regulations). Integrated emergency management (IEM) comprises six related activities: anticipation, assessment, prevention, preparation, response and recovery. A volume of non-statutory guidance Emergency Response and Recovery http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/content/emergency-response-and-recovery, describes the multi-agency framework for responding to, and recovering from, civil emergencies in the UK. This non-statutory guidance is targeted at all personnel who may become involved in emergencies. It aims to develop a shared understanding of multi-agency response and recovery arrangements across responding agencies.12.5. Emergency Preparedness supports those individuals and organisations which have a role to play in the civil protection framework and, in particular, those organisations subject to duties under the Act.1.1. 
12.6. This guidance sets out how the civil protection duties should be carried out in England and Wales. Other available guidance is referenced within the Further Reading Chapter that accompanies the Emergency Preparedness guidance.12.7. This guidance also sets out how the civil protection duties should be carried out by certain bodies in Scotland, namely the Maritime and Coastguard Agency, the Health and Safety Executive and the British Transport Police. These bodies exercise functions which are largely reserved on a UK-wide basis and it is appropriate for them to be subject to guidance made by a Minister of the Crown. ‘Minister of the Crown’ or ‘Minister’ refers to the most appropriate minister in the given situation. The Scottish Ministers make separate regulations and guidance which apply to other Scottish Category 1 and 2 responders which fall within devolved competence. For more information, see Chapter 10: Scotland.12.8. This guidance also applies to certain bodies in Northern Ireland, namely the Maritime and Coastguard Agency and telecommunications operators. The guidance applies to the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) only in relation to emergencies arising from war or terrorism threatening serious damage to the United Kingdom. The Department of Justice in Northern Ireland may make appropriate guidance for the PSNI in respect of other emergencies to which the Act applies. Neither this guidance nor the Act applies to other bodies in Northern Ireland. Arrangements similar to those established under the Act, the Regulations, and this guidance have been set up in Northern Ireland on a non-statutory basis. For further information, please refer to Chapter 12: Northern Ireland.1.1. 
12.9. The guidance in this volume is divided into chapters. Each chapter deals with a specific aspect of preparedness within the civil protection framework. The main chapters (Chapters 2-8) describe the chief obligations imposed by the Act on Category 1 responders. Others (for example, Chapters 10-12, and 16) provide guidance which sets the work undertaken at the local level in the context of broader arrangements, including variations in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. It is hoped that Category 1 and 2 responders will find these chapters helpful in understanding and delivering the wider civil protection framework.112.10. Each chapter in this volume has a broadly similar format:o summary;o guidance on what the Act and the Regulations require of Category 1 and 2 responders;o guidance on how to carry out the requirements of the legislation; ando other information which may be helpful (much of which is contained in lined text boxes).Supporting the chapters are: annexes, a glossary and a bibliography (collected at the end of this volume).12.11. This guidance includes a number of boxes setting out additional information. The type of box used indicates the type of information contained within it:o lined text boxes - these unshaded boxes contain advice and information that may be useful to local responders, but are not directly supported by the Act.o figures - these diagrams illustrate aspects of the good practice guidance.1 Throughout the footnotes of this document the Regulations are referred to as regulation(s) with the appropriate number. Reference to the sections of the Civil Contingencies Act are referred to as e.g. s.2(1)(c).
 WHAT THE ACT AND THE REGULATIONS REQUIRE 12.12. While the civil protection duties are detailed on the face of the Act, the detail of what those duties mean, and how they should be performed, is delivered through the Regulations.2The Act and Regulations are supported too by this guidance document, which includes guidance to which the organisations covered by the Act must have regard. 312.13. However, all the duties specified in Part 1 of the Act are contingent on the definition of “emergency”.The definition of “Emergency”12.14. “Emergency” is defined in Part 1 of the Act as: an event or situation which threatens serious damage to human welfare in a place in the UK, the environment of a place in the UK, or war or terrorism which threatens serious damage to the security of the UK. 412.15. The definition of “emergency” is concerned with consequences, rather than with cause or source. Therefore, an emergency inside or outside the UK is covered by the definition, provided it has consequences inside the UK. 512.16. An emergency is considered to have consequences inside the UK if the serious damage is within the territorial sea of the UK.6 The territorial sea is the area of sea up to 12 nautical miles to seaward of the UK coast (or, more accurately, to seaward of the coastal baseline established by statute).2 s. 2(3). See also s. 4 and s. 63 s. 3(3), s. 4(8) and 6(6)4 s. 15 s. 1(5)6 s. 18(2)

12.17. 12.18. 
A place in the UK may be anything from a small village to a town square to a large city. It may also include a part of a region or an entire region.Determination of when an emergency has occurred, or is likely to occur, is addressed in three ways. The Act provides:o a specification of the kinds of event or situation which may cause “damage”; 7 ando two tests for determining whether an event or situation threatening8such damage constitutes an emergency (one of which must be met).o The Regulations outline: The common procedures thatCategory 1 responders must follow in making the decision to activate a business continuity or emergency plan. 9
Damage12.19. The Act sets out a list of events or situations which may be considered to pose a threat of damage to human welfare, the environment or security.10Two tests as to whether a response is required12.20. A Category 1 responder must perform its duties under the Act only in relation to two situations, either of which poses a considerable test for that organisation’s ability to perform its functions.117 s. 1(1)-(3)8 s. 2(2)(a)-(b)9 regulation 2410 s. 1(2)-(3)11 s. 2(2)PAGE 7
12.21. The two tests are:o where the emergency would be likely to seriously obstruct its ability to perform its functions;12o where the Category 1 responder:o would consider it necessary or desirable to act to prevent, reduce, control, or mitigate the emergency’s effects, or otherwise take action; ando would be unable to act without changing the deployment of its resources or acquiring additional resources.13One of these two tests must be met for the main duties of the Act to apply.Procedure for determining when an emergency has occurred12.22. A procedure for determining when an emergency has occurred must be written into business continuity and emergency plans. The procedure should enable the person who will make the judgment to be identified, and state how they will be advised and1.1. 
whom they must inform.14
The person will usually be a post-holder identified by their
role or job title. More information on this can be found in Chapter 5 – Emergency Planning. It is particularly important that this is clearly stated in multi-agency plans.The importance of Category 1 responder functions12.23. The Act requires Category 1 responders to take up their civil protection duties by reference to their functions. Functions are defined as “any power or duty whether1.1. 
conferred by virtue of an enactment or otherwise”.15 powers and duties, as well as common law powers.
The reference covers statutory
12 s. 2(2)(a)13 s. 2(2)(b)14 regulation 24
12.24. The functions of Category 1 responders are called into play when an emergency occurs or is likely to occur.12.25. Category 1 and Category 2 responders are referred to in the Act.16 The term “responder” is not defined. However, a main purpose of the legislation is to ensure that Category 1 responders are able to perform their functions so far as necessary or desirable to respond to an emergency.17The role of Category 1 and Category 2 responders12.26. Category 1 responders are listed in Schedule 1 to the Act.18 They are the main organisations involved in most emergencies at the local level: for example, the emergency services.12.27. Category 2 responders are also listed in Schedule 11.9 They are likely to be heavily involved in some emergencies: for example, utilities and transport companies.12.28. The Act brings both groups within its framework to ensure greater consistency and co-operation at the local level.The links between the duties12.29. The main civil protection duties fall on the Category 1 responders as follows: 20
16 s. 3(4)-(5)17 s. 2(1)(d)o 
risk assessment;o business continuity management (BCM);o emergency planning; ando maintaining public awareness and arrangements to warn, inform and advise the public.o 
18 Schedule 1, Part 1 (as amended). Part 2 of Schedule 1 sets out a list of Category 1 responders in Scotland who are subject to regulations and guidance made by Scottish Ministers.19 Schedule 1, Part 3 (as amended). Part 4 of Schedule 1 sets out a list of Category 2 responders in Scotland who are subject to regulations and guidance made by Scottish Ministers.
20 s. 2(1)
PAGE 9
12.30. A fifth duty applies to local authorities alone: 21o provision of advice and assistance to the commercial sector and voluntary organisations.12.31. Two further duties are prescribed in the Regulations: 22o co-operation;o and information sharing.
12.32. 12.33. 
Risk assessment, supported by a collective process, provides the fundamental grounding for delivering the substantive elements of the Act.Emergency planning is supported by BCM, and is underpinned by the risk assessment. Its purpose is to ensure that Category 1 responders can perform their functions effectively in an emergency. It supports public awareness work and also shapes arrangements for warning and informing the public. Category 1 and 2 responders must co-operate and share information in fulfilling these duties.
21 s. 422 s. 2(5)(h)-(i), Parts 2 and 8 of the Regulations.
Figure 1.1: How the seven civil protection duties under the Act and the Regulations fit together12.34. Provision of advice and assistance to the local business community and voluntary organisations by the local authority is likely to be linked to emergency plans and to draw on risk assessments. (See Chapter 6 paragraphs 6.14 - 6.16 for further information). It will also be supported by co-operation and information sharing with partners. THE ROLE OF THE MINISTER	12.35. In the event that any areas of civil protection arrangements do not address particular hazards or threats to the satisfaction of the Government, the Act permits the appropriate Minister of the Crown to issue new regulations or to1.1. 
make an order or issue a direction.23 3, 4, 5, 10, 11, 12 and 13.
These powers are discussed in Chapters
12.36. Chapter 13: Support and challenge describes the systems in place which will help the Government to identify whether there are areas where government action needs to be taken. The role of the Minister of the Crown in relation to performance development is also explained within this chapter. 24What the Act permits12.37. A Minister of the Crown has certain functions available to him/her by virtue of the Act, which may be exercised, subject in certain cases, to Parliament’s approval.12.38. These are not likely to be used frequently, but may include:ï require a responder to perform a function and, derived from that, the power to direct in an urgent situation;ï amending the list of Category 1 and Category 2 responders; andï monitor performance.12.39. Ministers have a range of powers under Part 1 of the Act. Most of these powers relate to the issuing of guidance and Regulations to support the delivery of the main duties under the Act, and are dealt with elsewhere in this guidance.12.40. This section does not deal with the emergency powers framework under Part 2 of the Act. The extent and exercise of emergency powers is addressed in Emergency Response and Recovery.12.41. A Minister may amend the Regulations or guidance issued under Part 1 of the Act. The powers to amend the Regulations are broad; the Minister may make any provision about the extent of the duties under sections 2 and 4 and the1.1. 
manner in which they are to be performed. Section 2(5) of the act lists a range of provisions which can be included in regulations, – but this is not exhaustive.12.42. A Minister may also require a person or body to perform a function in relation to an emergency.25 For example, the Minister could require responders to purchase a particular range of interoperable equipment (subject to appropriate funding being in place).12.43. Finally, a Minister may legislate so as to amend the list of Category 1 and/or 2 responders. 26 This power is only exercisable if both Houses of Parliament have approved the order. The Minister may remove a responder from the list, upgrade the status of a Category 2 responder into a Category 1 responder (and vice versa) and add new responders.Urgent powers of direction12.44. There are circumstances during emergencies, or when they appear imminent, when consistent, decisive action is necessary. The response required might fall outside existing planning frameworks; Category 1 and 2 responders might lack the information or advice to deal with it effectively; or it may not be apparent to these responders how best to deal with the situation.12.45. Section 7 of the Act is designed to enable action to be taken by a Minister of the Crown in cases of urgency where there is insufficient time to make legislation. It is an exceptional power designed to ensure that in cases of real urgency the Government can arrange for coherent, effective action to be taken at the local level.1.1. 
12.46. The Act enables 27 a Minister to issue a direction containing any provision that could be made by secondary legislation under sections 5 and 6 of the Act, to responders or a class of responders.12.47. An urgent direction must be in writing, though it could of course arrive by fax or e-mail. The Minister must revoke his direction as soon as is reasonably practicable (which will be, at the latest, as soon as it is possible to legislate). Even if not revoked, a direction will lapse 21 days after it has been made.Monitoring powers12.48. A Minister has a range of powers to assist him/her in monitoring and overseeing the new civil protection regime. He/she may ask any Category 1 or 2 responder to provide him/her with information about the action taken under the Act.28 The Minister may require a Category 1 or 2 responder to explain why it has not taken action under the Act. If the Minister considers that a Category 1 or 2 responder has failed to comply with its obligations under the Act, he/she may take proceedings against that responder in the High Court.2912.49. These powers are not intended to be used to establish direct monitoring by the Government as a standard procedure. They will be used in exceptional circumstances. Details of mechanisms and tools to develop responder performance and compliance with the act can be found in Chapter 13.27 s. 728 s. 929 s. 10
Other statutory regimes in the field of civil protection12.50. A particular set of risks is excluded from consideration under the legislation.30 These risks are subject to the Control of Major Accident Hazards (COMAH) Regulations 1999, the Pipelines Safety Regulations 1996 or the Radiation (Emergency Preparedness and Public Information) Regulations 2001 and their Northern Ireland counterparts. Category 1 responders are not required to exercise their duties under the Act and Regulations in relation to emergencies which are covered by these provisions.12.51. However, Category 1 responders may use the Act regime to support or supplement these separate regimes where they consider this appropriate. For example, if Category 1 responders wish to include COMAH risks in the Community Risk Register, this is acceptable. They can also make information requests under the Regulations to support the COMAH duties, if they wish.12.52. One disadvantage of a separation between the two regimes, the one supported by the Act, the other by the Health and Safety Executive, is addressed by the inclusion of the Health and Safety Executive in Schedule 1 as a Category 2 responder. Further guidance on this can be found in Chapter 19, The CCA and the fit with other legislation, which looks at how key duties under the CCA link with those contained in other site specific legislation.How the Act and the Regulations apply in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland12.53. Chapters 10, 11 and 12 detail how the Act and the Regulations apply in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. In addition, each of the chapters dealing with how the duties under the Act are to be performed contains information about how30 regulation 12
that particular duty is to be performed in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Note that the Regulations and this guidance do not apply to those responders in Scotland who are within devolved competence. 31Integrated emergency management and the ActIntegrated emergencymanagementEmergency PreparednessEmergency Responseand RecoveryAnticipation√Assessment√Prevention√Preparation√Response√Recovery management√12.54. Civil protection arrangements need to be integrated both within and between Category 1 and 2 responders. They should also be conducted according to a practical doctrine beginning with anticipation and assessment of risk and concluding with effective response and recovery arrangements.12.55. The Act focuses on emergency preparedness but its requirements should be seen in the context of integrated emergency management (IEM).31 The Regulations and this guidance apply to those responders listed in Parts 1 and 3 of Schedule 1 to the Act. These responders are referred to in the Regulations as “General responders” but for ease of reference they are referred to in this guidance as “Category 1 and Category 2 responders”. Parts 2 and 4 of Schedule 1 to the Act list the responders that exercise functions which fall within the competence of the Scottish Ministers. These responders are referred to in the Regulations as “Scottish Category 1 responders” and “Scottish Category 2 responders”
12.56. The following six activities are fundamental to an integrated approach:ï anticipation;ï assessment;ï prevention;ï preparation;ï response; andï recovery management.12.57. The Act focuses on two of these - assessment and preparation - and they are covered extensively in this volume of guidance on preparing for emergencies. The other volume of guidance, Emergency Response and Recovery, covers the final two - response and recovery management.12.58. Anticipation is sometimes called horizon-scanning. Category 1 responders, with the support of Category 2 responders where appropriate, should aim to be aware of new hazards and threats which might affect their locality and be ready to revise their risk assessments and plans accordingly. They may also wish to consider a mechanism to inform the public of what to do according to any new hazards and threats.12.59. Prevention is an important component of integrated emergency management.The Act does not deal with it to any great extent because it is largely a matter for other legislation, for example fire safety and industrial safety, building regulations, flood defence, maritime safety or health protection. More information can be found in Chapter 19 (The CCA and the fit with other legislation). Prevention under the Act is limited to actions that help prevent an emergency which may be about to occur. For example, activating an emergency plan in advance of a major public event.
12.60. Response and recovery management are addressed in Emergency Response and Recovery because they are not covered directly in the Act. They are concerned with managing the consequences of an emergency, rather than preparing to deal with one.12.61. Although the Act focuses on preparedness for response to emergencies, it should be seen in the wider context of safety, risk and threat management. Also, although the discussion of preparedness under the Act concentrates on the maintenance of planning arrangements, effective management is the aim. Planning is a process of preparing a Category 1 responder, its managers and personnel for the act of managing an emergency.12.62. The wide concept of IEM within and across Category 1 responders is geared to the idea of building greater overall resilience in the face of a broad range of disruptive challenges. If the response is to be truly effective in meeting the needs of everyone affected by an emergency, then all leaders of the community, industry and commerce should be aware of the contributions of local responders and other organisations. It may also be beneficial to educate the general community about how they can support themselves in disruptive challenges.12.63. In an extended emergency, the amount of work may be overwhelming, while provision of everyday services will also need to continue. Category 1 responders should explore all options for maintaining critical services, not only during the response but also throughout the recovery and aftermath proceedings, which may be lengthy.1.1. 
 Chapter 2 Co-operationRevision to Emergency PreparednessCivil Contingencies Act Enhancement ProgrammeMarch 2012
Chapter 2 (Co-operation) of Emergency Preparedness Revised Version
ï The local resilience area is based on police force boundaries (paragraph 2.40).ï One form of co-operation required by the Act is the Local Resilience Forum (LRF).The LRF is the principal form of multi-agency co-operation in a local resilience area. Even so, the statutory duties fall on the individual local responders. The LRF is not a legal entity and it does not direct its members. The role of the LRF in co-operation is examined in Table 2 (paragraphs 2.39-2.69).ï The purpose of the LRF is defined (paragraphs 2.45-2.50) and its structure suggested (paragraphs 2.51-2.59)ï Responders may satisfy their responsibilities to attend the Forum by nominating representatives (paragraphs 2.66-2.69).ï The LRF has an important place in the local resilience chain in England and Wales (paragraphs 2.92-2.96).ï Most Category 2 responders are not organised to deliver their normal business in local resilience areas. The expectations which Category 1 responders place on Category 2 responders should be reasonable. Protocols are proposed which may vary the way in which Category 2 arrangements can meet Category 1 requirements (paragraphs 2.60-2.65, 2.70-2.91).ï The likely participation in the LRF of the different classes of local responder organisation (within both Categories 1 and 2) is described (paragraphs 2.108 – 2.158).ï 
The scope of co-operation2.1. The Civil Contingencies Act 2004 prescribes, in the first instance, a consistent set of four duties across all the Category 1 responders, which include the emergency services, local authorities, health services and other organisations likely to be involved in most emergencies. Four elements of the emergency planning cycle – risk assessment, emergency planning, business continuity planning, and warning and informing – must each be delivered in the same way. This standard framework provides a sound basis for local co-operation.2.2. A fifth element – promotion of business continuity management – is required of local authorities.2.3. Drawing on this common set of procedures, the Act then adds two more duties for the Category 1 responders. They are required specifically to co-operate and share2.1. 
information in delivering the other five duties.1
There are thus seven duties in all.
2.4. These requirements to co-operate and share information are given extra importance by their imposition on a larger number of responder organisations, such as the utilities and transport providers. This second grouping, the Category2 responders, have fewer overall obligations under the CCA, partly because they are less likely to be involved in most emergencies 2 and also because the underpinning sector-specific legislation and regulations, which define what they do, include duties to deliver their service during an emergency. Under the Act, the Category 2 responders are required to co-operate and share information3with Category 1 responders.4  They are also required to co-operate and shareinformation with each other insofar as this supports Category 1 responders.1 See Fig 1.1, Emergency Preparedness; Chapter 1: Introduction, p.92 Even so, the impact of flooding in 2007 and other severe weather events on some of the Category 2 responders shows how important their role is.3 Information sharing, as a separate duty, is the subject of a separate guidance chapter (Chapter 3) in Emergency Preparedness, and of additional non-statutory guidance, Data Protection and Sharing: Guidance for Emergency Planners and Responders, 2007. Information sharing remains an important aspect ofday-to-day co-operation between local responders and, as such, is considered in this chapter too.4 For a useful example from one Category 2 sector stressing the importance of information sharing with Category 1 responders, see Effective Information Sharing with Category 2 Telecommunications Providers, CCS, May 2009 http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/media/250370/local_resilience_forums_telecoms.pdf
2.5. Co-operation for the Category 2 responders includes looking at how delivery of the emergency duties under their own legislation, such as risk assessment, emergency planning and exercising, can most easily match with the similar CCA duties of theCategory 1 responders.5	Category 2 responders need to be fully integrated intomulti-agency planning at all levels levels, including co-operation with each other where it helps local level preparedness by the Category 1 responders.2.6. One form of co-operation between Category 1 and 2 responders, which is required by the regulations, is the Local Resilience Forum (LRF).2.7. A third grouping of local responders includes the voluntary sector to which Category 1 responders “must have regard” when carrying out their duties under the Act (see Chapter 14). There are other organisations outside the framework of the Act which are also brought into co-operation with the duty-holders in certain circumstances, such as, for example, the military (see Chapter 15).Aspects of local-level co-operation2.8. There are three essential ways of addressing co-operation:o Within your own organisation;o Directly with other organisations; ando Through managed arrangements with other organisations, which may take a number of forms.5 regulation 4(2), 4(3), 4(4)
2.9. Co-operation starts with the ability of each responder organisation to get the different parts of its own structure to work together. The Act obliges each responder organisation to ensure that all those divisions with functions that may require to be employed in an emergency are fully prepared. Effective preparation ensures that they are ready to co-operate with each other within the internal structures of the organisation, as well as with others outside the organisation. In particular cases, internal multi-directorate groups should be established to develop plans and training. The practice of civil protection under the CCA should be systematically “embedded” within each organisation.2.10. The next level of co-operation is outward facing and involves responder organisations working directly with each other (both Category 1 responders and Category 2 responders, together with the voluntary sector and other organisations) across the five main CCA2.1. 
duties.6
Meetings, visits, phone calls, correspondence, e-mails and exercises are organised
to strengthen each Category 1 organisation’s risk assessment, plan-making, business continuity arrangements and warning and informing procedures. Much of this is one- on-one liaison work which takes place all the time on a day-to-day basis. Many local responders have set up multi-agency groups (below the level of the LRF) to help them prepare their own multi-agency plans and support local preparedness and awareness.2.11. However, if the Act required simply the direct interrelationship of the duty-holders with each other – “all with all” – it would not work efficiently and effectively. For this reason, the CCA also provides for managed arrangements between the Category 1 and Category 2 responders. It cuts back on the impact of the duties by permitting various measures to help structure the relationship between responders and avoid unnecessary duplication of effort. Managed arrangements also permit the duty-holders to “speak with one voice”, when appropriate, and to co-ordinate actions across a local resilience area, or part of the area.
6 regulation 4(1)-(4)
PAGE 6
2.12. In this regard, the Act and its regulations support a third form of co-operation with partner organisations through formal multi-agency structures and facilities. These managed arrangements include agreements to work together through:o protocols between responders, which may also involve those not covered by the Act; appointing a lead responder; and setting up arrangements to jointly discharge or delegate functions;o forums and support bodies at various levels, such as: the Local Resilience Forum (LRF) and multi-LRF groups, the offices of a Lead Government Department, or other central government forums 7 ; ando nominating a representative organisation to act on your behalf in attending meetings.In addition, co-operation can also be facilitated through outward-facing, structured communications methods, such as, for example:o Websites – set up locally and nationally; ando Secure national communications media, such as the National Resilience Extranet.8
7 In Wales, the equivalent structures are the Wales Resilience Forum and the Welsh Government.8 Further details on the National Resilience Extranet (NRE) can be foundat http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/content/emergency-response-resilient-telecommunications 
PAGE 7
 WHAT THE ACT AND THE REGULATIONS REQUIRE	A Category 1 or 2 responder “shall comply with regulations” made by a Minister of the Crown about “the extent of a duty” and “the manner in which… it is to be performed” (s2(3) and s3(3)(a)).Category 1 responders which have functions exercisable in a particular local resilience area “must co-operate with each other” and “with general Category 2 responders” in connection with the performance of their duties (reg 4(1)).Category 2 responders which have functions exercisable in a particular local resilience area “must co-operate with each... Category 1 responder” which has functions exercisable in that area and “with each other”in connection with the performance by the Category 1 of its duties (regs 4(2), 4(3))Co-operation across the five main CCA duties2.13. In looking more closely at co-operation as required in the Act and regulations, it is useful to define more clearly the circumstances in which Category 1 responders seek support from their Category 1 and 2 partners.  Category 1responders must co-operate with each other and with Category 2s.9 Category 2responders must support Category 1s in delivering their Category 1 duties and co-operate with other Category 2s in support of the Category 1s.109 Regulation 4(1).10 Regulations 4(2), 4(3)PAGE 8

2.14. 
Table 1 lists occasions11
on which the Category 1s are likely to require
co-operation in fulfilling their duties under the Act. The table includes information sharing, which is simultaneously a separate duty and a key aspect of co-operation.12Table 1: The duties to co-operate and share information: as carried out by Category 1 and 2 responders13 across the five main CCA dutiesA. DUTY TO CO-OPERATEB. DUTY TO SHAREINFORMATIONFive main Category 1DUTIESIs co-operation required?Is information-sharing required?1.Risk Assessmenta)Direct discussions with partners to support compilation of individual risk assessment for each Category 1 organisation. For further information please refer to Chapter  4 (Local responder riskassessment duty).Information required directly from partners to support each Category 1 responder’s individual risk assessment. Forfurther information please refer to Chapter 4 (Local responder risk assessment duty).b)Discussion with partners within the LRF to compile Community Risk Register (CRR).Information required for Community Risk Register.c)Discussion with partners within the LRF regarding publication of the CRR – which can be done as part of warning and informing arrangements.Consistent approach to providing risk and warning information required across the partners.11 Each cell (and each bullet point) indicates an act of co-operation and/or information sharing.12 Regulation 4(4)(a)13 The impact on Category 2 responders of the co-operation and information sharing requirements identified in Table 1 is discussed in paragraph 2.17 below and examined in more detail in Annex A. It should be noted that the emergency plans of some Category 2 responders will not be specific
to a particular local resilience or local authority area. Procedures should be designed to match or dovetail across different planning frameworks.
PAGE 9
A. DUTY TO CO-OPERATEB. DUTY TO SHAREINFORMATIONFive main Category 1DUTIESIs co-operation required?Is information-sharing required?d)Discussion with partners regarding:ï central government assessment of risk under capabilities programme; andï reports back to central government about risk registers.Information required to assist with interpreting the local impact of central government risk assessment.e)Discussion with partners about hazards and risks to support development by Category 1 responders of:ï specific emergencyplans; andï exercise scenarios.Information required to help define the nature and possible quantification of consequences addressed:ï by Category 1 plans; andï in exercise scenarios.f)Risk meetings or discussions with infrastructure operators about business continuity plansInformation from infrastructure operators and main suppliers about business continuity risks2.Emergency Planninga)Direct discussion for Category 1 responders with partners to prepareï specific emergencyplans;ï multi-agency plans; andï LRF multi-agency plans.Details of partner contacts, roles, responsibilities, procedures, capabilities and resources.b)Discussion for Category 1 responders with partners about:ï specific emergencyplans;ï information required under the national capabilities survey.Details of partner contacts, roles, responsibilities, procedures, capabilities and resources.
A. DUTY TO CO-OPERATEB. DUTY TO SHAREINFORMATIONFive main Category 1DUTIESIs co-operation required?Is information-sharing required?2.Emergency Planningc)Discussion for Category 1 responders with partners about design and delivery of training and of exercises for:ï specific emergencyplans;ï multi-agency plans; andï LRF multi-agency plans.For scenario development.d)Discussion with partners about the design and delivery of training and of exercises for plan required by central government.For scenario developmente)Updating of plansDetails of partner contacts, roles, responsibilities, procedures, capabilities and resources.3.Business Continuity Plansa)Discussions with key infrastructure operators and main suppliers about procedures.Information from key infrastructure operators and suppliers about procedures.b)-Updated BusinessContinuity Plans4.Warning and Informinga)Meetings for Category 1 responders with partners about the nature of hazard and risk, and type of messages to make public.Category 2 responders are likely to have responsibilities to provide information to the public under theirown legislation (“functions”).Updated messages and procedures.b)Meetings for Category 1 responders with partners and other co-operating organisations, such as the media and voluntary sector, about multi-agency media plans and arrangements for warning dissemination.Category 2 responders are likely to have responsibilities to provide information to the public under their own legislation (“functions”).Updated messages and procedures.[Operationally – at the response phase, partners should inform each other when warnings and other messages are issued.]
A. DUTY TO CO-OPERATEB. DUTY TO SHAREINFORMATIONFive main Category 1DUTIESIs co-operation required?Is information-sharing required?4.Warning and Informingc)Joint publicity and events by Category 1s and their partners to raise public awareness of plans and procedures.Each organisation to contribute relevant messages.5.Promotion of Business ContinuityManagementa)LA clarifies with partners who is doing whatto promote business continuity management.Information about promotion efforts undertaken and promotional opportunities.b)-Requests from business community for information about potential business continuity risks.2.15. Across the five duties, apart from the specific duty to co-operate through the local resilience forum, co-operation “shall take such form as may be agreed between2.1. 
the relevant responders”.14
Most of these agreements for working together are
informal and routine. Practical areas for co-operation and/or information sharing are dealt with directly between responders through day-to-day liaison. Other agreements are based on more formal structures of co-operation, such as the Local Resilience Forum or procedures supported by protocols. 152.16. As a statutory requirement, the LRF has an important role in facilitating co-operation between the partners. Annex A takes the areas of co-operation and information-sharing identified in Table 1 and helps define the role of the LRF. It identifies the key areas – from risk assessment to warning and informing – where the LRF is likely to play a part in co-operation and further areas where it may be involved in information sharing.14 regulation 4(4)15 regulations 4(4)(a), 4(4)(b), 7
2.17. Annex A also looks at the areas of co-operation and information-sharing from the perspective of Category 2 responders. It identifies the areas where requests for co-operation from Category 1 responders are likely to have a major impact on Category 2 responders, though most of these are intermittent only. There are also areas where information requests can have a major impact.Co-operation with the voluntary sector2.18. There are local responders not captured in the schedule to the Act who may also be brought in to local planning arrangements, depending on the circumstances. One2.1. 
group – the voluntary sector - is identified in the Act 1.6
Category 1 responders are
required to “have regard to” the activities of the voluntary sector in maintaining their emergency and business continuity plans.2.19. “Regard” must be given to those local voluntary organisations whose activities are carried on in the local resilience area and are relevant in an emergency.17 Those voluntary organisations whose role is to play a significant part in emergency response, such as search and rescue organisations, should expect Category 1s to integrate them fully into multi-agency co-operation across the five main duties. Other voluntary organisations may also expect to be involved in multi-agency co-operation where their activities are relevant to emergency planning and response. Voluntary organisations are not obliged by statute to carry out their role.  In reaching an agreement to co-operate at a local level, the capability of the voluntary organisation to fulfil its role locally is a key factor. It is reasonable, when looking at collaborative arrangements as part of a local agreement with Category 1s, for a voluntary organisation to provide a locally-determined capacity and capability assessment.16 s2(5)(k)… “bodies (other than public or local authorities) whose activities are not carried on for profit”.17 regulation 23(1)PAGE 13
Managed co-operationProtocols2.20. Responders have tended to rely on custom and practice and minuted agreements to support well-established collaborative arrangements and to provide a basis for new initiatives. However, the regulations permit Category 1 responders between themselves and Category 1 with Category 2 responders to go further in the performance of their duties by developing protocols which consolidate co-operative working on a firmer basis.182.21. A protocol is a formal agreement between Category 1 responders, or Category 1 and Category 2 responders - or between them and local responders not covered in the Schedule, such as the voluntary sector or the armed forces – detailing how they will undertake or allocate responsibilities to deliver a task. Protocols may cover matters of broad agreement or detailed procedures for working together, including how to hand over tasks, provide a service or obtain additional resources. As far as possible, they should be simple, straightforward and concise. Protocols may or may not be legally binding depending on the nature of the agreement reached between the parties. Most often partners are unlikely to seek a legally-binding protocol.2.22. Protocols between local responders may be developed by the LRF or its sub-groups, or by industry groups on behalf of local responders (such as Category 2s) in a particular class or sector. Some protocols aim to insert local detail and circumstances into how co-operation is carried out. They are likely to be particularly relevant in relation to:
18 regulation 7(1)19 regulations 7(4), 7(5)o 
information sharing agreements and co-operation generally between Category 1 and Category 2 responders, including multi-LRFbased arrangements; 19PAGE 14
o multi-agency emergency planning arrangements, including humanitarian support;o arrangements for co-operation with voluntary or third sector, armed forces and other responder organisations not listed in the Schedule to the Act; ando communications planning generally:ï for managing the response to an emergency; andï communicating with the public.2.23. Particular attention should be paid when developing protocols in one local resilience area to their development in neighbouring resilience areas and more widely. Organisations whose remit covers several resilience areas may find it difficult to engage with protocols from different areas which contain conflicting requirements. Recognition should also be given to national protocols.2.24. Protocols may be used to strengthen the structure of Local Resilience Forums (LRFs), for example, to determine governance arrangements for the working of the Forum.2.25. Protocols are permitted on a cross-boundary basis between local resilience areas, as well as on a cross-border basis between Category 1 and Category 2 responders in England and Scotland.202.26. As defined in regulations, protocols are likely to specify three aspects of the co-operation required:o its timing;o its form; ando contact details for the individuals involved.2120 Protocols may of course be set up between England and Wales, but these are not addressed in regulations because the Act covers both England and Wales.
21 regulation 7(3)
PAGE 15
Other matters can be included as local responders wish.An example of a standard model protocol will be made available on the National Resilience Extranet (NRE).Also available on the NRE are examples of best practice case studies. These can be found at https://www.resilience-extranet.gse.gov.uk/AtlasApps/Pages/Collaborate/ DocumentStore/DocumentStore.aspx?folderid=113699. They detail the areas where protocols have been introduced and the benefits derived from them.The lead responder principle2.27. The main duties fall equally on all those Category 1 responders “whose functions” (defined as their powers and duties) are likely to be seriously obstructed by an emergency or who would consider it necessary or desirable to take action to deal with the emergency through a special deployment of resources.22 There is a risk that Category 1 responders may duplicate each other’s work when, for example, carrying out their duty of risk assessment or providing warnings when an emergency occurs.2.28. The problem is particularly acute in relation to communicating with the public.It would not be sensible for a number of Category 1 responders each to be arranging to publish the same, similar or, indeed, conflicting messages about risks and planning arrangements to the same members of the public. It would be confusing, too, if several organisations were maintaining arrangements, simultaneously to issue uncoordinated public warnings about an emergency. Gaps in the arrangements could also arise because no one organisation had taken an overview. To address these difficulties, the regulations enable one local responder to take on the lead responsibility. 23
22 s. 2(2)23 regulations 32-34. These Regulations are described in more detail in Chapter 7 of Emergency Preparedness, Communicating with the Public.That guidance also includes, at Annex 7C, a checklist of suggested protocols for warning, informing and advising the public.
PAGE 16
2.29. There is a further risk of duplication where, for example, several Category 1 responders in the same LRF area each decide they are obliged to assess the same risk or the impact of that risk (for example, severe weather). Again, more than one Category 1 responder could believe it necessary to develop an emergency mortuary plan or a coastal pollution plan. Regulations address these potential problems by permitting all those Category 1 responders whose functions are exercised in relation to a particular duty (other than the duties to communicate with the public, see Chapter 7) to identify one of their number as lead responder. The lead responder is the Category 1 responder with lead responsibility for performing a given duty in relation to a given emergency, or an emergency of a particular kind, in that local resilience area.242.30. The other Category 1 responders who are party to the decision are referred to as non-lead Category 1 responders.252.31. Many of these issues of duplication are, of course, addressed through the activities of the Local Resilience Forum. The LRF can help the Category 1 local responders determine how the lead responder principle is applied. It ensures proper co-ordination of risk assessment and multi-agency planning and, under the separate regulations, communication with the public.2.32. Regulations outline the duties on a lead Category 1 responder.26 They must:o take the lead responsibility for that particular task in that local resilience area; 27o consult the non-lead Category 1 responders in performance of the duty;
24 regulation 925 regulation 9(4)26 regulation 1027 There are likely to be different lead responders appointed for different tasks within a particular local resilience area.
PAGE 17
o keep the non-lead Category 1 responders informed about how they are fulfilling the duty; ando co-operate with non-lead Category 1 responders and, in particular, as far as reasonably practicable, obtain approval from the non-lead Category 1 responders for the way they are performing the duty.2.33. Regulations also specify the role of the non-lead Category 1 responders.28 They must:o co-operate with the lead Category 1 responder in performance of the duty;o provide information to the lead Category 1 responder which will assist in performance of the duty; ando assist the lead responder in any exercises or training in connection with the duty.The non-lead Category 1 responders do not themselves need to perform the duty to an extent that would unnecessarily duplicate what the lead Category 1 responder is doing.29 However, if the non-lead responder is not satisfied with the way the lead responder is performing the duty, then (after exhausting other remedies) it should determine for itself how it will carry out the duty.2.34. The requirement on a Category 1 responder to co-operate with another Category 1 responder in the performance of its duty (for example, by taking part in a joint exercise) applies where the former is the lead responder and the2.1. 
latter is a non-lead responder. 30
Category 2 responders are also required to
assist the lead Category 1 responder when it is carrying out duties on behalf
28 regulation 1129 regulation 11(2)(d)30 regulation 11(2)(c)
PAGE 18
of a number of responders to the same extent that they would be required to assist the individual Category 1 Responders.2.35. A decision by the relevant local Category 1 responders not to co-operate with identifying a lead responder in relation to a particular duty leaves them potentially all equally responsible for the performance of that duty.2.36. In practice, local responders have tended to operate in accordance with the above lead responder principle on an informal or customary basis.Joint discharge and delegation of functions2.37. In some instances, Category 1 responders will wish to go beyond direct or bilateral co-operation and enter into joint arrangements with other Category 1 responders. This is permitted by the regulations and can take two forms:o exercising responsibilities jointly. In this case, two or more Category 1 responders would agree that an aspect of the duties was best performed by working together. For example, a number of local authorities may decide to form a single civil preparednessunit, and staff and fund it jointly to deliver their responsibilities under the Act; 31 ando delegating responsibility entirely. For example, a local authority might decide to delegate some or all of its responsibilities to the local fire and rescue service.3231 regulation 8(a)32 regulation 8(b)PAGE 19
2.38. In both these instances, all Category 1 responders covered by the decision have to agree that joint arrangements are appropriate and make associated agreements in terms of transfer and other resources. Of course, they each retain ultimate ownership of their own functions and are ultimately responsible for the performance of their duties; they must therefore be satisfied that they are being delivered correctly.Local Resilience Forum2.39. Under the regulations, Category 1 responders must form a Local Resilience Forum (LRF) as part of their obligation to co-operate with each other.33 Category2 responders whose functions are exercisable within a local resilience area co-operate with other responders by attending meetings of the LRF or being represented at it.34 (In circumstances where all the Category 1 responders in a local resilience area agree, this requirement on a Category 2 may be varied).35 Often in practice, as permitted by the Act, several responder organisations in a particular class will nominate a representative to attend on their behalf.2.40. The LRF is the principal mechanism for multi-agency co-operation and co-ordination under the Act, based on each police force area. It is a process by which the duty-holders co-operate with each other. The LRF helps the duty- holders decide how they will interpret and meet their responsibilities under the CCA. It has no separate legal personality and does not have powers to direct its members. As a forum for responder organisations, it is not a local responder itself and has no specific duties under the Act.
33 regulation 4(4)(b)34 regulation 4(7)(c)35 regulation 7(5)
PAGE 20
2.41. Organisations not specifically captured by the Schedule to the Act, such as the military and voluntary organisations,36 the Department for Communities and Local Government Resilience and Emergencies Division (DCLG RED) Team and Welsh Government will generally be invited to attend the LRF, contribute to its work and be involved in its working groups and sub-groups where relevant.2.42. The chief officer group of the LRF must make arrangements to meet at least once every six months. The aim should be to space these meetings evenly and to develop a regular cycle. Meetings can be held more frequently if LRF members agree that is necessary. The chief officer group should be supported by a general working group and sub groups. The frequency of these meetings is set by the LRF .372.43. The LRF is not an operational body because it has no functional responsibilities to deliver during an emergency and no resources. However, generally, during an emergency, a particular set of those who make up the LRF are likely to come together as a multi-agency team to deliver their functional responsibilities.2.44. Table 2 compares the role of the LRF with the role of the Category 1 and 2 duty holders. It shows how the LRF, acting through the powers of its duty- holders and on their behalf, undertakes certain key tasks – such as preparing and maintaining the Community Risk Register and preparing LRF multi-agency plans. Equally, it shows how the main responsibilities are delivered by the duty holders themselves.36 regulation 2337 regulations 4(4)(b), 4(5) - 4(7)
Table 2: The role of the LRF and the role of the duty holder (Category 1 and 2 responders)ROLE OF THE LRFROLE OF THE DUTY HOLDERCategory 1 RespondersCategory 2 Responders1.Help develop policy by agreement across the partners.Implement agreed policy. Inform partners of relevant policy changes within their sector. 38Implement agreed policy in support of Category 1 responders. Inform partners of relevant policy changes within their sectoror company.2.Facilitate co-operation.Be ready to co-operate with partners.39Be ready to co-operate with partners.3.Keep all Category 1 and 2 responders in its local resilience area informed of all LRF business.Receive and take note of all materials circulated by LRF and take actionas appropriate.Receive and take note of all relevantmaterials circulated by LRF and take action asappropriate.4.Facilitate and, where necessary, promote development of protocols, including with the voluntary sector and the military.Set up agreements and protocols with partners, including, where appropriate, locally-determined capacity andcapability assessments.Support Category 1 responders by setting up or agreeing protocols.5.Information and education – share latest thinking and experience.Enable staff to keep up-to-date with relevant civil protection issues.Enable staff to keep up-to-date withrelevant civil protection issues.6.Prepare and maintain Community Risk Register.Prepare and maintain Individual Risk Register.Support development of Community Risk Register.7.Receive and, where appropriate, respond to government requests about risk assessments and capabilities.Assess impact of government requests in their functional areas of responsibility and respondas necessary.Assess impact of government requests in sectoral areas of responsibility and respond as necessary.38 A relevant policy change could be any matter which affects emergency response arrangements and preparations for response.39 Readiness involves both awareness and capability and relates to whether civil protection is embedded in the organisation or not (see paragraph 2.9 above.)
ROLE OF THE LRFROLE OF THE DUTY HOLDERCategory 1 RespondersCategory 2 Responders8.Be aware of individual members’planning arrangements.Prepare and maintain individual plans.Prepare plans under sectoral responsibilities.9.Be aware of the planning arrangements of voluntary sector organisations and other organisations not named in the schedule tothe Act.In preparing plans, have regard tothe capacity and capabilities of voluntary sector organisations and other responders not named in the scheduleto the ActIn preparing plans under sectoral responsibilities consider the capacity and capabilities of responders not named in the schedule tothe Act10.Facilitate identification of lead responder where appropriate.Act as lead responder or supportlead responder.Act as lead responder under its sectoral responsibilitiesor supportlead responder.11.Be aware of multi-agency plans of members.With relevant partners, develop and maintain its own multi-agency plans as appropriate.Under sectoral responsibilities, develop and maintain relevantmulti-agency plans.12.Prepare and review LRF multi-agency plans 40 as appropriate.Contribute to LRF multi-agency plans.Under sectoral responsibilities, contribute to LRF multi-agency plans.13.Receive and, as appropriate, respond to government requests for specific plans under the capabilities programme.Develop multi-agency plans 41 in line with the government’s capabilities programme.Under sectoral responsibilities and government’s capabilitiesprogramme, developmulti-agency plans.14.Support its members’ exercises, including maintaining a listof exercises.Exercise its individual and multi- agency plans.Support Category 1 responder exercises under CCA and sectoral responsibilities.40 Increasingly, LRFs are developing multi-agency plans – though these are likely to be “owned” and managed by one of the Category 1 local responders on behalf of the LRF members.41 As required by the Act, Category 1 responders are likely to develop multi-agency emergency plans and these may not cover the whole LRF area. They are not necessarily treated as LRF plans.
ROLE OF THE LRFROLE OF THE DUTY HOLDERCategory 1 RespondersCategory 2 Responders15.Organise exercises of LRF multi-agency plans.Take part in LRFmulti-agency exercises as appropriate.Take part in LRFmulti-agency exercises as appropriate.16.Awareness and support for business continuity management (BCM).Prepare and maintain business continuity plans. Support partners in preparing their business continuity plans.Under sectoral responsibilities, prepare and maintain business continuity plans. Support Category 1 responders in developing theirBC plans.17.Facilitate its members in agreeing lead responder role and other measures for warning and informing arrangements.Set up and maintain warning and informing arrangementsand plans.Under sectoral responsibilities andin support of Category 1 responders, setup and maintainwarning arrangements.18.Facilitate co-operation across partners in promotion of business continuity management.(LA) Promote BCM. (Other Category 1 responders) Assist LAs with BC information as appropriate.Assist LAs with BC information as appropriate.19.Play supportive role during an emergencyRespond to emergencies. Implement recovery plans.Respond to emergencies. Implement recovery plans.20.Attend multi-LRF meetings or Wales Resilience Forum (WRF),as appropriateTake note of multi-LRF/ WRF discussions.Attend multi-LRF meetings / WRF or take note of its discussions.
Purpose of the LRF
2.45. 2.46. 2.47. 
The purpose of the Local Resilience Forum is as follows:o to provide a local forum for local issues;o to help co-ordinate risk assessment through production of the Community Risk Register;o to facilitate Category 1 and 2 responders in the delivery of their CCA duties;o to help deliver government policy by co-ordinating responses to government initiatives; ando to help determine a procedure for the formation of a Strategic Co-ordinating Group (SCG) by the relevant local responders at the time of an emergency.The fundamental role and first purpose of the LRF in England and Wales is as a co-ordinating group for local responders engaged in preparedness for emergencies at the police force area level.42 It should enable any of the members to bring issues forward for discussion and agreement on combined initiatives. All responders build up over time an understanding of the challenges and pressures faced by their partners and an experience of working together.A second purpose of the LRF reflects a strategic approach to preparing for emergencies. The importance of the LRF preparing the Community Risk Register (CRR) 43 is that its members develop a consistent understanding of the hazards and threats across the LRF area. The risk register also provides a sound basis for joint working. An agreed risk assessment across all the local partners helps determine the priority issues they must be ready to deal with.
42 regulation 4(4)(b), 4(5)-(7)43 regulation 15
2.48. Another strategic purpose of the LRF is to support the duty-holders so that they perform their legal responsibilities better than they would if they wereacting on their own.44 The five main duties of the Act, plus the co-operationand information sharing duties, provide a substantial agenda which changes and evolves. Many emergency situations demand multi-agency working across all the partners, including the development of multi-agency LRF plans and the exercising of those plans. Support may also be needed with protocols for information sharing and other matters and with agreements about which of the partners will act as a lead responder. The LRF is also likely to be involved with supporting the development of performance management procedures and with encouraging good practice.2.49. A fourth purpose reflects the position of the LRF in the resilience chain (see paragraph 2.92 below), namely the importance to the government of a group which will:o take forward at the local level initiatives which need to be developed within a national framework; ando facilitate discussion between local responders as requested by government and report back.Expectations from central government for delivery within a national framework are placed on LRFs – or, strictly, on the Category 1 responders, supported by the Category 2 responders, who make up the LRF – for example, as part of the government’s national capabilities programme. These expectations require formal responses and considerable engagement under the LRF’s work programme. The relationship between central government and the Category 1 and 2 responders, as mediated by the LRFs, is discussed further below (see paragraphs 2.92-2.94).44 s. 2 (5)(h)
2.50. Finally, as stated, the LRF does not have an operational role. It facilitates preparedness at the local level. Nevertheless, when an emergency occurs, at least one of the local Category 1 responders will normally 45 declare a majorincident and call together a Strategic Co-ordinating Group (SCG) (usually, though not always, led by the police). Some, or many, of the responder organisations which have met at the LRF are likely to be part of the SCG.46 The SCG’s task is to co-ordinate the response to the emergency and it is also likely to take a role in the initial stages of the recovery (after which, if required, it is replaced by a dedicated Recovery Co-ordinating Group (RCG)). LRFs must help plan how the formation of the SCG takes place so as to ensure that it happens smoothly and without misunderstandings. It is reported widely that organisations which have worked together in the LRF are more likely to respond coherently and with confidence to an emergency. The formation of the SCG is not simply a transition from the LRF. On occasions, the LRF will continue to meet while an SCG is operating.LRF – structure2.51. The Local Resilience Forum comprises all chief officer groups, working groups,
task and finish groups and sub-groups.47
The structure of the LRF reflects its
status as a forum bringing together the duty-holders.2.52	Because of its importance, the LRF chief officer group should attract a sufficiently senior level of representation.	For example, local authority representatives should be at chief executive or deputy chief executive level, and police representatives should be chief constables or their deputies. Because the discussions are strategic, the LRF chief officer group should meet relatively infrequently, though at the minimum every six months, and the meetings should be thoroughly prepared so that the time of senior officers is used well.4845 Plans are maintained by Category 1 responders and will normally be activated by a member of that organisation, the regulations do not limit the decisions to Category 1 responders. Please refer to Emergency Preparedness, Chapter 5, paragraph 5.20 for more information.46 At the time of an emergency, those organisations whose functions are affected by the emergency come together to deliver the response and to lead the recovery.47 regulation 4(7)48 regulation 4(7)(a)
2.53. The role of the general working group is to bring issues before the chief officer group and ensure its decisions are implemented. Preparation for the LRF chief officer meetings is likely to be the responsibility of the LRF general working group. It is likely that senior civil protection professionals will attend, who can help determine the most useful agenda for the chief officer group. Chief Officers may of course nominate appropriate senior managers to attend if they wish. These working group meetings should be held regularly and they are likely to be convened more frequently to prepare the business of the LRF before chief officer group meetings and to act on its decisions afterwards and between meetings.2.54. Arrangements for the LRF – including the frequency of meetings of its groups and sub-groups – should be agreed between the Category 1 responders within a local resilience area and in consultation with the Category 2 responders which exercise functions within the LRF area. 492.55. Regardless of the way in which organisations are represented in the LRF process, all papers for discussion at the chief officer group meetings should be copied to all Category 1 and 2 responders in the LRF area and any standing members which are not Category 1 or 2 responders, such as voluntary sector and military representatives. All local responders should also be invited to submit agenda items to chief officer group meetings. These procedures will allow Category 1 and 2 responders not regularly attending the meeting to know what the issues are and to submit their contribution through their representatives if they wish. They may also request to attend the meeting, or part of the meeting, because of particular concerns they have. Where appropriate, LRFs should consider publishing papers into the public domain to inform their local communities of discussions held within meetings and upcoming agenda items.49 regulation 4(5)- 4(7), 4(10)
The general working group, sub groups and task and finish groups2.56. A typical structure for a Local Resilience Forum is shown in Figure 2:Figure 2: Structure for a Local Resilience Forum2.57. The general working group is likely to be a permanent group. In the first instance, it should be made up of officers from the organisations represented on the LRF chief officer group – though these may be augmented from other responder organisations. In some areas, the chairs of sub-groups are members of the general working group. The group takes forward business such as LRF multi-agency plans and training and exercise programmes.2.53. 
2.58. Supporting the general working group will be various sub-groups. Some of these may be permanent groups, such as the risk group which co-ordinates the production of the Community Risk Register. Task and finish Groups should also be considered with a finite life to deliver a defined outcome. One role of the sub- groups and task and finish groups is to provide an opportunity for organisations which do not attend the main LRF meetings (but which are represented there) to make their contribution. These groups also provide an opportunity for responder organisations which are not involved in the whole range of civil protection work, such as Category 2 responders and the voluntary sector, to be engaged. However, they should not be used as an opportunity to remove Category 2 responders from core LRF business. (Category 2 responders are specifically entitled to attend the main LRF meetings.50 )  Membership of all sub-groups, and their role in the light of evolving LRF priorities, should be reviewed regularly.2.59. Determination of which groups should be permanent sub-groups and which task and finish groups is a matter for LRFs themselves. Possible groups are suggested as follows:o Risk – delivering the Community Risk Register; identifying priorities for the work programme;o Capabilities – matching the government’s capabilities programme, including, for example, Telecommunications sub-groups (TSGs);o Area groups – based on administrative areas smaller than the whole LRF area;o Sector groups, including the voluntary sector – see discussion of representation at paragraphs 2.66-2.69 below;50 regulation 4(4)(b), 4(7)
o Specialist groups – these are cross-organisational groupings working on particular issues, such as chemical hazards, flooding, utilities emergencies, events, welfare support for people affected by emergencies, animal health, media relations, or training and exercising; ando Standing groups – these tend to pre-exist the CCA or to exist outside its statutory framework – such as airport committees, COMAH groups, coastal groups, event planning and sports stadium groups, town and city centre groups, local search and rescue committees, or flood defence boards. (Essentially, a “friendly”relationship should be established with them to ensure that they are familiar with the work of the LRF and reporting arrangements set up in both directions. Some may usefully be brought under the LRF umbrella as formal sub-groups. It is suggested that standing coastal groups be set up in all coastal areas.)Sub-groups and task and finish groups should only be established with the approval of the LRF chief officer group and should tie into the priorities set out in the Community Risk Register. Increasingly, LRFs are adopting governance arrangements which define the role and relationship of the various groups within the structure and ensure that the programme is carried forward in accordance with sound business management principles.51 regulation 4(5)- 4(7), 4(10)
The impact of the pattern of local resilience areas on all Category 1 and 2 responders2.60. The establishment of local resilience areas and LRFs on police service boundaries 51can pose particular problems.2.61. Because the administrative arrangements of local government in England and Wales vary considerably between metropolitan, shire and unitary areas, co-operation across a police boundary local resilience area is more easily applied in some areas than others. Also, the pattern of local resilience areas across England and Wales exerts particular pressures on national-level Category 1 responders such as, the Environment Agency and the Maritime and Coastguard Agency whose organisational footprints are different. Again, some of the Category 2 responders, such as, the utilities or transport companies, are organised nationally or regionally, on different boundaries. The LRF needs to take a flexible approach in recognition of these organisational differences.2.62. Also, one consequence of the local nature of arrangements under the CCA is that the way LRFs work is frequently different from one local resilience area to another. Differing procedures can pose particular problems for local responders (Categories 1 and 2) operating across a number of LRF areas. These responders are likely to have adopted a standard approach across all the LRF areas they cover. They should be prepared to show flexibility too.
51 regulation 3.
PAGE 32

2.63. 2.64. 2.65. 2.66. 52 regulation 4
The justification for basing local resilience planning on a police boundary structure is that emergencies generally have their initial impact at the local level. Response is first organised locally – usually co-ordinated by the police. It follows that, irrespective of the partners’ particular administrative arrangements and their procedures, they must have the capability to respond effectively at the local level. In this respect, it means both Category 1 and Category 2 responders must prepare at the local level with their civil protection partners. 52Nevertheless, some concessions should be made to acknowledge the difficulties which some responders, not only Category 2 responders but also some Category 1 responders, have in fulfilling expectations at the planning stage at the local level.One useful action which LRFs should take is to publish a detailed map showing their local resilience area and the local responders operating within it. It is also useful to provide clear information, possibly in a members’ handbook, about the membership of the LRF, its structures, procedures and activities.LRF – “effective representation”There are difficulties for some responders (both Category 1 and Category 2 responders) whose administrative areas cover a number of LRF areas of getting senior staff to all LRF meetings. There are also problems for the efficient functioning of the LRF where, for example, a number of organisations in the same class or sector – for example, shire district councils in England – all wish to attend the same LRF meeting. For these reasons, the regulations permit responders in a particular class, because they are operating in the same sector, to nominate a representative from that class who will act for them at the LRF meeting. This qualification of the obligation on all Category 1 responders and Category 2 responders to attend the LRF in their local resilience area, aims to ensure that meetings can be run efficiently and organisations are not over-stretched. The main requirement is that local responders must be “effectively represented”.53
53 regulation 4(8), 4(9)
PAGE 33
2.67. Where Category 1 responders do not feel they are or can be effectively represented by another member of their class – for example, metropolitan districts and unitary authorities may consider they need to be fully engaged in the LRF – then the primary duty to attend the LRF applies. Similarly, where Category 2 responders – for example, in the telecoms or the energy sectors – consider that a single organisation from their sector cannot represent them all (because, for instance, the class covers a range of different types of business), they should identify a second, suitable representative organisation, or recognise that the primary duty falls on them to be involved directly.2.68. Concerns remain that those responder organisations not attending the LRF are not engaged in its business and can fall outside the active civil protection community at the local level. Representation in some instances has tended to be determined in an ad hoc way, without regular review and renewal. In order to achieve effective representation, a more consistent procedure will be useful.  Those Category 1 and 2 responders in each class in a local resilience area 54 who wish to utilise the representation procedure should have an annual meeting to nominate an organisation (or possibly more than one) from their class to represent them for the year, unless other sound mechanisms exist.55 Over the course of the year, the representative is expected to provide an effective two-way flow of information for those in its group or sector. The mandate of the representative organisation should also be clearly stated. One Category 2 utility attempting to represent all Category 2 utilities across several sectors is not likely to be effective representation.54 See Civil Contingencies Act 2004, Schedule 1, Part 1 and 3, for classes of local responder in England and Wales.55 In Wales, a memorandum of understanding and information handbook has been produced by the Wales Utilities Group. The document provides a framework for the companies concerned to work with Category 1 responders and other Category 2 responders to meet the requirements of the Act. It sets out how utility companies engage with responder organisations and LRFs through an engagement protocol.
2.69. A Category 1 or 2 responder which acts as an effective representative for others:o has the authorisation of other local members of its class to take part in the LRF on their behalf;o is aware of the proceedings of the LRF chief officer group, its general working group, sub-groups and task and finish groups and is ready to take forward to the LRF issues raised by local members inside and outside these groups; 56o is able to explain current structures, policies, priorities and events in the area of civil protection affecting its sector; ando ensures that the other local members of its class which it represents are kept fully informed of issues discussed at the LRF and are invited to submit their comments or attend particular LRF meetings as appropriate.Role of Category 2 responders in co-operation2.70. Category 2 organisations are brought under the Act because local resilience can only be achieved if their emergency and business continuity plans under their own legislation reflect an understanding of, and integrate with, the plans of Category 1 responders. Category 2 planning may be regional or even national in its scope - these plans nonetheless must still acknowledge the interface with local responders in local level response arrangements and cater to their needs. Category 2 organisations also must co-operate with each other where that will help a Category 1 responder fulfil its duties.57
56 regulation 4(10)57 regulation 4(3)
PAGE 35
2.71. Category 2 responders are expected to help Category 1 responders in all aspects of the duty 5,8 but not to the extent that the demands of the Category 1 responder effectively place a Category 1 responsibility on them “by the back door”. Accordingly, Category 1 responders are expected to manage their requests for co-operation addressed to Category 2 responders – when, for example, requesting attendance at meetings of the LRF or seeking information for business continuity plans – in ways which are realistic and fair. At the same time, the Category 1 responders should not be expected to compromise their objectives.2.72. In order to address the various problems identified for Category 2 responders of meeting the demands made on them, a combination of measures should be implemented in each local resilience area:o to set the expectations of Category 1 responders at a level which is realistic and fair;o to manage Category 1 expectations and requests in the most efficient way; ando 	to address the obligations on Category 2 responders in ways which recognise the reasonable needs of Category 1 responders under the Act.2.73. Annex A aims to identify the reasonable expectations which Category 1 responders will have of Category 2 responders. The major areas where co-operation, including information sharing,59 is likely to be sought are identified as follows:o compilation of the community risk register (meetings and information sharing);58 regulation 4(2), 4(3)59 regulation 4(4). Co-operation can take many forms. In this list, two only (meetings and information sharing) are identified because they are considered to be
the most time-consuming for Category 2 responders. For a fuller description of co-operation, see paragraph 10 above.
PAGE 36
o identifying hazards and risks as the basis for specific emergency plans and exercise scenarios (meetings);o identifying business risks as part of BC planning (information sharing);o discussions with partners when developing procedures for specific plans, for multi-agency plans, and for LRF multi-agency plans (meetings);o discussions with partners when developing and planning exercises(meetings); ando discussions with partners about co-ordinating and formulatingwarning and informing messages (meetings).2.74. Some of these areas require direct contact for the Category 1 responder with a specific Category 2 partner and are unlikely to be addressed by a representative, or by other means. Therefore, the processes of attempting to manage the burden on Category 2 responders outlined below (see “The Right Issue, At the Right Time, At the Right Level”, paragraphs 2.83 - 2.87) will not meet all cases, and Category 2 responders should expect to continue to address some direct requests from Category 1 responders.2.75. Category 2 responders should expect to deal directly with the following expectations from Category 1 responders:o to meet with them occasionally to help them deliver their statutory tasks;o to take part in relevant exercises; ando to assist with information to help them complete their statutory tasks.o 
The Category 2 role is not a passive one. Category 2 responders should be engaged actively with Category 1 responders in making the relationship work.2.76. The expectation that Category 2 responders will take part in relevant local exercises is particularly important and needs to be managed carefully. Category 2 responders are subject to requests to take part in civil protection exercise programmes organised nationally or across multi-LRF boundaries. It is reasonable, nevertheless, for Category 1 responders to expect Category 2 responder involvement in local exercises where a clear need is demonstrated.2.77. In terms of the obligation under the Act to attend the LRF chief officer group, the requirements on Category 2 representatives are moderated in two ways:o They must consider attendance at all meetings; 60o They must attend meetings where all Category 1 responders in that local resilience area have invited them.61In practice, Category 2 responders or their representatives should give careful consideration to attending those meetings where items of relevance to them are on the agenda. If all Category 1 responders in the area request their attendance at a particular meeting, then the Category 2 responder or its representative must do so. However, this power to require attendance should only be used by the Category 1 responders where the item for discussion is relevant to the Category 2 responder.60 regulation 4(9)(b)61 regulation 4(9)(a)PAGE 38
2.78. Whether a matter is of relevance or not will be determined by the Category 2 responder or its representative organisation in conversation with the LRF secretary. In cases of dispute – where the LRF chair can demonstrate that he or she has the agreement for this course of action of all the Category 1 responders in the local resilience area62– the LRF chair can require the Category 2 responder or its representative to attend.2.79. Category 2 responders are, of course, entitled to attend any of these meetings of the LRF, its working group, sub-groups and task and finish groups if they2.53. 
wish to do so.63
Membership of these groups is determined by the LRF chief
officer group and Category 2 responders should be encouraged to attend them when relevant issues are tabled.Category 1 and 2 responders and information sharing2.80. A particular aspect of co-operation examined in Annex A is the impact on Category2.53. 
2 responders of requests for information from Category 1 responders. 64
(Such
requests can be directed at fellow Category 1 responders too, who may also benefit from a managed approach.) Annex A identifies two areas of major impact:o information required for the Community Risk Register; 65 ando information from infrastructure operators and main suppliers about business continuity risks. 66A number of other areas are identified where the impact is intermittent or minor, but they should be recognised and addressed.
62 regulation 4(10)(b)(i)63 regulation 4(10)(b)(ii)64 regulation 4765 regulation 15,66 regulation 18, 19,
PAGE 39
2.81. Requests for information – between Category 1s and Category 1s, Category 1s and Category 2s, Category 2s and Category 2s, and Category 1s and the voluntary sector – are suitable for a managed approach because:o the demands of a number of responder organisations are similar;o the volume of demands is great and can usefully be spread out or, alternatively, concentrated, or reduced; ando the capacity of partners to meet demand is limited.It is essential that civil protection partners seeking information from Category 2 responders (and other Category 1 responders and the voluntary sector) respect the difficulties that may be caused for the organisation receiving the request and refrain from an “all with all” approach67as far as possible (see also Chapter 3 on Information Sharing). Protocols relating to information sharing have been developed in some local resilience areas to ease the difficulties. A proposal for a more comprehensive protocol governing all aspects of co-operation is made in the next section.2.82. Even so, occasions remain when direct contact between local responders, one-on-one, to seek and provide information remains appropriate, as the Act requires.Category 1s, Category 2s and the voluntary sector, LRFs and multi-LRFs: “The Right Issue, at the Right Time, at the Right Level”2.83. Attendance at LRF meetings and sub-groups can create difficulties for Category 2 responders (and some Category 1 responders and the voluntary sector), particularly those which operate regionally or nationally. Category 2 responders must be invited to all LRF meetings, but the circumstances where Category 1 responders require a Category 2 to attend a meeting:67 See paragraphs 2.9 - 2.10 above.
o should be limited to those where matters of relevance will be discussed (see paragraphs 2.77- 2.78 above); ando may be modified by putting in place arrangements at the multi-LRF level which, in defined circumstances, will satisfy the requirement to meet with Category 1 local responder partners.2.84. A principle of Category 2 engagement should be that it takes place on “the right issue, at the right time, at the right level”. The key considerations are pragmatic and need to ensure that representatives of Category 2 responders attend those meetings of the LRF chief officer group, the working group, the sub-groups and task and finish groups where they need to be present and not those where they don’t.2.85. However, a further consideration is that co-operation, including information sharing, between Category 2 responders and Category 1 responders may be mediated effectively through structures at a multi-LRF level or above. Thus procedures should be agreed (and may be cemented in protocols) which identify a role for the DCLG RED team or a group of multiple LRFs – or Welsh Resilience Forum in Wales (WRF) – to facilitate co-operation between the Category 2 responders and the Category2.53. 
1 responders. 68
Examples are already in place where the formal arrangements
between Category 2 responders and Category 1 responders have been agreed across multi-LRF areas. Protocols have been designed where the duty holders themselves are the main parties to the agreement, together with the LRF(s) and organisations representing Category 2 responders from, for example, a particular utility sector.68 regulation 7.
2.86. The effect of the two moderating principles in paragraph 2.83 above is that the LRF, representing the Category 1 and 2 responders in its area, will need to determine which areas of work with particular Category 2 responders should continue to be dealt with through its structures and which can safely be delegated and formally assigned to a multi-LRF level committee on which Category 1 representatives will sit. (This task may be assisted by reference, for example, to Table 2 above which examines the tasks of the LRF, and also Annex A).2.87. Consideration should be given to how to allocate the different types of information request across the various forms of managed co-operation proposed:o through LRFs;o through groups of LRFs (and the Welsh Resilience Forum);o through LGD websites;o through Category 1 and 2 responder websites;o through secure national communications media; ando through the use of protocols between all the parties to agree the appropriate use of all the above.Support from lead government departments2.88. Working with the organisations they sponsor, lead government departments (LGDs) can act as a clearing house for answering certain generic types of request from Category 1 responders. This can be done through a variety of means including through the use of a web site with, for example, a Frequently Asked Questions page (as, for example, the CCS website on Category 2 responders69 ).69   www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/resource-library/civil-contingencies-act-category-2-responders-overview-sectors-and-emergency-planni
2.89. LGDs can also assist LRFs by ensuring that requests for action in a local resilience area are made to the duty-holders, rather than added to the expectations placed on the LRF.Other forms of co-operation to improve information sharing2.90. Category 2 responders themselves and their national associations can assist Category 1 responders by providing generic information on their websites tailored to the specific needs of local responders.2.91. Other means of making information available to local responders are through secure national communications media, such as the National Resilience Extranet.PAGE 43
A Category 1 or 2 responder “shall have regard to guidance” issued by a Minister of the Crown about “the matters specified” in regulations (s2(3) and (5) and s3(3)(b)).The Local Resilience Forum2.92. The LRF has essentially two roles as illustrated in Figure 1 below: 70o To link up organisations at the local level; ando 	To serve as one tier in a chain of resilience organisations at the local, multi-LRF and national levels.Figure 1: Resilience across the tiers of government
70 Please note that Diagram 1 should not be taken as demonstrating a hierarchical relationship. It is also generic and schematic. It does not, for example, describe the particular arrangements in Wales - including the Wales Resilience Forum and the links to the Welsh Government as lead government department in some areas.
PAGE 44
2.93. Supporting the LRF and facilitating its work in the resilience chain is the Department of Communities and Local Government Resilience and Emergencies Division Team in England, and in Wales, the emergencies branch of the Welsh Government (WG). In addition, there are Lead Government Departments (LGDs) which relate to each of the Category 1 and 2 responders and represent them at a UK level as well as issuing guidance in relation to their functions. WG has devolved responsibility in a number of areas, such as environment and animal health, and acts as an LGD for those areas in Wales. Finally, there is the Civil Contingencies Secretariat (CCS) within the Cabinet Office which relates directly to the Category 1 and 2 responders and to the LRFs and is responsible for the Civil Contingencies Act 2004 and local resilience policy. It also co-ordinates the resilience work of LGDs. The CCS and LGDs report to a Cabinet sub-committee on Threats, Hazards and Resilience and Contingencies (NSC (THRC)), which itself reports to a Cabinet committee, the National Security Council (NSC).2.94. The LRF should not be expected to act in the same way as an arm of government, funded and resourced to deliver policy objectives.  It is a forum required under the CCA regulations, but it may not have paid staff and its essential role is to help the duty-holders determine what to do in accordance with local circumstances.  Government’s formal relationship is with the duty-holders, the Category 1 and 2 responders, who have the principal responsibility for delivery.2.95. The LRF is also not an entity which represents its local responder members in a legal sense. In this respect, the LRF cannot “deliver” its members. However, the duty-holders can agree to bind the LRF to a certain course of action if they wish.2.53. 
2.96. As suggested above7,1 the aim of delivering a more robust LRF which can act more decisively can be achieved through agreement on governance arrangements which can be supported by a protocol between all the Category 1 and 2 partners. It can also be assisted by agreements for joint discharge of functions between key responders.Leadership and management2.97. There are several aspects of leading the LRF and ensuring that it works well, such as chairing the forum, the role of the secretary, the development of governance arrangements and sound business management practice and the possible appointment of an LRF manager.2.98. Traditionally in many areas, the role of chair has fallen to the police. The matching of the LRF boundary to the police boundaries reflects the police’s key co-ordinating role in many types of emergency. Generally, it makes them well placed to co-ordinate the multi-agency partnership of responder organisations, many of which are likely to operate within only part of – or, alternatively, over a wider geographical area than – the local resilience area. Even so, the choice of chair remains a matter for local determination.2.99. Various factors should determine the choice. The chair should be able to:o take on the job on a long term basis;o speak with authority about the forum area;o speak with authority about strategic civil protection issues; ando commit sufficient time to prepare for forum meetings.71 See paragraph 2.24
2.100. The chair may also represent the LRF at meetings with other tiers, including devolved and central government, or nominate another member of the LRF or its sub-groups to do so, at the appropriate senior level. Usually those nominated to attend on behalf of the LRF will be familiar with, and actively engaged in, the functional subject areas under discussion and may be the chair of the relevant subgroup2.101. The secretariat support role is crucial in ensuring the LRF performs effectively. This clearly involves the appointment of an efficient secretary but it may also require a co-ordinator or manager to assist the chief officer and general working groups and ensure that the business of the forum across all its sub-groups and task and finish groups is dealt with satisfactorily. The two roles can fall to any of the member organisations and there are several instances where, for convenience, the role is performed by the chair’s organisation, or the roles are co-located. However, it should generally be a different organisation from that providing the chair, possibly a local authority, so as to get the widest knowledge at the centre of the LRF of the range of functions engaged in preparations for emergency.2.102. In relation to the LRF chief officer group, the working group, various sub-groups and task and finish groups, and other activities, the support role to the chair has a number of key tasks, as follows:o fix the date of chief-officer level LRF meetings;o agree the agenda and attendance with the LRF members;o organise the production of papers and presentations;o circulate papers to all Category 1 and 2 responders in the LRF area;o brief the chair;o take the minutes and follow up the matters arising and action points;o disseminate the minutes to all Category 1 and 2 responders in the LRF area and other LRF members;o 
o ensure that meetings of the working group, sub-groups and task and finish groups are effectively organised and recorded; ando ensure that relevant issues from these groups are brought to the attention of the chief officer group.Where a co-ordinator or manager has been appointed, the following additional tasks may be undertaken (though without a manager, these are undertaken by the LRF chief officer group and the working group):o track progress in carrying out the forum’s decisions, including competent delivery of its programme, which may include the Community Risk Register, developing multi-agency plans and running multi-agency exercises;o prepare and deliver from time to time a strategic assessment on the capability and readiness of local responders, acting together, to respond; ando act when necessary as a focal point for the dissemination of documents containing policy initiatives and requests from other levels of government.2.103. All of these tasks, but particularly the last three, illustrate the burden of work falling to LRFs, which has encouraged them to find ways of appointing managers where they can. The LRF is not a fully-staffed, corporate body, supported by a secure funding stream. As a result, the expectations placed on it can sometimes strain its limited infrastructure. The LRF relies on voluntary contributions in kind or through subscription from its members. Accordingly, central government will endeavour to reduce the demands placed directly on LRFs by circulating communications and expectations for action in the first instance to the specific Category 1 and 2 duty-holders whose contributions are required. LRF chairs and secretariats will be fully informed of all these communications and be invited to co-ordinate initiatives.2.53. 
2.104. The LRF is likely to rely on its member organisations – in addition to those providing the chair and the secretariat – taking initiative and progressing work through the general working group, the sub-groups, the task and finish groups and other projects.2.105. Various factors should determine the choice of who provides the secretariat. Those taking up the task should:o take on the job on a long term basis;o be competent to support the chair at strategic level meetings;o have the back up of an administration team within their own organisation; ando be competent to organise, or to support officers from their own or other organisations, in administering the work of the working group, sub-groups, task and finish groups and other projects.LRF funding2.106. Dedicated funding can achieve greater consistency of performance in LRFs. In most cases, providing a secretariat - or a co-ordinator or manager-relies on a subscription scheme. Subscription from LRF members has achieved good results in a number of areas and should be considered as a practical way of standing the forum on a firmer footing.2.107. Establishing LRFs on a firmer basis with greater resources to support the chair and secretariat will require full consent from the members, who will wish to ensure that sound governance arrangements and an effective work programme are in place. Some support for the work of sub-groups, as well as the main LRF, may be appropriate in some instances.2.53. 
Participation in the LRF2.108. This section looks at how participation in the LRF process is likely to be organised in practice for different classes of organisation. The descriptions below are guides rather than definitive structures, and will need to be tailored to reflect local circumstances. But they do represent what Category 1 and 2 responders have indicated as reasonable expectations at the local level.Category 1 responders2.109. Local authorities play a critical role in civil protection. They have a wide range of functions likely to be called upon in support of the emergency services during an emergency, including key statutory responsibilities such as environmental health, housing, social services and highways. As the response phase comes to an end, the impact on the community becomes a key issue. At this stage, the recovery phase, the local authority is likely to take the lead co-ordination role as part of its wider community leadership responsibility.2.110. Each local authority retains the right to attend the LRF. But it may not be practical for every local authority in any given LRF area to be a member of the full LRF. Despite their legal autonomy and individual approaches to civil protection, in many instances, it will make sense for local authorities to nominate one or more of their number to act as effective representatives on the LRF.2.111. Police forces co-ordinate the response to most emergencies on land. Their key role in co-ordinating the response is based not only on the need to protect the scene for emergency workers and vehicles and preserve evidence of a potential crime; the police are also often expected to co-ordinate information to the public about the emergency, including dealing with the media. This strong presence in co-ordinating the response has meant that the police are often called upon to co-ordinate multi-agency policy work at the strategic level as well.2.53. 
2.112. As the LRFs have been based by definition on police areas, there will be a single local police force member for each LRF. Each police force will have a single representative, though it may have a second if it has taken on the role as chair.2.113. The British Transport Police (BTP) plays a role akin to local police forces, albeit in a more specialist and limited environment. It takes responsibility for the management of incidents on the rail network and at train stations.2.114. In most LRFs, the local police force will represent the BTP. The exceptions to this are likely to be those meetings where particular consideration is given to rail transport issues, including risk assessments and plans.2.115. The Fire and Rescue Service is a key Category 1 responder. It has a pivotal role to play in the risk assessment and response to a wide range of emergencies, both fire and non-fire related. Its co-ordination role of the fire and rescue service in a multi-agency incident is normally focused on operations inside the inner cordon. Fire and Rescue Services’ expertise and equipment for dealing with chemical emergencies, including decontamination on behalf of the health service, and their search and rescue capabilities, give them a key role in multi-agency planning.2.116. In many cases, outside Wales, the boundaries of the local fire and rescue authority will be coterminous with or very similar to the LRF area. It will generally be appropriate for the fire and rescue authorities to have a single representative. Any other fire and rescue authorities which also fall within the same LRF area will be most efficiently represented by the lead authority, with that authority taking responsibility for keeping its colleagues informed of LRF deliberations.2.53. 
2.117. Although a part of the NHS, the Ambulance Service has a distinct place within the multi-agency civil protection effort. As one of the emergency services, they are at the vanguard of emergency response.2.118. If a number of ambulance trusts operate within the same LRF area, it will probably be appropriate to agree a lead trust (reflecting both the geographical coverage within the LRF area and commitments with other LRFs). In Wales, there is a single ambulance trust covering all four police areas.2.119. The National Health Service 72 (NHS) is a patient-led service across primary, secondary and tertiary care. Health sector organisations covered by the Act include Strategic Health Authorities, Primary Care Trusts, Local Health Boards, the Public Health Wales NHS Trust, Trusts (Foundation and Non-Foundation) that provide hospital accommodation and services in relation to accidents and emergencies, and also Ambulance Trusts. The above NHS organisations are all subject to duties under the Act as Category 1 responders, with the exception of Strategic Health Authorities, which are Category 2 responders (and are described below at paragraphs 2.151-2.152).2.120. Particular care needs to be taken in establishing co-operation with the various parts of the health structure at LRF level. In addressing the responsibilities of a large organisation, it is challenging for single NHS representation to portray accurately the position of the entire local health economy on the LRF. Some LRFs have a health sub-group on which all the various health organisations are represented. In England, the local NHS is normally represented at the LRF by the lead Primary Care Trust (apart from the ambulance service which is separately represented in its own right) or, in exceptional circumstances, the Strategic Health Authority. In Wales, Health Boards, the Public Health Wales NHS Trust and the Welsh Ambulance Services Trust will normally each be represented.72 References to NHS structures will be amended as appropriate following restructuring
2.121. Notwithstanding its close links with the NHS, the Health Protection Agency (HPA) should be represented separately.2.122. Port health authorities are concerned with the prospect of human, animal and crop diseases being imported into the UK at seaports and airports.2.123. Port health authorities are unlikely to be directly represented on the LRF. Generally, they will be represented by the local authority or (in some circumstances) the HPA. Like the BTP, they will be expected to attend the LRF meetings when issues relating to their functions are discussed.2.124. The Environment Agency aims to protect and improve the environment, and to promote sustainable development. It plays an important supporting role in planning for and responding to emergencies: in particular, it has key roles in relation to flood risk management and environmental regulation.2.125. The Environment Agency has seven regions and 19 operational areas across England and Wales and will be directly represented by the Environment Agency area in which the LRF area is located. Where the LRF falls across an Environment Agency area boundary, the Environment Agency has agreed to nominate a lead area and thus a single representative.2.126. The Environment Agency will be represented by the area manager or nominated deputy from the lead area and will provide advice and information on all aspects of the environment for which it has a statutory responsibility.2.53. 
2.127. The Maritime and Coastguard Agency (MCA) is responsible for the initiation and co-ordination of civil maritime search and rescue within the UK Search and Rescue Region, and as such is an emergency service. It carries out this function through HM Coastguard. This role is described in the Search and Rescue Framework for the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.2.128. The MCA also leads the response to maritime pollution incidents in the UK Pollution Control Zone. It manages a multi-level plan, the National Contingency Plan for Marine Pollution from Shipping and Offshore Installations, for co-ordinating responder organisations dealing with pollution at sea or on the coast.2.129. The MCA is structured around three “regions” (Eastern; Wales and West England; and Scotland and Northern Ireland). Within each region, there are three HM Coastguard operational areas. These regional and area boundaries do not coincide with coastal police force areas.2.130. The MCA will be required to take part in the LRF process only in coastal LRF areas. It will be represented at the LRF by an HM Coastguard manager from the Coastguard “region” where the LRF is situated. In most cases, this will be the manager from the relevant area. These managers will be able to provide advice and information on all maritime emergency response matters. In addition, the MCA has a central resilience unit and each “region” has a senior MCA/ HM Coastguard officer dedicated to resilience matters.2.53. 
Category 2 responders2.131. Electricity distributors and transmitters are covered by the Act. During an emergency affecting electricity supplies, the companies retain control of their operations and have to meet their obligations as prescribed by the regulator. It is crucial that their planning arrangements be understood by the Category 1 responders, and vice versa, and that there be a free flow of information between them.2.132. Electricity companies operating within a given LRF area may be expected to attend the LRF meetings when relevant agenda items are tabled. They are likely to be represented by one or more of their number, who will report back to them.2.133. Gas distributors and transmitters are covered by the Act. During an emergency affecting gas supplies, the companies retain control of the operation and have to meet their obligations as prescribed by the regulator. It is crucial that their planning arrangements be understood by the Category 1 responders, and vice versa, and that there be a free flow of information between them.2.134. Planning in relation to oil and gas pipelines is covered by the Pipelines Safety Regulations.These arrangements, including exercises, are likely to be reported to the LRF.2.135. The main gas distribution company in an area may attend the main LRF group on the basis of ‘right to attend, right to invite’. It may act as a representative for other gas distributors, and report back to them.2.136. Water and sewerage undertakers. During an emergency affecting water or sewerage, the companies retain control of their operations and have to meet their legal obligations. It is crucial that their planning arrangements be understood by the Category 1 responders, and vice versa, and that there be a free flow of information between them.2.53. 
2.137. In many cases, there will be one water company operating within an LRF area. It will attend the main LRF group on the basis of ‘right to attend, right to invite’. Where there is more than one company, they may be represented by one of their number, which could report back to them.2.138. Telephone service providers, fixed and mobile. There are many providers of landline services. There are five mobile telephone operators, each organised on a national basis. During an emergency affecting fixed or mobile telephone supplies, the companies retain control of their operations and have to meet their obligations as prescribed by the regulator. It is crucial that their planning arrangements be understood by the Category 1 responders, and vice versa, and that there be a free flow of information between them.2.139. Fixed-line and mobile companies operating within a given LRF area may be expected to attend the LRF meetings when relevant agenda items are tabled. They are likely to be represented by one of their number, which will report back to them.2.140. Railway operators. Responsibility for operation and maintenance of the railway track rests currently principally with Network Rail. There are a number of train operating companies, organised on a national and regional basis and dealing with passengers and freight. During an emergency affecting the railways, the companies retain control of their operations and have to meet their obligations as prescribed by the regulator. Network Rail and some train operating companies are also responsible for operating mainline stations. It is crucial that these planning arrangements be understood by the Category 1 responders, and vice versa, and that there be a free flow of information between them.2.53. 
2.141. Freight train operators will in most cases be represented by Network Rail. In some instances it may be appropriate for passenger train operating companies to be represented by Network Rail also.2.142. Airport operators. Not every LRF area will have an airport within it. And not every airport will be subject to the obligations. Only “relevant airport operators” are covered by the Act. ”Relevant airport operators” are defined as those with an annual throughput of at least 50,000 passengers or 10,000 tonnes of freight.2.143. During an emergency affecting an airport, the airport retains control of its operations and has to meet its obligations as prescribed by the regulator. It is crucial that its planning arrangements be understood by the Category 1 responders, and vice versa, and that there be a free flow of information between them.2.144. Each airport is likely to represent itself directly in the LRF process, either at the main group or at a relevant sub-group.2.145. Ports. Not every LRF area will have a port within it. And not every port will be subject to the obligations. “Relevant harbour authorities” are defined as those with an annual throughput of at least 200,000 passengers or 1.5 million tonnes of freight. During an emergency affecting a port, the harbour authority retains control of its operations and has to meet its obligations as prescribed by the Secretary of State. It is crucial that its planning arrangements be understood by the Category 1 responders, and vice versa, and that there be a free flow of information between them.2.146. If more than one relevant harbour authority operates within an LRF area, they are likely to nominate a lead operator to attend either the main LRF group or a relevant subgroup. This role may be taken on by a representative of the British Ports Association.2.53. 
2.147. The Highways Agency is an executive agency of the Department for Transport (DfT), responsible for managing the English Strategic Road Network, comprising motorways and A-roads (primary routes). The Highways Agency does not operate in Wales, where WG has responsibility for trunk roads. Divided into a number of operational regions and areas, the work of the Highways Agency includes maintenance and development of roads, structures and equipment on the Network. Since 2004, with the introduction of the Traffic Officer Service, operational management of traffic on those roads has also become an important part of the Agency’s remit, with the National Traffic Control Centre providing traffic and travel information through a variety of media across the Network. The Agency also has a keen interest in multi- agency working and partnerships with all key stakeholders, in particular the Police, helping to respond effectively to incidents.2.148. It is crucial that these planning arrangements be understood by the Category 1 responders, and vice versa, and that there be a free flow of information between them. Highways Agency emergency planning teams exist within each region and will attend LRF meetings and sub-groups on the basis of “right to attend, right to invite”.2.149. The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) has a crucial role to play in certain aspects of the LRF process. In particular, the HSE has a significant input to make in the assessment of risk, and the development of the Community Risk Register. The HSE also has a role in relation to offshore oil and gas installations.2.150. The HSE may be expected to attend LRF meetings and sub-groups when relevant items are tabled.2.151. Strategic Health Authorities73(SHAs) in England act as the regional headquarters for the NHS. They do not deliver services but provide leadership, co-ordination and supportacross a defined geographical area, managing the performance of PCTs and NHS Trusts.73 References to NHS structures will be amended as appropriate following restructuring.
2.152. Arrangements vary, but SHAs are likely to represent the NHS at multi-LRF Forums. Co-ordination between the SHA and the lead PCTs in each LRF area ensures sound representation.Other co-operating bodies2.153. The DCLG Resilience and Emergencies Division (DCLG RED) and the Welsh Government (WG) are responsible for ensuring that there is good two-way communication between Category 1 and Category 2 responders and central government, that planning is co- ordinated where necessary, and that Category 1 responders have the support they need. DCLG and WG need a full understanding of the work of LRFs, not least because of the requirement to develop plans for emergencies beyond the local level.2.154. DCLG and WG can be expected to be standing members of the LRFs in their area. They will generally attend only as observers, though they will be able to add value in a number of ways, including offering advice on the wider picture, and encouraging cross- boundary working and the sharing of good practice.2.155. The armed forces have a small permanent role in local civil protection through the provision of unique and guaranteed military “niche” capabilities, such as explosive ordnance disposal or search and rescue. As part of the wider government response, Defence can also make a significant contribution in support of Category 1 responders at times of serious emergencies through Military Aid to the Civil Authorities (MACA). The armed forces remain prepared to respond to a range of emergencies in the UK, especially where Defence can make a strategic impact. There are no standing forces allocated to UK resilience, however, and assets are drawn from across Defence to meet specific demands. Since the Armed Forces are a centralised organisation under direct control of central government, requests for assistance are considered at national level.2.53. 
2.156. It is important that Category 1 responders establish close links with the armed forces in their area. Through the medium of LRFs (and multi-LRF groups/ Wales Resilience Forum), Category 1 responders will develop a greater understanding of how the armed forces might support a response to an emergency. It is therefore important that the Regional Brigade, via the Joint Regional Liaison Officer (JRLO), is represented at the appropriate level on LRFs since he or she is best placed to provide appropriate guidance on seeking military assistance. Clear guidance on Defence’s role is contained in MoD’s, The Defence Contribution to UK Resilience – A Guide for Civil Responders, 2009 7.42.157. The Met Office provides services that can help Category 1 and 2 responders prepare for and respond to emergencies that are caused or influenced by the weather. These can include severe weather warnings, plume predictions and storm tide alerts. Linked to these services is advice on the interpretation and impact of the weather during an emergency.2.158. The voluntary sector is organised nationally and locally and can provide a wide range of skills and services. It has a key support role to offer to the emergency services and other responding organisations in emergency planning and response and, in certain circumstances, such as rescue at sea, an operational role. At the national level, the Voluntary Sector Civil Protection Forum ensures communication and co-operation between organisations in the voluntary sector themselves. Further detail on the voluntary sector’s work is set out in Chapter 14.74 http://www.mod.uk/NR/rdonlyres/84992BEC-0918-41E6-8CB4-11FD23D5B119/0/JDP022EdAddendumWeb.pdf
Annex ACO-OPERATION AND INFORMATION-SHARING: EXPECTATIONS AND IMPACT AND THE ROLE OF THE LRF[This table repeats Table 1 and highlights the impact of the CCA duties on the Category 2s and the LRF. It does not deal with expectations regarding attendance at LRFs.]A. DUTY TO CO-OPERATEB. DUTY TO SHARE INFORMATIONFive Main Category 1 DUTIESIs co-operation required?Impact on Category 2 responders andother Category 1respondersIS LRF involved?Is information sharing required?Impact on Category 2 responders andother Category 1respondersIs LRF involved?1.Risk Assessmenta)Direct discussions with partners to support compilation of individual risk assessment foreach Category 1organisation.Intermittent – impact variesNoInformation required directly from partnersto support each Category 1 responder’s individualrisk assessment.Intermittent – impact variesNo – but Category 1s use CRR to develop their own risk assessmentsb)Discussion with partners within LRF to compile CommunityRisk Register.Major and ongoingYesInformation required for CommunityRisk Register.Major and ongoingYesc)Discussion with partners within the LRF re publication of the CRR – which can be done as part of warningand informing.Intermittent – impact variesYesConsistent approach to providing risk and warning information required across partners.Intermittent – impact variesYes
A. DUTY TO CO-OPERATEB. DUTY TO SHARE INFORMATIONFive Main Category 1 DUTIESIs co-operation required?Impact on Category 2 responders andother Category 1respondersIS LRF involved?Is information sharing required?Impact on Category 2 responders andother Category 1respondersIs LRF involved?1.Risk Assessmentd)Discussion with partners aboutï Central government assessment of risk under capabilities programmeï Reports back to central government about multi-LRF and national riskregistersIntermittent – impact variesYesInformation required to help assist with interpreting the local impact ofcentral government risk assessment.Intermittent – impact variesYese)Discussion with partners to support development of:ï specific emergencyplansï exercise scenarios.Intermittent - majorNoInformation required to help define the nature and possible quantificationof consequences addressedï by Category 1plansï in exercisescenarios.Intermittent – impact variesNof)Risk meetings or discussions with infrastructure operatorsabout BusinessContinuity plans.Intermittent – impact variesProbably notInformation from infrastructure operators and main suppliers re business continuity risks.Intermittent - majorProbably not
A. DUTY TO CO-OPERATEB. DUTY TO SHARE INFORMATIONFive Main Category 1 DUTIESIs co-operation required?Impact on Category 2 responders andother Category 1respondersIS LRF involved?Is information sharing required?Impact on Category 2 responders andother Category 1respondersIs LRF involved?2.Emergency Planninga)Direct discussion for Category 1 responders with partners to prepareï specific emergencyplans;ï multi-agency plans;andï LRF multi-agencyplans.Intermittent - majorï Probably notï Sometimesï YesDetails of partner contacts, roles, responsibilities, procedures, capabilities and resources.Intermittent - majorï Probably notï Noï Yesb)Discussion for Category 1 responders with partners aboutï Plans required by central governmentï Information required under nationalcapabilities survey.Intermittent - majorYesDetails of partner contacts, roles, responsibilities, procedures, capabilities and resources.YesYesc)Discussion for Category 1 responders with partners about design and deliveryof training and of exercises for:ï specific emergencyplans.Intermittent - majorï Probably notï Sometimesï YesFor scenario development.Intermittent – impact variesï Probably notï Sometimesï Yes
A. DUTY TO CO-OPERATEB. DUTY TO SHARE INFORMATIONFive Main Category 1 DUTIESIs co-operation required?Impact on Category 2 responders andother Category 1respondersIS LRF involved?Is information sharing required?Impact on Category 2 responders andother Category 1respondersIs LRF involved?2.Emergency Planningï multi-agencyplans; andï LRF multi-agencyplans.d)Discussion with partners about design and delivery of training and exercises for plan required bycentral government.Intermittent – majorYesFor scenario development.Intermittent – impact variesYese)Updating plansRegular - minorSometimesDetails of partner contacts, roles, responsibilities, procedures, capabilitiesand resources.Regular – minorSometimes3.Business Continuity Plansa)Discussions with key infrastructure operators and main suppliers reprocedures.Intermittent – impact variesNoInformation from key infrastructure operators and suppliers reprocedures.Intermittent – impact variesNob)--NoUpdated businesscontinuity plans.Regular – minorNo
A. DUTY TO CO-OPERATEB. DUTY TO SHARE INFORMATIONFive Main Category 1 DUTIESIs co-operation required?Impact on Category 2 responders andother Category 1respondersIS LRF involved?Is information sharing required?Impact on Category 2 responders andother Category 1respondersIs LRF involved?4.Warning and Informinga)Meetings for Category 1 responders with partners about the nature of hazardand risk and type of messages tomake public.Intermittent - majorYesCategory 2 responders are likely to have responsibilities to provide information to the publicunder their own legislation.Updated messagesand procedures.Intermittent – impact variesYesb)Meetings for Category 1 responders with partners and otherco-operating organisations such as the media and voluntary sector about multi-agency media plans and arrangementsfor warning dissemination.Intermittent - majorYesCategory 2 responders likely to have responsibilities to provide information to the public under their own legislation.Updated messages and procedures. [Operationally - at the response phase- partners should inform each other when warnings and other messagesare issued.]Intermittent –  impact variesYes
A. DUTY TO CO-OPERATEB. DUTY TO SHARE INFORMATIONFive Main Category 1 DUTIESIs co-operation required?Impact on Category 2 responders andother Category 1respondersIS LRF involved?Is information sharing required?Impact on Category 2 responders andother Category 1respondersIs LRF involved?c)Joint publicity and events by Category 1s and their partners to raise public awareness of plansand procedures.Intermittent – impact variesSometimesEach organisation to contribute relevant messages.Intermittent - minorYes5.Promotion of BCMa)LA clarifies with partners who is doing what to promote business continuitymanagement.Intermittent - minorNoInformation about promotion efforts undertaken and promotionalopportunities.Intermittent – minorSometimesb)---Requests from business community for information about potential businesscontinuity risks.Intermittent - minorNo
 Formal Information Sharing Under the Civil Contingencies Act 2004Revision to Emergency Preparedness, Chapter 3 (Information Sharing)Civil Contingencies Act Enhancement ProgrammeMarch 2012
Chapter 3 (Formal Information Sharing) of Emergency Preparedness Revised Version1 Civil Contingencies Act 2004 (Contingency Planning) Regulations referred to in this Guidance as the Contingency Planning Regulations.

 WHAT THE ACT AND THE REGULATIONS REQUIRE The duties quoted below outline formal legal requirements. However, most information sharing will be undertaken voluntarily within the context of broader co-operation between responders.A Category 1 or 2 responder “shall comply with regulations” made by a Minister of the Crown about “the extent of a duty” and “the manner in which… it is to be performed” (s2(3) and s3(3)(a))Regulations under the Act “may permit or require a person or body listed in Part 1 or 3 of Schedule 1 to provide information, either on request or in other specified circumstances, to a person or body listed in Part 1 of the Schedule in connection with the performance of a duty under subsection (1)”. This is subject to Part 8 of the Regulations.Purpose and Scope3.1. Information is shared between Category 1 and 2 responders as they work together to perform their duties under the Act. Information sharing is a crucial element of civil protection work, underpinning all forms of co-operation. It may involve simple liaison between bodies keeping each other up to date on their current arrangements and future plans. Such activities may be carried out through LRFs and multi LRF groups, and more informally.3.1. 
3.2. Information sharing may also involve direct contacts, formal or informal, between Category 1 and 2 responders seeking knowledge of hazards, risk assessments or planning arrangements (including warning procedures) and other matters, where the information is in the possession of one, and the other believes it needs the information to fulfil its civil protection duties.3.3. The process of sharing information is crucial to other duties under the Act as represented in Annex A of Chapter 2 (Co-operation) ?. These are:o sound risk assessment relies on obtaining accurate information about the nature of the hazard, the probability of a hazardous eventoccurring, and the potential effects and impact on the community if it does. Each of these elements may involve some specialist knowledge and calculation and the information required may be privileged or sensitive and not generally in the public domain.o business continuity management largely involves knowledge of the vulnerabilities of one’s own organisation – but it also examines linkages to and dependencies on suppliers and contractors, where information may be harder to obtain.o emergency planning relies essentially on knowledge of how each of the partners in response has planned to perform – what their aims and contribution will be, how they will organise and co-ordinate their efforts with those of other bodies, and how contacts will be managed before and during the event. All these details are constantly changing as plans are revised, organisations are restructured or their roles redefined, and individuals and teams are replaced.2 This refers to a table in the 2012 revision of Chapter 2 (Co-operation) of Emergency Preparedness.
3.4. Information sharing is necessary so that Category 1 and 2 responders are able to make the right judgements. If Category 1 and 2 responders have access to all the information they need, they can make the right decisions about how to plan and what to plan for. If they do not have access to all the information, their planning will be weakened. They will be less well placed to make judgements around cost-benefit analysis – what to plan for and what not to plan for.3.5. But the picture is complicated because each individual Category 1 or 2 responder needs to get its planning right and this has to be balanced against the needs of others. For example, sharing a piece of information which helps the planning of one Category 1 or 2 responder, might, in some circumstances, harm the interests of another Category 1 or 2 responder.	Also, the perspective of an individual organisation on a single piece of information can be affected by its own position, so an organisation can interpret information in a way that seems correct but is actually wrong. For example, a Category 1 or 2 responder might interpret something to be a risk, but another Category 1 or 2 responder with greater expertise might be less concerned. And in some circumstances, Category 1 or 2 responders will not be able to appreciate the bigger picture into which the information fits. For example, a seemingly innocuous piece of information might have implications for national security.3.6. These two competing factors point towards a framework in which the initial presumption is that information should be shared, but that some information should be controlled if its release would be counterproductive or damaging in some other way.3.1. 
Devolved Administrations3.7. The way in which the information sharing duty under the CCA and the Contingency Planning Regulations apply to Category 1 and 2 responders in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland is much the same as in England. The key points in relation to the information sharing duty are:o in Scotland, Part 1 of the CCA and the Regulations (which includes the disclosure of information provision under which the Regulations were made) apply to Scotland, with the powers it sets out residing with Scottish Ministers; ?o in Wales, arrangements under Part 1 of the CCA and the Regulations apply; ando in Northern Ireland, arrangements under Part 1 of the CCA andthe Regulations apply only to a limited number of organisations: PSNI, MCA and telecoms providers.Where relevant, LRFs should be aware of the different structures in place and consider cross boundary information sharing requirements.When information should not be formally requested3.8. In most instances, information will pass freely between Category 1 and 2 responders, as part of a more general process of dialogue and co-operation. This is the means by which the overwhelming majority of information sharing should happen and has happened. Annex A of Chapter 2 sets out the areas in which responders will expect to share information.3 Part 8 of the Civil Contingencies Act 2004 (Contingency Planning) (Scotland) Regulations 2005 (SI2005/ 494).
3.9. The Regulations require Category 1 and 2 responders to consider alternativeroutes before pursuing a formal information request.4  But there are still someinstances in which the supply of information will be more controlled. Under the Regulations, any Category 1 or 2 responder can request information from another Category 1 or 2 responder, so long as it is for the purpose of fulfilling responsibilities under the Act, or the performance of another function which relates to an
emergency. 5
This should be seen very much as a fallback option and every effort
should be made to maintain relationships between Category 1 and 2 responders that allow information to be shared without recourse to formal requests. But should formal requests be necessary, there are a number of procedures that need to be followed in order to make the system work. This ensures that Category 1 and 2 responders make proper efforts to use existing and informal routes to gather information. The aim of this provision is to avoid over-bureaucratisation of the information-sharing process, and reinforce the message that the information-sharing mechanisms under the Act should be regarded as a fallback rather than as the first option.3.10. Where it is necessary to resort to the formal request process, one or more Category 1 or 2 responders will request the information and one or more will receive the request. They are known respectively as “the requesting Category 1 or 2 responder” 6 and “the receiving Category 1 or 2 responder.” Where the information is required by a number of Category 1 responders, the request may be co-ordinated through the LRF or LRF members may agree on a lead responder co-ordinating such a request. In addition, any multi- Local Resilience Forum groups may facilitate the co-ordination of such requests from across more than one LRF area.4 regulation 47(3)(b)5 regulation 476 regulation 47
In Wales, this role is undertaken by the Wales Resilience Forum (WRF).	This co-ordinated approach to information sharing should reduce the burden on those agencies from whom information is requested. Before making a request, first, the Category 1 or 2 responder must be satisfied that it does not already hold the information, either by virtue of a previous request or because of informal information exchange. Category 1 and 2 responders should, as a consequence, marshal the information they hold in such a way as to ensure they can make a judgement on this point.3.11. Secondly, the Category 1 or 2 responder must satisfy itself that the information is not reasonably accessible to the public – that is to say, is not published by the Category 1 or 2 responder as part of its wider information policy.  Examples of this would include material made available in annual reports or accounts, or material on websites (both those of individual Category 1 or 2 responders and general websites with generic information).3.12. Thirdly, the Category 1 or 2 responder must satisfy itself that the information cannot be obtained by other means. This includes all forms of informal dialogue and information sharing, and obliges Category 1 and 2 responders to work together in the first instance to agree information flows that meet the need of those organisations involved. To assist the process LRFs are strongly advised to develop information sharing protocols. These should recognise any pre-existing organisational relationships and will include many of the informal information sharing agreements that exist at the local level. Category 1 and 2 responders also have or may have pre-existing requirements on them under other legislation (including, for example, their licence conditions from a regulator,3.1. 
or by direction of a minister) to assess risk and to prepare planning arrangements for emergencies. This may mean that relationships and information-sharing routes are already established. Where possible, these should be built on and complemented, rather than duplicated.Formal procedures for requesting information3.13. In any instance of information sharing, one or more Category 1 or 2 responders will request the information and one or more will receive the request. They are known respectively as “the requesting responder” and “the receiving responder”.73.14. An information request should be made in writing. It must specify either the information required or a description of the information requested. The request should be sufficiently precise that the nature of the information sought is clear. The request must include reasons as to why the responder needs the information.83.15. The request may specify a time limit, and the place at which the information should be provided. The request may also specify the form in which the information is to be supplied (eg in paper form, on disk). In each case, the time allowed and the place and form specified, must be reasonable. For example, a requesting responder seeking details from an established plan might allow a week for the receiving responder to reply. But if the information being sought is, for example, not presently collated in an easy-to-share way, or can only be released with the permission of a third party, a month might be more applicable. Wherever possible, the mechanics of the request should be discussed in advance between responders.3.16. A template for requesting information can be found at Annex 3.7 regulation 478 regulation 48
Procedure for dealing with a request3.17. A valid request for information in possession of the Category 1 and 2 responder receiving the request, must be complied with unless one of the exceptions applies (see paragraph 3.23). This is the case even where the information has been originally supplied in confidence – though the responder which receives the information is also likely to become subject to that duty of confidence. Where the responder is subject to restrictions on the disclosure of information in another enactment or a contract, the other enactment or contract will have to be considered in light of the Regulations. Which provision applies will depend on the particular terms of the other enactment or contract.3.18. In considering whether the request is valid, a responder should consider if the procedural requirements have been satisfied and whether the reasons given by the requesting responder indicate the information does appear to be reasonably required in connection with the requesting responder’s functions.3.19. The information must be provided within the time limit specified in the request.If no time limit is specified, the information must be provided in a reasonable period. The information must be supplied in the form and at the place specified by the request.3.20. The request relates to information, not documents. A responder which receives a request is not required to disclose all the documents which contain the information which has been requested. However, this will often be the easiest way to deal with an information request. In other cases, a new document which contains the information being requested may be prepared.3.1. 
3.21. A template for responding to a request for information can be found at Annex 3.3.22. Templates for making and replying to information requests can be found at Annex 3.Storing information3.23. Category 1 and 2 responders should also be aware of the differences required in handling personal data, when compared to handling sensitive security-related or commercial information (see paragraph 3.26).3.24. It is essential that Category 1 and 2 responders who request information formally or informally have appropriate methods of secure storage when the requested information is received. Each agency should have a locally defined protocol for handling, accessing, and storing information, especially that which relates to sensitive information.Exception to the duty to provide information: sensitive information3.25. Not all information can be shared, and Category 1 and 2 responders can claim exceptions in certain circumstances (and thus not supply information as requested). Exceptions under this Act and the Regulations relate to sensitive information only.3.1. 
Where the exceptions apply, a Category 1 or 2 responder must not disclose the information:o exception where disclosure would prejudice sensitive information:a Category 1 or 2 responder must refuse to comply with an information request if the information is sensitive and if it has reasonable grounds to believe that complying with the request would compromise that information. If a Category 1 or 2 responder refuses to disclose information on this basis, it must give reasons for so doing, unless the information is sensitive by virtue of its impact on national security. 9 It should be noted, however, that this exception is only rarely likely to be available, as generally there will be no robust reason to expect that information would be passed on.3.26. There are four different kinds of sensitive information as defined by the Regulations: 10o information prejudicial to national security – information, where disclosure to the public would adversely affect national security.o information prejudicial to public safety – information, where disclosure to the public would adversely affect public safety.o commercially sensitive information – information which relates to the business or other affairs of a person or organisation, where disclosure to the public would prejudice the legitimate business interests of the person or organisation to whom the information relates.o personal data – information which is personal data within the meaning of the DPA, where disclosure to the public would breach any of the data protection principles or section 10 of the DPA.9 regulation 45(1)10 regulation 45(1)
3.27. It will be for individual Category 1 or 2 responders to reach a decision about whether the information they hold is sensitive. But there are a number of general points that should affect the decision:o all Category 1 and 2 responders should work on the presumptionthat information requested should be disclosed. Non-disclosure should only occur in exceptional cases, such as where there are clear national security or commercial implications.o where the Category 1 or 2 responder knows that the information has originated from the intelligence services and that disclosureto the public would threaten national security, then the information must not be disclosed unless consent is obtained from the originating services. Where the Category 1 or 2 responder suspects that the information has originated from the intelligence services, or that it may be sensitive for reasons of national security, it should consult with the originator of the information.o in considering national security implications, note that the test is whether disclosure to the public would threaten national security, not whether disclosure to the requesting Category 1 or 2 responder would threaten national security. A similar test applies in the other categories of sensitive information.o in the case of information that is sensitive by virtue of its national security implications, a Minister of the Crown may issue a certificate certifying that disclosure of that information to the public would be contrary to the interests of national security. This certificate is conclusive. The Minister can issue a certificate in relation to a class of information or a specific piece of information. Note, however, that absence of ao 
certificate does not mean that the information cannot be sensitive on national security grounds.11o where a request relates to information, part of which is sensitive and part of which is not, the exception only applies to the sensitiveinformation. (In other words, the application of an exception does not necessarily enable a Category 1 or 2 responder to refuse an information request in its entirety).Using non-sensitive information within the planning process3.28. The Act and Regulations do not impose any limits on the use of information obtained under the Act which is not sensitive. However, use of non-sensitive information may be limited by duties of confidence, by other enactment or by contract.3.29. There are unlikely to be any restrictions on the use to which a Category 1 or 2 responder can put any non-sensitive information which it creates in the course of carrying on its duties under the Act; for example an emergency plan – though an emergency plan may contain information that has been supplied by another Category 1 or 2 responder, and the use to which this information may be put may be subject to limits. It is also important to be mindful that information is sensitive within different environments, and whilst some information may be suitable for sharing among Category 1 or 2 responders, it might not be suitable for the wider public.11 regulation 46
Disclosure of non-sensitive information3.30. Neither the Act nor the Regulations place any restriction on the disclosure of non-sensitive information that is obtained under the Act. Nor do the Act or Regulations create any restriction on disclosure of non-sensitive information that is created by a Category 1 or 2 responder in the course of carrying out its functions under the Act. However, non-sensitive information which is received from other Category 1 or 2 responders or third parties may be subject to a duty of confidence or contractual restrictions on disclosure. Category 1 or 2 responders may also be subject to other statutory restrictions on disclosure.3.31. Just because there is no restriction on disclosure, this does not necessarily mean that the Category 1 or 2 responder will be obliged to disclose the information. But some Category 1 or 2 responders may be under a legal obligation to disclose certain information – in particular, under the Act (see, for example, the duty to arrange to publish in part the plans and risk assessments),12 the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FOIA) and the Environmental Information Regulations 2004 (EIR).13Using sensitive information within the planning process
3.32. 12 s. 2(1)(f)13 S.I.2004/3391
If a Category 1 responder asks for sensitive information for the purpose of performing a particular function under its regulatory regime, that information may only be used for that purpose. 14 The effect of this will be to limit the circulation of information within Category 1 responder organisations. For example, information about the robustness of mobile phone coverage in the event of an emergency, legitimately obtained by one part of an organisation for use in emergency plans, should not be shared with another part of the organisation responsible for the organisation’s contractual relationship with its mobile phone provider.
14 regulation 52(1)
3.33. If a Category 1 or 2 responder wishes to use sensitive information it has received by virtue of an information request under the Act for a different purpose, it must3.1. 
obtain the consent of the relevant person or organisation.15
The relevant person
or organisation for different types of sensitive information is set out in Figure 3.1.3.34. The use of sensitive information may be further restricted by duties of confidence, by other enactment or by contract.3.35. Restrictions on the disclosure of sensitive information which is created by a Category 1 or 2 responder in the course of carrying out its duties under the Act are dealt with below. This is likely to limit the way in which sensitive information created by a Category 1 or 2 responder is used.Disclosure of sensitive information3.36. The Regulations prohibit any Category 1 and 2 responder from publishing or otherwise disclosing any sensitive information which it has received by virtue of the Act. 16 The Regulations also prohibit disclosure of any sensitive information which the Category 1 or 2 responder has created in the course of discharging its duties under the Act.17 For example, a risk assessment might identify that a local authority’s planning to evacuate a city centre was deficient, and would exacerbate the effects of a terrorist attack. Putting the information into the public domain could expose a weakness that might encourage an attack. If this information was obtained by virtue of an information request made under the Act, or created in the course of a Category 1or 2 responder discharging its duties under the Act, the sensitive information must not be disclosed, even if it would otherwise fall within the Category 1 responder’s duty to publish a risk assessment/plan or its duty to warn, inform and advise the public.15 regulation 52(2)16 regulation 51(1)17 regulation 51(5)
3.37. There are two exceptions in the Regulations to the prohibition on disclosure.Where the exceptions apply, the Category 1 or 2 responder may disclose. But unless the Category 1 or 2 responder is subject to an obligation under the Act to disclose the information (eg as part of the obligation to publish risk assessments), it is not obliged to do so:o consent for the publication or disclosure is obtained. Consent should be obtained from the person identified in Figure 3.1. Note that the consent may be given subject to conditions. 18o the information is commercially sensitive or personal data, but the public interest in disclosure outweighs the interests of the person or organisation concerned. This exception does not apply if the information is sensitive by virtue of its national security or public safety implications. When relying on this exception, the Category 1 or 2 responder must inform the person or organisation to whom the information relates of its intention to disclose the information and provide reasons why it is satisfied that the public interest in disclosure outweighs their interests. 193.38. The prohibition on disclosure applies when the Category 1 or 2 responder is discharging its duties under the Act or any other function that it has in relation to an emergency. The prohibition does not apply where a Category 1 or 2 responder is dealing with an information request under the Regulations or contributing to the Community Risk Register (CRR).18 regulation 51(2)
3.39. The prohibition will not apply where the Category 1 or 2 responder receives an information request under the FOIA or the EIR. In such circumstances, Category 1 or 2 responders must consider the relevant enactment to determine whether or not the information should be released (bearing in mind that the presumption under FOIA is that all information will be disclosed). The right to information under each of those enactments is subject to exemptions on disclosure. In many cases, these will apply to sensitive information; but Category 1 or 2 responders should consider each case on its merits.
3.40. 
The Regulations 20
deal with the sharing of risk assessments to form the CRR.
Where the risk assessment contains sensitive information, the Category 1 or 2 responder need not provide that information to the CRR where it considers that to do so would impair the confidentiality of that information or compromise the information. Note that there is no obligation under the Regulations to publish the CRR in its entirety. It is possible for a Category 1 or 2 responder to contribute a risk assessment to the CRR on condition that its risk assessment is not published.
20 regulation 15(3)
PAGE 19
Figure 3.1: Relevant Persons or Organisations for Different Types of Security InformationType of sensitive informationPerson or organisation whose consentis neededRelates to national security and supplied indirectly or directly by one of theintelligence services.The intelligence service which supplied the information or a Minister of the Crown.Relates to national security but not supplied indirectly or directly by one of the intelligence services.(a) if the information is contained in a document which has been created by a public authority, that authority; (b) in other cases, the organisation which supplied the information or (if different) a Minister ofthe Crown.Relates to public safety and supplied indirectly or directly by one of theintelligence services.The intelligence service which supplied the information or a Minister of the Crown.Relates to public safety but not supplied indirectly or directly by one of the intelligence services.a) if the information is contained in a document which has been created by a public authority, that authority; (b) in other cases, the organisation which supplied the information or (if different) a Minister ofthe Crown.Relates to the business or other affairs of a person or organisation where disclosure would harm the legitimate businessinterests of that person or organisation.The person or organisation to whom the information relates.Relates to personal data and disclosure to a member of the public would contravene anyof the data protection principles or s 10 DPA.The person to whom the personal data relates. HOW THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE ACT AND THE  REGULATIONS MAY BE CARRIED OUT 
3.41. 
This section outlines how the Government believes the duties described may best be carried out. It describes good practice. Category 1 responders must have regard to this guidance. 21
Types of Information3.42. It may be helpful for Category 1 and 2 responders to think about their use of information in the round, and consider how streams of information interact.3.1. 
21 s. 3(3)(b)
PAGE 20
3.43. There are various types of information. Information may be suitable for some audiences, but not others. And the circulation of information can be limited to certain classes of organisation or individual.3.44. It is important not to think of information as being either public or private. The picture is much more nuanced, with a spectrum which runs from limited-access information (even within organisations) through to information intended to be absorbed and understood by the public.3.45. However, there are certainly controls on the free flow of information. Access is limited in a range of ways including physical access, restrictive markings, circulation lists, the ‘need-to-know’ principle and targeting particular audiences.Protective markingThere are 6 key points for protectively marking material. These are:o Not Protectively Marked;o Protect;o Restricted;o Confidential;o Secret; ando Top Secret.The large range of information that can be covered by PROTECT means that a descriptor should be used e.g. “PROTECT - FOR LOCAL RESILIENCE FORUM USE ONLY”. Material which contains sensitive personal data should be marked “PROTECT – PERSONAL DATA”. The non-statutory guidance document, Security Vetting and Protective Markings: A guide for Emergency Responders, describes
the classification for each heading. It is however unlikely that responders will have a frequent need to work with highly classified material, but nevertheless, should understand the classification for each heading.Security vettingThere are three types of personnel security controls (vetting levels) that affect access to protectively marked information. These are:o Baseline Standard (BS) – previously known as Basic Check (BC) and also known as Baseline Personnel Security Standard (BPSS). This standard may enable those who are cleared to have access upto CONFIDENTIAL and occasional controlled access to SECRET material.o Security Check (SC) - This standard may enable those who have been cleared to have long term, frequent and uncontrolled access to SECRET information or assets; and occasional controlled access to TOP SECRET.o Developed Vetting (DV) – This standard may enable those who are cleared to have long term, frequent and uncontrolled access to TOP SECRET information or assets.Incidents of a sensitive natureIn the rare case of an extremely sensitive incident, such as a nuclear or terrorist attack, it is important that Category 1 and 2 responders assess the appropriateness of clearances for staff and volunteers. This judgment must be based on how frequently staff are likely to come into contact with any sensitive information arising from the incident. Category 1 and 2 responders should be willing to challenge organisations which demand unwarranted levels of clearance.
Category 2 responders3.46. As with co-operation obligations, it is important for Category 1 responders to be realistic about what information is requested from Category 2 responders. Information sharing has the potential to be very burdensome if it is not handled responsibly.3.47. Category 2 responders often put information about their activities into the public domain.  Information about the overall regulatory regime for Category 2 responders such as the utility and transport sectors is also widely available. In the first instance, Category 1 responders should seek information about the civil protection arrangements of Category 2 responders from these open sources. To facilitate this, the Government will work with Category 2 responders to put as much information as practical about their industry’s civil protection arrangements into the public domain.3.48. Whilst Category 2 responders do not have the same planning duties as Category 1 responders, Category 2 responders do have a duty to provide information whenrequested by another responder 22 if the responder requires it:o to perform its duties under the CCA; oro in connection with the performance of another of its functions which relates to an emergency.22 regulation 44A, 47 (1), 49 (1), 50
If a request is made, the Category 2 responder must, unless the information is sensitive, comply with the request. In addition to the exceptions discussed elsewhere in this chapter, the regulations prevent a Category 2 responder providing information if they consider that:o the information requested is personal data and disclosure would contravene a data protection principle; oro disclosure would be likely to adversely affect the confidentiality of the information.In relation to information on vulnerable people, disclosure should not contravene a data protection principle. Provided that the requesting agency gives an assurance that the confidentiality of the information will not be breached, the Category 2 responder would be expected to provide the information as a general duty under the regulations.3.49. Beyond these generic arrangements, Category 1 responders can generally expect to be making information requests in a limited number of areas:o information about local configuration of national arrangements;o information about specific local facilities; ando contact details of key staff.3.50. Of course, this list is not exclusive. If a Category 1 responder wants information in order to discharge its duties under the Act, it should approach the Category 2 responder in question and begin a dialogue about access. If that is not possible, or is unsuccessful, and the Category 1 responder believes the request to be3.1. 
reasonable and appropriate, it should make the request in accordance with the procedures set out above.3.51. Where possible, Category 1 responders should seek to channel requests through as small a number of routes as possible to avoid duplication of effort. There are several ways in which Category 1 responders can request access to information to make the process more efficient:o where the information is required by a number of Category 1 responders, the request may be co-ordinated through the Local Resilience Forum (LRF), with the information shared between LRF members if appropriate. This is particularly relevant if the questions relate to local arrangements.o across more than one LRF area, the request could be co-ordinated through any multi-agency or multi-LRF groups.o where a type of information request comes up repeatedly, a Category 1 responder should consider raising this with its national representative body, or the sponsoring government department, or through the national representative body for theCategory 2 sector in question. This will allow the sector to consider whether adjustment might be made to the scope of publicly available information to remove the need for future requests.3.52. In terms of sensitive information, most Category 2 responders are particularly likely to rely on exceptions that relate to commercial confidentiality. This reflects the fact that many of the Category 2 responders are private sector bodies, who may be in competition with other Category 2 responders within the same area. It is important that these needs are respected. For example, two mobile3.1. 
phone operators in the same LRF area might not want to expose details of their network coverage to each other, or to the public.3.53. This would obviously be less true of those Category 2 responders from the public sector.3.54. Category 1 responders should also bear in mind that information may be available to their organisation by virtue of existing commercial relationships with a Category 2 responder, or that information might be shared under the Act which would affect a commercial relationship. For example, an electricity supplier might have a contract to supply a local authority, but civil protection work might reveal problems with the resilience of that supply.3.55. It is important that Category 1 responders respect the circumstances under which such information is obtained, and abide carefully by any restrictions on its use. Should Category 1 responders not handle information properly, the sanctions set out in the Act 23 might be available to the Category 2 responder in question. In addition, if information is disclosed in breach of any duty of confidence, action may be taken against the responder in breach.3.56. In return for responsible use of these powers to request information, Category 2 responders should ensure that they can deal with reasonable requests made by Category 1 responders.Exercising (validation, training and testing)3.57. The regulations clarify the requirements in regard to the arrangements for exercises not only to ensure that emergency plans are effective, but also that23 s. 10
training for Category 1 personnel and other persons whom the responder considers necessary should also be provided. In addition, whilst not all elements of the plan can be tested, crucial elements of the plan can. One of these elements is information management.3.58. It is vital that all Category 1 and 2 responders have an awareness of their roles and are reasonably comfortable with them before an incident occurs. Category1 and 2 responders should receive awareness training in understanding and interpreting the legislation relating to information sharing i.e. under the CCA, DPA, FOIA and EIR. In addition, lessons and experience from previous incidents should also be included in any training and exercising of plans. Reference should be made to the use of national reports and recommendations from major incidents.3.59. Category 1 and 2 responders should regularly review their training and exercising programme to validate, exercise and test the information sharing and also interoperability of communications elements of an emergency plan. In undertaking such a review, it is essential that responders understand their role and can fulfil its purpose before an incident occurs.Other legislative requirements3.60. Although there are many pieces of legislation which affect the use of information within individual sectors, there are three which have a wider-ranging impact and of which, as a consequence, Category 1 and 2 responders should be aware. It is for each Category 1 or 2 responder to make the final judgements about the detailed implications of each of these pieces of legislation and how they interface with the Act.3.1. 
Freedom of Information Act 20003.61. FOIA provides a mechanism by which members of the public can access information held by public sector bodies.3.62. The FOIA aims to increase the transparency of public bodies and the way in which such bodies carry out their work, and to increase accountability. For Category 1 and 2 responders which are public authorities as defined by the FOIA – broadly speaking that is a UK-wide public authority or a public sector body in England, Wales and Northern Ireland (similar legislation exists in Scotland) – the FOIA imposes certain duties to communicate information which is requested by any person (subject to procedural requirements and exemptions). These duties are not affected by the Act.3.63. Although as a matter of law the FOIA could be used by one public authority to extract information from another, the FOIA is not primarily intended to be used for that purpose. Public authorities have an implicit duty of co-operation in the discharge of public functions which should facilitate information flow. As such, public authorities which are Category 1 or 2 responders should not regard the FOIA as the principal basis for making requests from each other about civil protection matters. Category 2 responders which are not public authorities should also not rely on the provisions of the FOIA as the principal basis to acquire information for civil protection purposes.3.64. Instead, Category 1 and 2 responders should follow the two-stage process set out in earlier paragraphs. In the first instance, they should consider whether it is possible to get the information they seek through other means.3.1. 
3.65. It is only if the information is not publicly or informally available that Category 1 or 2 responders should seek to use the formal mechanisms set out above. But this remains a last resort.3.66. In most respects, the information sharing provisions in the Act and Regulations are broader than those in the FOIA. The FOIA recognises that the information will enter the public domain. The Act recognises that the information stays within the civil protection community. As a result, the Act allows certain types of sensitive information to be shared which would be unlikely to be disclosed under FOIA.3.67. It is important however that WRF, LRFs and any multi LRF group agree protocols for dealing with individual FOIA requests. This will ensure that multi-LRF, WRF or LRF responders who receive the same individual FOIA request from the public or media can produce a co-ordinated response to the request. The process may mean identifying a lead responder to deal with specific FOIA requests on behalf of the multi LRF/WRF or LRF responders bearing in mind what can and cannot be disclosed under the CCA.3.68. Detailed guidance on the FOIA can be found on the Ministry of Justice website at www.justice.gov.ukEnvironmental Information Regulations 20043.69. The EIR provide for the freedom of access to information on the environment, subject to certain conditions.3.70. Further information is available through the website of the Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, at www.defra.gov.uk3.1. 
Data Protection Act 19983.71. The DPA provides certain rights to individuals to request information from public bodies about personal data held by them which relates to that individual. It also provides limits on the use or processing of such data by public authorities. The Data Protection Act must be considered in relation to the duties imposed under the Act and Regulations.3.72. Guidance on the Data Protection Act can be found in Data Protection and Information Sharing - Guidance for Emergency Planners and Responders, which is available through the Cabinet Office website at www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/ukresilience and on the Information Commissioner’s website at: www.ico.gov.ukOther Related Guidance3.73. Guidance on multi agency interoperability is available from www.npia.police.uk3.74. Data Protection and Information Sharing - Guidance for Emergency Planners and Responders is available through the Cabinet Office website at www.cabinetoffice. gov.uk/ukresilience and Security Vetting and Protective Markings: A guide for Emergency Responders is available on a restricted basis from DCLG RED or from the Welsh Government or via the National Resilience Extranet at www.resilience- extranet.gov.uk or www.resilience-extranet.gse.gov.uk.3.1. 
Annex 3INFORMATION REQUEST PROFORMASInformation Request Under the Civil Contingencies Act 2004Requesting organisation(s)Information holding organisation(s)Information requestedReason why the information is required in connection with the Act or other civil protection duties (and how the information is likely to be used)Date of requestDate by which information is requiredForm in which information is requiredPlace to which information should be sentContact details
Response to Information Request Under the Civil Contingencies Act 2004Requesting organisation(s)Information holding organisation(s)Date of requestInformation requestedRequest accepted?Yes/NoIf no, please set out the exceptions on which you are relyingIf yes, please set out any sensitivities or further background information which might be necessary to ensurethe information is properly understood and properly protectedDate information was suppliedContact details
 Chapter 4 Local responder risk assessment dutyRevision to Emergency PreparednessCivil Contingencies Act Enhancement ProgrammeMarch 2012
Chapter 4 (Local responder risk assessment duty) ofEmergency Preparedness, Revised Versionï SummaryRisk assessment is the first step in the emergency planning and business continuity (BC) planning processes. It ensures that Category 1 responders make plans that are sound and proportionate to risks (paragraphs 4.1-4.5).ï The Act places a duty on all Category 1 responders to carry out risk assessment.Multi-agency co-operation in maintaining a Community Risk Register is also a statutory duty (paragraphs 4.9-4.10).ï There is a six-step process for risk assessment that reflects widely accepted good practice. It involves a cycle of identifying potential hazards within the local context, assessing the risks, and considering how those risks should be managed. Responders can use these steps to assist their own planning (paragraphs 4.29-4.56 and Box 4.6).ï Local risk assessments should inform multi-LRF and national assessments, and vice versa.Category 1 responders will be able to draw on generic risk assessments and other sources of information (Box 4.5) that are provided by central government, while local risk assessments will be shared with Government via the Department for Communities and Local Government (Resilience and Emergencies Division DCLG RED). These may then be used to inform multi-LRF and national risk assessments (Boxes 4.2 and 4.3).
Box 4.1: Further advice and information WHAT THE ACT AND THE REGULATIONS REQUIRE	Scope of the duty4.1. The Act places a risk assessment duty on all Category 1 responders. The purpose of the duty is to:o ensure that Category 1 responders have an accurate and shared understanding of the risks that they face so that planning has a sound foundation and is proportionate to the risks;o provide a rational basis for the prioritisation of objectives and work programmes and the allocation of resources;o enable Category 1 responders to assess the adequacy of theirplans and capabilities, highlight existing measures that are appropriate, and allow gaps to be identified;
o facilitate joined-up local planning, based on consistent planning assumptions;o enable Category 1 responders to provide an accessible overview of the emergency planning and business continuity planning context for the public and officials ando inform and reflect national risk assessments that support emergency planning and capability development at those levels.Assess the risk of an emergency4.2. There is a duty on Category 1 responders to assess the risk of an emergency within, or affecting, a geographical area for which each Category 1 responder isresponsible.1 The source of risk includes both hazards and threats. Hazards aredefined as non-malicious events including natural events, industrial accidents and industrial action. Threats are defined as malicious attacks. Emergency, as defined in the Act, is an event or situation which threatens serious damage to human welfare in a place in the United Kingdom, an event or situation which threatens serious damage to the environment of a place in the United Kingdom, or war, or terrorism, which threatens serious damage to the security of the United Kingdom.2 It must also meet either of the following criteria:o The threat or hazard is of a sufficient scale and nature that it is likely to seriously obstruct a Category 1 responder in the performance of its functions.o The threat or hazard requires the Category 1 responder to exercise its functions and undertake a special mobilisation.31 s.2 (1)(a)-(b), regulation 132 s.13 s. 2(2)
4.3. Challenges which do not constitute an emergency as defined under the Act lie outside the scope of the risk assessment duty. As part of business continuity management (BCM), Category 1 responders will need to risk-assess their emergency planning arrangements and their ability to deliver their critical functions during those emergencies for which the risks are assessed to be significant. Henceforth, in this chapter, ‘hazards’ and ‘threats’ are events which may result in an emergency, as defined above.Modification of plans4.4. Category 1 responders are required to consider whether plans should be modified in light of the risk assessment. 4Plan for response to an emergency4.5. Category 1 responders need only perform a risk assessment in relation to emergencies which would or might affect the geographical area for which they are responsible.5 This includes risk sources both within and outside an LRF border including critical national infrastructure (CNI).Minister of the Crown4.6. The Regulations enable a Minister of the Crown to issue Category 1 responders with guidance on the risk of a particular emergency. This guidance will usually take the form of likelihood and impact assessments. The Minister may provide that Category1 responders must adopt that assessment as their own. In general, this is the approach that will be used for the assessment of risks associated with threats; central government will provide statements of the likelihood and impacts of broad threat4 s. 2(1)(e)5 regulation 13
categories within the Local Risk Assessment Guidance (LRAG) 6 and the National Risk Register (NRR).7 Planning figures for the generic consequences of these threats categories are provided in the National Resilience Planning Assumptions (NRPAs).8 In these cases, a responder must not assess the likelihood of that emergency occurring itself; it must rely on the Ministerial assessment.4.7. Alternatively, the Minister may provide that Category 1 responders must “have regard” to the Ministerial assessment. In such cases, responders must conduct a subsequent risk assessment of their own. They must take the Ministerial assessment into account, but if there are particular reasons to depart from that assessment (e.g. because there are peculiar local features which have not been taken into account in the Ministerial assessment), a responder may do so. This is how generic local likelihood assessments of hazards - in the form of the LRAG - will be provided to Category 1 responders in the Local Resilience Forums (LRFs) by the government departments and agencies that are best placed to make those assessments (e.g. the Environment Agency for coastal flooding, and the Health and Safety Executive for industrial accidents).Frequency4.8. The Act also states that the risk assessment should be updated “from time to
time”. 9
This must be interpreted in light of the purpose of the risk assessment
duty and the duty on responders to perform their duties under the Act in a “reasonable fashion”. Thus, Category 1 responders should assess risk as often as is necessary, taking into account the annually updated Local Risk Assessment Guidance (LRAG), to ensure that they are in a reasonable position to maintain and6 The LRAG is issued by the Cabinet Office and is designed to inform LRF risk assessments. It contains information on the likelihood and impact of generic threats and hazards and is updated annually See Box 4.4.7 The NRR is the public version of the NRA. It contains a high level overview of the risks to the UK as well as giving advice on how businesses, communities and individuals can better prepare for emergencies. It is issued approximately every two years. It can be found at http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/resource- library/national-risk-register. See Box 4.4.8 National Resilience Planning Assumptions provide information and planning figures for the generic consequences of risks. It is based upon the NRA and is published annually to reflect changes in the risk assessment.9 s. 2(1)(a)-(b)
update their emergency plans and to perform the civil protection duties under the Act, including the duty to maintain Business Continuity plans. However, the risk assessment should respond quickly to changes in the risk environment so that plans can be updated10accordingly. This means that the process should be iterative and contain risk monitoring and updating mechanisms (see paragraph 4.55).Co-operation4.9. As part of the LRF process, Category 1 responders must co-operate with each other in maintaining the Community Risk Register (CRR).11 The CRR provides an agreed position on the risks affecting a local area and on the planning and resourcing priorities required to prepare for those risks. Its purpose is to enable each Category 1 responder to:o be fully informed of the risks of emergency in its area;o benefit from the range of views on risk of its partners on the LRF;o identify collectively the main local emergency plans and capabilities which appear to be needed across all the Category 1 responders;o decide which of the plans and capabilities should properly fall to it;12ando know which of its partners in the LRF acknowledges responsibility for developing plans and capabilities against the various risks.4.10. According to the Regulations, the CRR should be shared with LRFs with whom a boundary is shared.13 A copy of the CRR should also be provided to the Department for Communities and Local Government Resilience and Emergencies Division for distribution to others as necessary. This may include Cabinet Office and other government departments, as well as other LRFs who do not necessarily share10 s. 2(1)(e)11 regulation 1512 s. 2(1)(b)13 regulation 16
geographical boundaries with the CRR area. Indeed, Category 1 responders should consider whether there are any specific risks which should be communicated to any LRFs in any other local areas.144.11. While the Act imposes a duty on each Category 1 responder to assess risk, it is recognised that requiring each Category 1 responder to perform this duty in isolation would lead to a wasteful duplication of resources. It is more efficient for individual Category 1 responders to fulfil their risk assessment duties by participating in a collaborative exercise that results in a single, collective risk assessment. This ensures that each local risk is assessed once only and allows the workload to be shared between Category 1 responders. It also helps to streamline the relationship between Category 1 responders and the government departments and agencies that are able to support the risk assessments.4.12. In light of this, the Regulations enable the risk assessment duty to be exercised in diff15erent ways. The Act provides that Category 1 responders may fulfil the duty to assess risk jointly. For example, a number of Category 1 responders in the form of a subgroup of the LRF might collectively assess the risk of a particular emergency occurring. Alternatively, the Act enables one Category 1 responder to be identified with lead responsibility.16 This is the mechanism that may be used by LRF members to share the risk assessment activity between them, with each member taking lead responsibility for a number of the risks. However, as outlined below, it will be for each Category 1 responder to assess whether a given risk poses a challenge for that particular responder.14 regulation 1815 regulation 816 regulations 9-11
4.13. In addition, a Category 1 responder may engage a third party (e.g. an external consultant) to provide it with advice that relates to the risk of a particular emergency occurring. The Category 1 responder may then rely on this advice in making its own risk assessment. However, Category 1 responders should remember the benefits of conducting this process themselves: increased stakeholder engagement, a deeper understanding of the risk assessment, and enhanced credibility when communicating and explaining the assessment.Publication of risk assessments4.14. The Act requires each Category 1 responder to arrange to publish all or part of its risk assessments.17 It can do this (by agreement with its LRF partners) by publishing all or part of the CRR. It may also fulfil the duty by publishing all or part of a plan, where the part published includes a summary of the risk assessment on which the plan is based. When deciding what may be published, the security classification of information and any restrictions on the disclosure of sensitive information should be taken into consideration (see paragraph 4.57)How the Act and the Regulations Apply in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland4.15. The extent of the risk assessment duty under the Act and the application of this guidance differ between the devolved administrations.Scotland4.16. Category 1 responders in Scotland have a duty to undertake risk assessment. The Resilience Division and sector policy areas of the Scottish Government work closely with Strategic Co-ordinating Groups (LRF equivalents) and national agencies to17 s. 2(1)(f)
4.16. deliver resilience activities in Scotland. The guidance Preparing Scotland has been centrally produced by the Scottish Government in partnership with Category 1 responders to support them to undertake these statutory duties.4.17. Information on hazard and threat assessments for the UK is provided to the Scottish Government in the form of the LRAG, the National Risk Register and National Resilience Planning Assumptions. These are circulated to Strategic Co-ordinating Groups via the Scottish Government’s Resilience Division. This material will be issued direct by a Minister to Category 1 responders which fall outside devolved competence.Wales4.18. The Act, Regulations and guidance extend to Wales. To assist Category 1 responders to fulfil their risk assessment duty, the Welsh Government will be provided with information on hazard and threat assessments in the form of the LRAG, the National Risk Register and National Resilience Planning Assumptions, to cascade to Category 1 responders in Wales. The Welsh Government may issue its own risk assessments to responders in Wales, with the consent of the Minister of the Crown. In certain circumstances, a Minister of the Crown may also provide guidance direct to Category 1 responders in Wales. From time to time, the CRR should also be shared with LRFs with whom a boundary is shared, and a copy provided to the Welsh Government.18Northern Ireland4.19. In Northern Ireland, only a limited number of organisations have duties under Part 1 of the Act. (For further details see Chapter 12.)18 regulation 16
4.20. To assist those Category 1 responders who do have a duty to undertake risk assessment, information on hazard and threat assessments will be provided to them direct. They will also be provided to the Civil Contingencies Policy Branch (CCPB) and the Department of Justice for information purposes.4.21. Because these organisations do not represent the full spectrum of responders, not all the duties placed on organisations elsewhere will be appropriate in Northern Ireland. In particular, the provisions in the Regulations relating to the LRF and its activities, including the production of a CRR, do not apply to responders in Northern Ireland.4.22. However, the Category 1 responders are expected to carry out individual risk assessments in relation to their own functions, and in doing so, they should co-operate, as appropriate, with each other. The Category 2 responders should4.16. 
also co-operate with the Category 1 responders as required.19
In carrying out
their risk assessment, Category 1 responders must have regard to any assessment of which they are aware by one of the specified Northern Ireland public service bodies and may adopt or rely on that work.204.23. Organisations in Northern Ireland which deliver relevant devolved functions (with the exception of the Police Service of Northern Ireland) are not subject to the duties in Part 1 of the Act, but carry out their civil contingencies activities in line with the Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Framework. Powers under the Civil Contingencies Act to give directions and guidance to the PSNI in relation to its devolved functions lie with the Department of Justice, as set out in Chapter 12.19 regulation 620 Part 10 of the Regulations
4.24. The Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Framework requires organisations to carry out individual risk assessments in relation to their functions. The methodology specified in the Framework is similar to that used by Category 1 responders. The Framework encourages organisations to co-operate in producing risk assessments and to share information at local level. Further information can be found on the CCPB website http://www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/index/making-government-work/civil- contingencies.htmlFigure 4.1: Risk as a product of likelihood and impact
Terminology4.26. Key terms applying to the process are defined in the Glossary. Risk terminology is notoriously varied. However, this chapter aims to be consistent with the main standards relating to risk management.Figure 4.2: The general risk management process4.27. It should be noted that, in the Act, risk itself is defined solely as the probability of an emergency 21 (see paragraph 4.2). The definition of risk used in this chapter is aligned with a more common definition in use but is, to all intents and purposes, consistent. Here, risk is defined as a product of the likelihood and impact of a given hazard or threat.21 s. 2(1)(a)
4.28. Generally, higher risks are associated with hazards or threats that have a higher impact and medium to high likelihood. Conversely, low risks will reflect hazards and threats where the impact is low and the likelihood is low to medium. The more difficult cases are those hazards and threats where the likelihood is low and the impact very high, or vice versa. These risks defy simple categorisation. They require a more sophisticated means of measurement involving judgements about the overall risk associated with certain combinations of likelihood and impact. Typically, these judgements are presented in a risk matrix, as seen in Annex 4F.The risk assessment process4.29. Here, risk assessment is one component of the general risk management process as set out in Figure 4.2. The dashed line represents transitions from one phase to another: the first phase is ‘contextualisation’, the second ‘risk evaluation’ and the third ‘risk treatment’. It should be noted that there is no statutory requirement for Category 1 responders to perform the risk treatment step. However, it is described below for completeness and because, in practice, Category 1 responders are likely to use this step as a bridge to the emergency planning duty.4.30. The risk assessment phases can be described as follows:o Contextualisation involves defining the nature and scope of the risk and agreeing how the risk management process will be undertakeno Risk evaluation covers the identification of those threats and hazards that present significant risks, analysis of their likelihood and impacts, and the combination of these values to produce overall risk scores.o 
o Risk treatment involves deciding which risks are unacceptably high, developing plans and strategies to mitigate these risks, and then testing the plans and any associated capabilities. The National Resilience Planning Assumptions (NRPAs) set national and regional figures for the common consequences of risk which should be planned for. Together with the Local Planning Assumptions Guidance, the NRPAs can be tailored to inform local plans and strategies.It is important to note that the Act does not require Category 1 responders to take action to reduce the likelihood of threats and hazards. Category 1 responders may decide to do this as part of their treatment of assessed risks but the Act only requires that emergency plans be developed: prevention and pre-emption lie outside its scope.4.31. All three phases should be cyclical and interactive, involving the full range of stakeholders and allowing for review and updating. Moreover, the entire risk management process must be cyclical if it is to retain currency. Risks vary with changes in the context, changes in the hazards and threats, and changes in available emergency plans and capabilities. Thus, periodic reviews are required to ensure that these changes are captured, and then reflected in the risk assessment and emergency planning processes (see step 6, Annex 4A).Box 4.2: Consistency with UK and multi-LRF risk assessments

Supporting the planning process4.32. As Figure 4.3 illustrates, risk assessment should drive a standard emergency planning process, informing emergency plans (and BC plans) which are then tested through audit and validation exercises. Regular updating of the risk assessment 22 in turn leads to the revision of plans and further testing. A fundamental principle of emergency planning and business continuity planning is to address common consequences rather than different causes. As far as possible, flexible, generic plans may be developed to deliver the response capabilities for managing these consequences, whatever causes them. However, to ensure that these generic plans are commensurate with the risks, it is important that planning is underpinnedby a risk assessment 22 that evaluates and prioritises those hazards and threatsaccording to their associated risks.Figure 4.3: The location of risk assessment in the emergency planning process22 s. 2(1)(e)
Organisation and accountability4.33. It is likely that the LRF would wish to set up a Risk Assessment Working Group (RAWG), composed of a representative group of emergency planning officers from Category 1 responders, to undertake this work under a chair appointed by the LRF. As with the LRF, this working group is simply a forum for co-operation on risk assessment. Accordingly, the CRR is not owned by the LRF but by Category 1 responders in the LRF collectively.Rigour and proportionality4.34. The risk assessment process should be based on a sound methodology using the best available evidence and judgment. Category 1 responders should be supported in their assessment by Category 2 responders, local bodies, DCLG RED and national organisations sharing information and co-operating as appropriate. However, as far as possible, the amount of effort given to any risk should be proportionate to its potential severity.The six-step process(See also Annex 4A)Step 1: Contextualisation4.35. In an initial discussion at the RAWG, Category 1 responders should begin by defining the scope of the risk management activity in the context of the Act and supporting guidance. They should review the process that they will adopt and identify the project’s stakeholders. Key stakeholder groups must include the Category 1 responders who share the risk assessment duty, and may include Category 24.26. 
organisations with a contribution to the risk assessment process, as well as groups in the community with relevant knowledge and a particular interest in the results of the work (see 4.56). It is important that Category 1 responders understand, at the outset, the risk evaluation criteria and principles with which risks will be evaluated and prioritised (see Annexes 4D and 4F). This should prepare them for later stages of the process, in which they will need to decide which risks are acceptable and those which must be tolerated, including those which require planning.4.36. An important part of step 1 is for Category 1 responders to describe the characteristics of the local area that will influence the likelihood and impact of an emergency in the community. This is to understand the context better, as well as to establish the vulnerability and resilience of the area to emergencies. To do this Category 1 responders should reflect on a number of aspects of their area, including:o Social: What is the demographic, ethnic and socio-economic composition of the community? Are there any particularly vulnerable groups in the community? How are the various communities geographically distributed within the local area? How prepared and experienced is the community at coping with different typesof emergencies?o Environment: Are there any particular local vulnerabilities(e.g. poor coastal defences against flooding)? Is the area urbanised, rural or mixed? Are there any Sites of Special Scientific Interest?o Infrastructure: How is the infrastructure configured in the area (transport, utilities, business, etc)? What are the critical supply networks in the area? Are there any sites in the area that are particularly critical for local and national essential services (e.g. telecommunications hubs, health, finance, legal, etc)? What type ofo 
economy does it have? How prepared and experienced are the businesses in the area at coping with different types of emergency?o Hazardous sites: What potentially hazardous sites exist in the area?Where are they in relation to communities or sensitive environmental sites?Step 2: Hazard review and allocation for assessmentHazards4.37. Taking into account centrally provided guidance, in the form of the LRAG (see Box 4.4), each Category 1 responder should consider the local context as described during step 1 and identify those non-malicious hazards that, in their view, present  significant risks (i.e. could give rise to an emergency) in their areas over the next five years. These hazards will be identified on the basis of experience, research or other information (including from the community itself) and they are likely to present consequences to which a special mobilisation by the Category 1 responder is required.4.38. The RAWG should share and discuss these hazards at a meeting of the LRF with a view to agreeing a list of hazards to be assessed. The LRF should endorse the list of hazards, and determine which Category 1 responder will lead the assessment of each hazard on behalf of the group. The LRF will also need to decide how any additional hazards proposed by the RAWG should be assessed, whether by the appointment of a lead, delegation or otherwise.4.26. 
Box 4.3: longer term considerationsCategory 1 responders should consider these aspects in the context of the current situation, but with regards to emerging trends and future events. They are also encouraged to take into account the longer-term risk context. Climate change, although not a risk considered in the time frames of the local risk assessment cycle, is a major driver of many of the risks that LRFs do consider Consideration of this longer term risk will allow responders to identify capability gaps and risk reduction measures that may need to be tackled over a longer term period. For example, will present coastal defences be sufficient over a longer term horizon. A suggested timeframe for longer term risk contextualisation is 20 years. The National Security Risk Assessment, first published in 2010, evaluates risk over the same timescale and can be drawn upon to inform longer term contextualisation. Other factors that may define the time frame of longer term contextualization include the expected service lifetime of buildings, plants and equipment. This consideration of longer term risk drivers, is not a statutory part of the risk assessment process and should be included at the discretion of the LRF.4.39. When overall risk scores are calculated at a later stage, events that are low in likelihood but high in impact will not score highly, implying a need for planning cannot be justified (e.g. asteroids hitting the earth). This is not to say that all low likelihood, high impact events should be excluded, but a careful judgment is needed about the likelihood below which events will be excluded from the assessment. It would be good practice to maintain a register of excluded risks as an appendix to the CRR; this would allow Category 1 responders to demonstrate that certain risks were considered at the outset but were then discounted for specified reasons (e.g. an assumption that the likelihood was so small that the hazard did not warrant further attention).4.26. 
4.40. The responsibilities of the lead assessors would be to:o assess the likelihood and impact of each hazard, based on the knowledge of RAWG members, the generic likelihood assessment (where available) and any other relevant information;o liaise with the relevant government departments or agencies, as required;o document assessments using the individual risk assessment example (Annex 4C), which will support the CRR, containing more detailed information on the assessment;o present the likelihood assessment to the LRF and make changes as necessary;o capture the results of the LRF risk assessment in the CRR; ando ensure that the assessment is adequately described in the CRR.Box 4.4: Local Risk Assessment Guidance (LRAG)
Category 1 responders will receive Local Risk Assessment Guidance containing information on the likelihood and impact of generic threats and hazards. This guidance will be agreed each year in a process co- ordinated by the Cabinet Office Civil Contingencies Secretariat and involving representatives from the departments and agencies responsible for providing the assessments, as well as representatives of the local emergency planners, including first responders. It will be made available by the Cabinet Office in England, and the Welsh Government in Wales. (For further detail on arrangements in the devolved administrations, see paragraphs 4.15-4.24.)The framework is continually updated; Category 1 and 2 responders and other relevant parties are encouraged to put forward suggestions for improvements to the guidance. These will be fed back to the originating departments who will, where possible, reflect these suggestions in future versions of the guidance.Step 3: Risk analysisThreatsAssessing the likelihood of threats4.41. Category 1 responders should adopt the central government assessment, set out in the LRAG, of the likelihood of threats as categorised in the National Risk Register (NRR) (See Box 4.5). Guidance on publication of the threat assessment within the community risk register is detailed in section 4.57PAGE 23
Assessing the impact of threats4.42. For some categories of threat, LRFs may also weight the impact of a successful attack against local targets within their area. Information from the LRAG, the National Risk Register, National Resilience Planning Assumptions, Counter Terrorism Security Advisor (CTSAs 23) (Box 4.5 ) and local crowded places protectionprogrammes can be used to inform the impact assessment. 24Assessing the likelihood of hazards4.43. The RAWG lead assessors should consider the likelihood of the hazards occurring within the next five years (the same timescale adopted by the UK assessment). The LRAG from central government should provide a basis for this work but the local knowledge available in the RAWG and other local organisations (including Category 2 responders) should allow the RAWG to elaborate the assessment, and even to change it, if necessary.4.44. When assessing the likelihood of a hazard, it is necessary to refer to the description of an outcome of an incident. Without defining the outcome, it is more difficult to assess likelihood. For example, it is difficult to assess the likelihood of flooding in the next five years without defining the size of the flood incident to be assessed (small scale floods are more likely than larger scale floods). The outcome can be defined in various ways. For flooding, it may be appropriate to talk in terms of the area flooded. For many incidents, it may be necessary to use numbers of fatalities. Although both measures - area flooded and fatalities - are consequences of the hazards, they are immediate or primary consequences that can be used as proxy measures to describe the outcome of the hazard.
23 CTSAs provide counter terrorism security advice to support LRFs and businesses.24   https://vsat.nactso.gov.uk/SiteCollectionDocuments/AreasOfRisk/working-together-crowded-places.pdf
PAGE 24
Box 4.5: Other sources of information to aid local risk assessmentThe National Risk Register (NRR)The National Risk Register (NRR) was first published in 2008 as part of the National Security Strategy which promised a publicly available assessment of the likelihood and potential impact of the range of threats and hazards the UK could face. Although intended to encourage public debate on security and help organisations, communities and individuals to prepare better for emergencies, the document is also important to LRFs in informing the local assessment of risks, particularly threat related risks. Indeed, the LRAG makes explicit reference to the NRR as an important tool in the risk assessment process.The National Risk Assessment (NRA)The National Risk Assessment (NRA) is the classified and detailed cross- government assessment of the risks facing the UK and is the basis of the public National Risk Register (NRR). It uses historical and scientific data and the professional judgments of experts to identify risks, assess the likelihood of the risk occurring and the impact if they do. The NRA is shared with all UK police forces. As well as informing police work, this will also give LRFs, the majority of which are chaired by the police, more direct access to the full assessment.The National Resilience Planning Assumptions (NRPAs) and Local Planning Assumption GuidanceThe National Resilience Planning Assumptions (NRPAs) provide information on the generic consequences of risks without disclosing the sensitive information on the causes of these consequences. Although the document
gives only national and sometimes multi-LRF planning figures, it is issued in tandem with the Local Planning Assumption Guidance which explains how the NRPAs should be interpreted and tailored to inform local planning assumptions. The guidance also explains how the Community Risk Register (CRR) rating matrix can be used to identify and define generic planning assumptions, providing a mechanism by which LRFs can use the output from the local risk assessment process better, to inform local planning.Counter Terrorism Security Advisors (CTSAs)CTSAs are embedded in all UK police forces. Their core role is to identify and assess local critical sites within their force area that might be vulnerable to terrorist or extremist attack; then devise and develop appropriate protective security plans to minimise impact on that site and the surrounding community. Additionally, the CTSA will promote awareness of the terrorist threat and develop positive ongoing relationships by appropriate discussion of changes in the prevailing terrorist threat and commensurate responses.4.45. The outcome of a hazard is not the same as its (wider) impact, which is considered later in the process, although there will usually be a close relationship between the two. For example, in the case of flooding, two flood events could havethe same outcome (e.g. 100 square miles flooded) but very different impacts, depending on the precise location of the flooding.
4.46. Where there is a considerable range in the foreseeable outcomes of a potential hazard, it may be necessary to assess the likelihood (and subsequently impact) of the hazard at multiple outcomes. Consequently, the individual risk assessment example at Annex 4C allows the lead assessors to record multiple outcomes for each hazard. Although a variety of outcomes may be considered for a particular type of risk, the LRF may decide that only a small number need to be captured in the CRR.4.47. Each assessment should be carried out by a group of professionals with a pragmatic mix of evidence and judgment, which should be documented as far as possible. Where appropriate, the assessments of likelihood will be informed by studies on the vulnerability (i.e. susceptibility to damage or harm) and resilience (ability to withstand damage or harm) of the relevant sites, systems and communities. The assessments of likelihood and of impact should adopt the scales provided at Annex 4D.4.48. It is possible that the generic local assessments of likelihood provided by central government in the LRAG will refer to outcomes of hazards that were not identified by the Category 1 responders. Category 1 responders can adopt different outcomes if they feel that this is necessary, but should document their reasons for doing so. It will not be possible for central government to re-issue the generic assessments with the revised outcomes, but it should be possible to take account of the new outcomes when agreeing the national risk assessment framework in subsequent years.Assessing the impact of hazards4.49. The next stage is to assess the impacts of the hazards. At Annex 4B, a generic framework is provided for assessing the local impacts of events in a consistent way. Using the impact scales provided, the lead assessors should assess the impact of hazards in their local areas.4.26. 

4.50. 4.514.52.4.53.
Category 1 and 2 responders and other organisations engaged in response should not share risk assessments (either through the LRF or otherwise) if the information in the assessment is sensitive (e.g. commercially sensitive or relating to national security) and the responder has reason to believe that to do so would compromise the information. Chapter 3 provides further guidance.The lead assessors should capture the agreed likelihood and impact assessments in the individual risk assessment forms for consideration by the RAWG.Step 4: Risk evaluationOnce the RAWG has agreed the individual risk assessment forms, the results should be collated and incorporated in the CRR, unless sensitive. The level of risk can then be determined by plotting likelihood and impact scores for each hazard on a risk matrix (see Annex 4F). The production of a risk matrix is an essential part of the risk assessment process. Not only does it enable the risk analysis to be interpreted against pre-defined criteria, but it greatly facilitates the communication of the risk assessment. Annex 4F provides descriptions of the four risk ratings (‘Very high’, ‘High’, ‘Medium’ and ‘Low’) and addresses their relative significance for directing emergency planning.Note that in this risk matrix, the impact score is given a slightly greater weighting than the likelihood score. For example, an ‘Unlikely’ (2) but ‘Catastrophic’ (5) risk scores ‘Very high’, whereas a ‘Probable’ (5) but ‘Minor impact’ (2) risk scores ‘Medium’. The formula used to combine likelihood and impact scores varies from one risk assessment approach to another. The guidance presented here is consistent with a number of the major standards, and consistency in the application of this risk matrix is essential if the results of the local risk assessments are to be easily compared.
4.54. As regards threat information within the public community risk register, LRFs must refer directly to the NRR and include the related NRR threat statement provided by central government in the threat section of the LRAG. See Box 4.4.Box 4.6: National Resilience Extranet (NRE):Step 5: Risk treatment(See Box 4.7)Step 6: Monitoring and reviewing4.55. Risks should be reviewed regularly. Although there is no statutory requirement, it is recommended LRFs review risks in line with the annually updated Local Risk Assessment Guidance (LRAG). Risks should be monitored continuously and, where information suggests a potential change in the risks, a risk assessment should be4.54. 
performed and the CRR updated accordingly. This may require special meetings of the LRF, although risk assessment should be a standing item on the agendas of the LRFs. The CRR will also need to be updated periodically to reflect changes in the response capability (i.e. resilience). Consequently, the CRR should be seen as a living document and the work of the LRF as a rolling project.Sharing Risk Assessments4.56. Regulations require CRRs to be shared with LRFs in neighbouring local areas with whom a boundary is shared, and to the DCLG Resilience and Emergencies Division. In addition, Category 1 responders should consider whether there are any specific risks which should be communicated to any LRFs in any other local areas.Box 4.7: Risk treatment
In this stage of the risk assessment process, the LRF should prioritise risk reduction measures in accordance with the size of the risks and the gaps in the capabilities required to respond to those risks. This should take into account risks both in context of the current situation and consideration of the longer term risk context.This will allow responders to identify capability gaps and risk reduction measures that may need to be tackled over a longer term period. They should set the risk priorities and, having evaluated the treatment options, agree a risk treatment plan. All such judgements should be recorded in the CRR.The process has a number of stages that are described below. The results of each stage should be recorded in the CRR:o Assess the type and extent of the capabilities required to manage and respond to the hazards. The National Resilience Planning Assumptions together with Local Planning Assumptions Guidance can be used to inform local planning figures and will determine the level of capability required.o Identify the capabilities that are already in placeo Considering the gap and the extent of the risk, rate the risk priority.o Identify the additional treatments required to close the capability gap and manage the risk more effectively.o 
Publishing Risk Assessments4.57. A number of hazards a community may face, including pandemic influenza and wide-spread flooding, would be beyond the capacity of the emergency services, without the co-operation of the communities affected. The Community Risk Register, which Category 1 responders have a duty to publish, is an effective mechanism for making communities and businesses more aware and better able to prepare to play their part in emergency scenarios. LRFs are encouraged to increase awareness and engagement of the local community with the CRR by taking into account the principles of effective risk communication as documented on the UK resilience website http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/resource-library/ communicating-risk-guidance. The webpage also gives examples of good practice that some LRFs have used in the production of their CRR. Category 1 responders are able to fulfil their statutory duty to publish all or part of their risk assessments by publishing all or part of the CRR or publishing all or part of a plan, where the part published includes a summary of the risk assessment 25 on which the plan is based. They should do so where such information is presented in such a way that informs and encourages members of the public to mitigate the consequences of risks in their area. They should also consider the security classification of the information and the restrictions on the disclosure of sensitive information (information disclosure of which would be damaging to national security or public safety or information which would be harmful to individuals or the commercial interests of any business entity.).25 s. 2(1)(f)
Box 4.8: Access under the Freedom of Information Act
 Annex 4 A: Summary of thesix-step local risk assessment processRevision to Emergency Preparedness
Step NoName of stepForum levelAgencies involvedActionsInputs1ContextualisationRisk assessment working group (RAWG)Category 1 responderso Define scope of project (relate to definition of emergency in the Act) and process tobe followedo Identify stakeholderso Set out risk evaluation criteria and principleso Review or describe social, economic, cultural, infrastructural and environmental issues within local contexto Review risk within the context of the current situation, but with regard for the longer-term risk contexto Prior internal discussions within all Category 1 responderso Views of Category 2 responders received2Hazard review and allocation for assessmentRAWGCategory 1 responderso		Taking into account centrally provided guidance and drawing on information provided by Category 2 responders,Category 1 responders provisionally identify and describe hazards which might give rise to an emergency in the next five years and thosewhich will noto Category 1 responders bring own research on hazardso Views of Category 2 responders receivedo Government to provide Local Risk Assessment Guidance (LRAG)
Step NoName of stepForum levelAgencies involvedActionsInputsLocal Resilience Forum (LRF) Risk Assessment working group (RAWG)o Category 1 responders provisionally agree allocation of lead assessorso LRF endorses hazards to be assessed and determines lead assessor responsibilityo RAWG convenes and reviews hazards identified at LRF for confirmation or possible Community Risk Register (CRR) amendmento RAWG confirms appropriateness of lead allocation and identifies any other agencies with key roleso RAWG agrees a project plan with deadlines for assessing individual or group hazardso Local Risk Assessment Guidanceo Lead assessors’ impact and likelihood assessments3Risk analysisLead assessorsAll Category 1 responderso		Lead assessors consider the likelihood of hazards occurring over five-year period, drawing on generic assessments from central government, other research and knowledge of Category 1 responders
Step NoName of stepForum levelAgencies involvedActionsInputso Lead assessor adopts the likelihood assessment of threats from central government.o Lead assessor suggests the range of potential impacts arising from the hazards as well as any vulnerabilities surrounding these, and discusses with RAWGo For some categories of threat, the lead assessor may weight the impact of a successful attack against local targets within their area.o Lead assessor captures assessment details for each hazard and related reasoning within the individual risk assessment form. This generates a provisional risk statement with likelihood, impact(s) and an overall risk assessment for evaluationby RAWGo		Input from other Category 1 and 2 responders, and community where relevant.
Step NoName of stepForum levelAgencies involvedActionsInputs4Risk evaluationRAWG LRFAll Category 1 responderso RAWG considers the individual risk assessment forms, compares the results to the risk criteria, and confirms or modifiesthese assessments as appropriateo Agreed assessments are collated and incorporated into CRRo Risk matrix is plotted for hazardso RAWG incorporates into CRR threat statement provided by central government within the LRAG.o RAWG highlights existing capabilities and migration plans for the hazards and threats and:ï considers the acceptabilityof risksï identifies and recommends options for risk treatment for the LRFï makes recommendations to the LRF on risk priorities for hazards and threatso Lead assessors bring examples of individual risk assessments back to RAWGo Agreed risk evaluation criteria
Step NoName of stepForum levelAgencies involvedActionsInputs56Risk treatmentMonitoring and reviewingLRFLRFLRFAll Category 1 responders Category 2 responders (as appropriate)o LRF reviews the CRR and risk matrix in light of the evaluation criteria, and amends as appropriateo LRF determines the acceptability of the risks beforeconsidering treatmento Review the capability challenges posed by the risks against existing capabilities, mitigation plans or known gapso Set risk prioritieso Evaluate proposed options for additional treatment of risks and agree risk treatment plano Identify officer or organisation to be responsible for implementation of actionso Actions communicated to appropriate working groupso Review of all risks as and when appropriate, taking into account the annually updated LRAGo Updated CRR, risk matrix and recommendation from RAWGo Updated CRR, risk matrix and recommendation from RAWGo Ongoing review of changes to context and hazards within responding organisationso Ongoing and regular reviews of risks by LRF between responders
Annex 4 B: Illustration of Local Risk Assessment GuidanceRevision to Emergency Preparedness

4B.1.4B.2.4B.3.
The following table is illustrative of the structure and type of content that is included in the Local Risk Assessment Guidance (LRAG). It identifies the types of hazard that Category 1 responders may wish to add to their Community Risk Registers, and an assessment of the likelihood of these risks occurring in a five- year timeframe in a typical Local Resilience Forum (LRF) area. It also sets out the assumptions which underpin the likelihood assessment and guidance on how this might vary through the country. It also provides information on generic threats for Category 1 responders.Category 1 responders are collectively responsible for maintaining a Community Risk Register (CRR). The LRAG is a guide which should assist Category 1 responders in compiling and assessing their CRRs. It provides a consistent basis for emergency planning across the LRF area.For each risk, the following descriptors are provided:o Risk identifier: Risks prefixed with ‘H’ are hazards which will require a national as well as a local response. Risks marked ‘HL’ would not ordinarily prompt a national response, and would usually be dealt with locally. Risks marked ‘T’ are threats which will require a national as well as a local response.o Risk category: This indicates the type of threat or hazard in question (e.g. terrorist attack, industrial accident, severe weather, public protests). Risk categories should be read in conjunction with outcome descriptions in order to understand the magnitude of the event.o 
o Outcome description: This describes the immediate consequences or significance of the event. Outcome descriptions will often be expressed in terms of the facilities that have been destroyed, the numbers of fatalities and casualties, or extent of contamination. It is this information which enables the subsequent local impact assessment.o Variation and further information: This column focuses on the specific assumptions or causal events that drive the outcome description.Details are also given on the historical precedent and justification for the specific assumptions made.o Likelihood score and lead department: This column in the table gives the likelihood score of the risk arising, and the department or agency which has made this assessment. There is an important distinction in the treatment of likelihood assessments for threats and for hazards. In the case of hazards, the table provides an assessment of the likelihood of relevant risks occurring in a five-year timeframe in a typical LRF area.Likelihood assessments for hazards are presented on a 1-5 scale.o In the case of threats, the assessment of likelihoods is treated differently.The table does not show likelihood scorings for each threat event because doing so would be analytically misleading.o Likelihood rationale: This column in the table provides additional descriptive or statistical guidance on how the generic likelihood assessment was calculated. Each local area will wish to identify which of those threats and hazards listed could not occur in their area because it lacks particular sites or characteristics; and ultimately each LRF will need to decide on its own likelihood assessments. This will lead to a reduced set of assessed risks for most, if not all, local areas. The central government likelihood scores given are based upon the assessment of the risk outcome description occurring at any location across the UK. The figure provided is what policy experts assess to be the highest of allo 
possible local level likelihoods for that specific scenario. While ratings at a local level will vary as each area is different, no local score should be greater than the national one. Clearly, where a local version of the hazard is being assessed at the LRF’s discretion and with potentially lesser impacts, the likelihood of that new, local risk, might well be greater.
4B.4.
The Local Risk Assessment Guidance will be issued annually. Feedback from Category 1 responders about how this guidance could be improved is welcomed and should be directed to the Civil Contingencies Secretariat in the Cabinet Office.
Emergency Preparedness | Annex 4 B: Illustration of Local Risk Assessment GuidanceType of riskRisk categories (and sub-categories)Outcome descriptionLikelihood assessment, lead department and assumptionsVariation and further informationLikelihood rationaleIndustrial accidents and environmental pollutione.g. H1Fire or explosion at a gas terminal as well as LPG, LNG and other has onshore feedstock pipeline and flammable gas storage sitese.g. Up to 3km around site causing up to 500 fatalities and 1,500 hospitalisations. Gas terminal event likely to be of short duration once feed lines are isolated; event at a storage site could last for days if explosion damaged control equipmentLikelihood rating: Lead: Fire and RescueService (F&R)/Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Assumptions:e.g. H2Fire or explosion at an onshore ethylene gas pipelinee.g. Up to 3km around site causing up to 500 fatalities and 1,500 hospitalisations and serious downstream impact on oil and chemical productionLikelihood rating: Lead: HSE Assumptions:e.g. HL1Fire or explosion at a gas terminal, or involving a gas pipelinee.g. Up to 3km around site causing up to 10 fatalities and 100 hospitalisationsLikelihood rating: Lead: HSE Assumptions:Fire or explosion at an oil refineryLikelihood rating: Lead: HSE Assumptions:PAGE 44
Emergency Preparedness | Annex 4 B: Illustration of Local Risk Assessment GuidanceType of riskRisk categories (and sub-categories)Outcome descriptionLikelihood assessment, lead department and assumptionsVariation and further informationLikelihood rationaleFire or explosion at a fuel distribution site and tank storage of flammable or toxic liquidsLikelihood rating: Lead: HSE Assumptions:Fire or explosion at an onshore fuel pipelineLikelihood rating: Lead: HSE Assumptions:Fire or explosion at an offshore oil/gas platformLikelihood rating: Lead: HSE Assumptions:Explosions at a natural gas pipelineLikelihood rating: Lead: HSE Assumptions:Toxic chemical releaseLikelihood rating: Lead: Environment Agency/HSE Assumptions:e.g. HL2Industrial accident involving toxic release, e.g. from a site storing large quantities of chlorinee.g. Up to 3km from site causing up to 30 fatalities and up to 250 hospitalisationsLikelihood rating: Lead: HSE Assumptions:e.g. HL3Industrial accident involving toxic releasee.g. Up to 1km from site causing up to 10 fatalities and up to 100 hospitalisationsLikelihood rating: Lead: HSE Assumptions:Radioactive substantive release from a nuclear reactor accidentLikelihood rating: Lead: HSE Assumptions:PAGE 45
Emergency Preparedness | Annex 4 B: Illustration of Local Risk Assessment GuidanceType of riskRisk categories (and sub-categories)Outcome descriptionLikelihood assessment, lead department and assumptionsVariation and further informationLikelihood rationaleAccidental or unplanned importation or release of radioactive material fromincorrectly handled or disposed of sourcesLikelihood rating: Lead: Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra)Biological substance release from control measure failure (e.g. pathogen release from containment laboratory)Likelihood rating: Lead: HSE Assumptions:Widespread contamination of the food supply chain, arising from:1. Industrial accident (chemical, microbiological nuclear) affecting food productionareas e.g. Chernobyl, Sea Empress oil spill, foot and mouthdisease (FMD)2. Contamination of animal feed,e.g. dioxins, FMDLikelihood rating: Lead: Food Standards Agency (FSA)Maritime pollutionLikelihood rating: Lead: EA Variation:Land contaminationLikelihood rating: Lead: EA Variation:Air quality incidentLikelihood rating: Lead: EA Variation:PAGE 46
Emergency Preparedness | Annex 4 B: Illustration of Local Risk Assessment GuidanceType of riskRisk categories (and sub-categories)Outcome descriptionLikelihood assessment, lead department and assumptionsVariation and further informationLikelihood rationaleTransport AccidentsRapid accidental sinking of a passenger vessel in, or close to, UK watersLikelihood rating: Lead: Department for Transport (DfT) Assumptions:Severe weatherStorms and galesLikelihood rating: Lead: Meteorological Office (Met Office) (on behalf of EA) Assumptions:Low temperatures and heavy snowLikelihood rating: Lead: Met Office (on behalf of EA) Assumptions:Flooding: Major coastal/tidalLikelihood rating: Lead: EA Variation:Flooding: Major fluvialLikelihood rating: Lead: EA Variation:PAGE 47
Emergency Preparedness | Annex 4 B: Illustration of Local Risk Assessment GuidanceType of riskRisk categories (and sub-categories)Outcome descriptionLikelihood assessment, lead department and assumptionsVariation and further informationLikelihood rationaleStructural hazardsLand movement (tremors and landslides)Likelihood rating: Lead: FireBuilding collapseLikelihood rating: Lead: Fire/HSEHuman healthInfluenza-type disease (epidemic)Likelihood rating: Lead: Department of Health (DH)Influenza-type disease (pandemic)Likelihood rating: Lead: DHSARS-type diseaseLikelihood rating: Lead: DHAnimal healthNon-zoonotic notifiable animal disease (e.g. FMD, Classical Swine Fever, Blue Tongue and Newcastle disease of birds)Likelihood rating: Lead: DefraZoonotic notifiable animal diseases (e.g. Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI), rabies and West Nile Virus)Likelihood rating: Lead: DefraPAGE 48
Emergency Preparedness | Annex 4 B: Illustration of Local Risk Assessment GuidanceType of riskRisk categories (and sub-categories)Outcome descriptionLikelihood assessment, lead department and assumptionsVariation and further informationLikelihood rationalePublic protestLarge scale public protestLikelihood rating: Lead: Cabinet Office Civil Contingencies Secretariat (CCS)Targeted disruptive protest, i.e. fuel protestLikelihood rating:Lead: Cabinet Office CCSIndustrial technical failureTechnical failure of upstream (offshore) oil/gas network leading to a disruption in upstream oil and gas productionLikelihood rating: Lead: DTIAccidental failure at water treatment worksLikelihood rating: Lead: DefraNo notice failure of a public telephony providerLikelihood rating:Lead: Cabinet Office Central Sponsor for Information Assurance (CSIA)Technical failure of electricity networkLikelihood rating: Lead: DHTelecommunication infrastructure – human errorLikelihood rating:Lead: Cabinet Office CSIAPAGE 49
Emergency Preparedness | Annex 4 B: Illustration of Local Risk Assessment GuidanceType of riskRisk categories (and sub-categories)Outcome descriptionLikelihood assessment, lead department and assumptionsVariation and further informationLikelihood rationaleTerrorist bombs - infrastructureE.g. T1Conventional attack on main government buildingse.g. Up to 400 fatalities and partial and temporary closure of the buildingLikelihood rating: Lead: Home OfficeRegions and local areas that includesignificant main government buildings are atgreater risk.PAGE 50
Annex 4 C: Example of an individual risk assessmentRevision to Emergency Preparedness
Individual risk assessmentHazard/threat category:	Sub-category:Severe weather	Flooding (main river)Hazard and threat description, including scale:	Risk reference no. River W – flooding over an area of 10 square miles and 50 square miles SW1 Date of revision:	Next review date:July 2011	September 2011
4C.14C.2
Overview of hazard or threatFlooding:o Most commonly caused by intense bursts of rain causing flashfloods, or prolonged rainfall on saturated ground in river catchments, which result in rivers or other watercourses overflowing their banks.o May lead to a minor inundation of properties and road closures, or result in widespread loss of life and devastation of property necessitating the implementation of a co-ordinated recovery plan.Key historical evidence2007October/November - United Kingdom - prolonged severe rainfall led to the flooding of 12,000 homes nationwide. The River Ouse at York flooded hundreds of properties with estimated £400 million damages. The Aire flooded over 300 properties in Selby and Barlby and 300 at Stockbridge near Keighley.
2006March - North Yorkshire - River Derwent burst its banks and inundated Malton and Norton forcing 200 families to abandon their homes (recurred in November 2007).2005April - Midlands - extensive flooding killed 5 and damaged 4,500 homes in Northamptonshire, Warwickshire and Oxfordshire.
4C.34C.4
LikelihoodHazard	Outcome description	 Likelihood Flooding (main river)	10 square miles	Probable (5) Flooding (main river)	50 square miles	Negligible (1)Igleby appears to be experiencing more instances of all forms of flooding in recent times, in particular as building continues on several floodplains.ImpactSummaryHazard	Outcome description	 Impact Flooding (main river)	10 square miles	Significant (4) Flooding (main river)	50 square miles	Catastrophic (5)Details

4C.54C.64C.5
Impacts associated with floods:o Primary:ï Drowning of people, pets and livestockï Major damage to property and surroundingï Closure, or washing away, of roads, bridges, railway linesï Loss of (and possible damage to) telephone, electricity, gas and water supplies. Pollution/health risks from sewerage systems, chemical stores, fuel storage tanks. Evacuation and temporary/long-term accommodation needso Secondary:ï Need for recovery strategy in aftermath of major floodï Disruption of economic life and major costs of rebuilding infrastructureï Public need for information, advice, benefits/ emergency paymentsï Insurance implications, including help for the uninsuredï Safety assessments/possible demolition of damaged buildings and structuresï Shortage/overstretch of key resources (equipment and personnel) and agencies. Overstretch of normal communication links, including mobile phonesVulnerability and resilienceAreas across Igleby with a high potential for flooding based on topography and historical incidents include Hotton, Nimby and Coneywood Bridge.
4C.6	Overall assessmentCategory:Severe weatherSub-category:Flooding (main river)Outcome descriptionImpactLikelihoodRisk10 square milesSignificantProbableVERY HIGH50 square milesCatastrophicNegligibleMEDIUMControls in place:Council: Major Emergency Plan; Generic Flooding Plan; Major Flood Incident Plan for River Aire.Other organisations:o Environment Agency:, Local Flood Warning Plan for Igleby Area.o Police: Flood Warning and Flood Response; Flood Plan for River WandleAdditional risk treatment required:o Assist Environment Agency in take-up of automated voice messaging for use in warning local residents and encourage better flood preparedness in communities.o Work with Land Drainage on the mapping and identification of ‘flooding hotspots’ on becks and other watercourses.o 
Annex 4 D: Likelihood and impact scoring scalesRevision to Emergency Preparedness
Emergency Preparedness | Annex 4 D: Likelihood and impact scoring scalesLevelDescriptorCategories of impactDescription of impact1InsignificantHealthï Insignificant number of injuries or impact on healthSocialï Insignificant number of persons displaced and personal support requiredï Insignificant disruption to community services, including transport services and infrastructureEconomicï Insignificant impact on local economyEnvironmentï Insignificant impact on environment2MinorHealthï Small number of people affected, no fatalities, and small number of minor injuries with first aid treatmentSocialï Minor damage to propertiesï Minor displacement of a small number of people for < 24 hours and minor personal support requiredï Minor localised disruption to community services or infrastructure < 24 hoursEconomicï Negligible impact on local economy and cost easily absorbedEnvironmentï Minor impact on environment with no lasting effects3ModerateHealthï Moderate number of fatalities with some casualties requiring hospitalisation and medical treatment and activation of MAJAX, the automated intelligent alertï notification system, procedures in one or more hospitalsSocialï Damage that is confined to a specific location, or to a number of locations, but requires additional resourcesï Localised displacement of >100 people for 1-3 daysï Localised disruption to infrastructure and community servicesEconomicï Limited impact on local economy with some short-term loss of production, with possible additional clean-up costsEnvironmentï Limited impact on environment with short-term or long-term effectsPAGE 57
Emergency Preparedness | Annex 4 D: Likelihood and impact scoring scalesLevelDescriptorCategories of impactDescription of impact4SignificantHealthï Significant number of people in affected area impacted with multiple fatalities, multiple serious or extensive injuries, significant hospitalisation and activation of MAJAX procedures across a number of hospitalsSocialï Significant damage that requires support for local responders with external resourcesï 100 to 500 people in danger and displaced for longer than 1 week. Local responders require external resources to deliver personal supportï Significant impact on, and possible breakdown of, delivery of some localcommunity servicesEconomicï Significant impact on local economy with medium-term loss of productionï Significant extra clean-up and recovery costsEnvironmentï Significant impact on environment with medium-to long-term effects5CatastrophicHealthï Very large numbers of people in affected area(s) impacted with significant numbers of fatalities, large number of people requiring hospitalisation with serious injuries with longer-term effectsSocialï Extensive damage to properties and built up environment in affected area requiring major demolitionï General and widespread displacement of more than 500 people for prolonged duration and extensive personal support requiredï Serious damage to infrastructure causing significant disruption to, or loss of, key services for prolonged period. Community unable to function withoutsignificant supportEconomicï Serious impact on local and regional economy with some long-term, potentially permanent, loss of production with some structural changeï Extensive cleanup and recovery costs.Environmentï Serious long term impact on environment and/or permanent damagePAGE 58
Emergency Preparedness | Annex 4 D: Likelihood and impact scoring scalesCategoryExplanationHealthEncompassing direct health impacts (numbers of people affected, fatalities, injuries, human illness or injury, health damage) and indirect health impacts that arose because of strain on the health serviceSocialEncompassing the social consequences of an event, including availability of social welfare provision; disruption of facilities for transport; damage to property; disruption of a supply money, food, water, energy or fuel; disruption of an electronic or other system of communication; homelessness, evacuation and avoidance behaviour; and public disorder due to anger, fear, and/orlack of trust in the authoritiesEconomicEncompassing the net economic cost, including both direct (e.g. loss of goods, buildings, infrastructure) and indirect (e.g. loss of business, increased demand for public services) costsEnvironmentEncompassing contamination or pollution of land, water, or air, with harmful biological/chemical/radioactive matter or oil, flooding, or disruption or destruction of plant or animal lifeNoteStrictly, levels 1 and 2 of the impact scale are likely to fall below threshold for an emergency. Consequently, there may be no statutory requirement to plan for events that score 1 or 2 on the impact scale. This scale recognises that, to demonstrate a thorough analysis, Category 1 responders will wish to include in the risk assessment certain risks with impacts at these levels.Likelihood scoring ScaleLevelDescriptorLikelihood over 5 yearsLikelihood over 5 years1Negligible>0.005%> 1 in 20,000 chance2Rare>0.05%> 1 in 2,000 chance3Unlikely>0.5%> 1 in 200 chance4Possible>5%> 1 in 20 chance5Probable>50%> 1 in 2 chancePAGE 59
Annex 4 E: Example of a classified Community Risk RegisterRevision to Emergency Preparedness
Emergency Preparedness | Annex 4 E: Example of a Community Risk RegisterDate of revision: July 2011Next review date: September 2011Risk refHazard or threat categoryHazard or threat sub- categoryOutcome descriptionLikelihoodImpactRisk ratingCapability requiredControls currently in placeAdditional risk treatment required (with timescale)Risk priorityLead responsibilityReview dateSW1Severe weatherFlooding (main river)River W – flooding 10 square milesProbableSignificantVery highFlood Incident PlansStrategic stocks of sand bagsMajor Emergency PlanMajor flood exercise every 2 years2TBDJuly 2012Flood warden schemeMajor Flood Incident PlanTransport accidentAccident on motorway or major trunk roadAccident on M6. Up to 10 fatalities and 20 hospitalisations.Closure of lanes for up to 1 weekPossibleSignificantVery highMotorway Incident PlansHeavy lifting and earth-moving equipmentMajor Incident PlansHighway Agency PlansMulti-agency co-ordination exercises every 2 years3Fire Service/ DfTJuly 2012Industrial accident and environ- mental pollutionToxic chemical releaseAccident at AA chemical plant. Releaseup to 3km from site. Up to 30 fatalities and 250 hospitalisationsUnlikelySignificantHighToxic Incident and Environ-mental Pollution PlansChemical containment. Detoxification and decontamination equipmentMajor Incident PlansEmergency Services Major Incident PlansHSE safety inspectionExercise safety every 5 years3Fire ServiceJuly 2012Terrorist attackConventional/Explosion in aInherent hospitalEmergencyIdentification2PoliceJuly 2012(informationexplosivecrowded placesurge capacityServices Majorof temporaryprovidedkilling up to 100Incident Plansmortuary sitesby centralpeoplegovernment)As regards to public information for community risk registers for both non-malicious hazards and malicious threats, LRFs should consider the security classification of the information and the restrictions on disclosure (see para 4.57). For malicious threats, LRFs are recommended to refer directly to the NRR, perhaps by including a link or reproducing the enclosed risks as assessed in the NRR matrix, using a modified form of the language previously recommended, along the following lines:“The NRR is a national picture, derived from the National Risk Assessment, of the risks of emergencies. The Matrix [here] gives an indication of the relative likelihood and impact of the high consequence risks that are outlined in the National Risk Register. It includes the risk of a number of kinds of terrorist attacks, shown here as attacks on crowded places, transport systems, and critical infrastructure, and attacks using non-conventional (or in other words chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear) materials. In planning for emergencies [we] take into account the impact that such attacks would have in the local area as much as we do the impacts of other hazards of a more local nature”PAGE 61
 Annex 4 F: Risk rating matrixRevision to Emergency Preparedness

Negligible (1)	Rare (2)	Unlikely (3)	Possible (4)	Probable (5)Likelihood
Key
Very High HighMedium Low
Definitions of risk ratingsVery high (VH) risk - these are classed as primary or critical risks requiring immediate attention. They may have a high or medium likelihood of occurrence, but their potential consequences are such that they must be treated as a high priority. This may mean that strategies should be developed to reduce or eliminate the risks, but also that mitigation in the form of (multi-agency) planning, exercising and training for these hazards should be put in place and the risk monitored on a regular frequency. Consideration should be given to planning being specific to the risk rather than generic.High (H) risk - these risks are classed as significant. They may have a high or low likelihood of occurrence, but their potential consequences are sufficiently serious to warrant appropriate consideration after those risks classed as ‘very
high’. Consideration should be given to the development of strategies to reduce or eliminate the risks, but also mitigation in the form of, at least (multi-agency) generic planning, exercising and training should be put in place and the risk monitored on a regular frequency.Medium (M) risk - these risks are less significant, but may cause upset and inconvenience in the short term. These risks should be monitored to ensure that they are being appropriately managed and consideration given to their being managed under generic emergency planning arrangements.Low (L) risk - these risks are both unlikely to occur and not significant in their impact. They should be managed using normal or generic planning arrangements and require minimal monitoring and control unless subsequent risk assessments show a substantial change, prompting a move to another risk category.
 Chapter 6 Business Continuity ManagementRevision to Emergency PreparednessCivil Contingencies Act Enhancement ProgrammeMarch 2012
Chapter 6 (Business Continuity Management) of Emergency Preparedness, Revised Version
 WHAT THE ACT AND THE REGULATIONS REQUIRE	Scope of the duty6.1. The Act requires Category 1 responders to maintain plans to ensure that they can continue to perform their functions in the event of an emergency, so far as is reasonably practicable.16.2. The duty to maintain plans relates to all the functions of a Category 1 responder, not just its civil protection functions. For Category 1 responders to help others in the event of an emergency, they first need to be able to keep their own crisis response capabilities going. However, Category 1 responders also need to be able to continue to deliver critical aspects of their day-to-day functions (e.g. law enforcement, looking after vulnerable people, attending minor fires) in the event of an emergency, if the impact on the community is to be kept to a minimum.6.1. 
6.3. It may, therefore, be helpful to think of the business continuity management (BCM) duty in the Act as being separated into two strands. In practice, the Act requires Category 1 responders to maintain plans to ensure that they can:o continue to exercise their civil protection functions: The legislation requires Category 1 responders to maintain plans to deal with emergencies (see Chapter 5) and put in place arrangements to warn and inform the public in the event of an emergency (see Chapter 7). The BCM duty requires Category 1 responders to maintain plans to ensure that they can deliver these capabilities when they are required.o continue to perform their ordinary functions: Category 1 responders perform a range of functions that are important to thehuman welfare and security of the community and its environment (e.g. provision of health care, detection of crime, fighting fires). This is particularly true in an emergency situation, where operational demands often increase and the operating environment canbecome more challenging. The legislation requires Category 1 responders to make provision for ensuring that their ordinary functions can be continued to the extent required.6.4. Organisations should not only look at the resilience of internal structures and processes, but also those of organisations they rely on, or deliver services through.6.5. The Act requires Category 1 responders to put in place plans to ensure that6.1. 
they can continue their functions in the event of an emergency.2
This requires

2 s.2(1)(c)
them to ensure that those organisations delivering services on their behalf (e.g. contracted-out services) or capabilities which underpin service provision (e.g. information technology and telecommunications providers) can deliver to the extent required in the event of an emergency. This is because services remain partPAGE 4
of an organisation’s functions even if they do not directly provide them.Limits of the dutyDefinition of emergency6.6. BCM is a flexible framework designed to help organisations to continue operating in the face of a wide range of different types of disruptions right the way along the spectrum of severity. BCM does not however embrace all dimensions of an organisation’s resilience, and one important distinction is between BCM and crisis management. The Publicly Available Specification on Crisis Management (PAS200) identifies crisis management as wider ranging and inherently strategic in nature. BCM in turn is a more operationally- focused activity to ensure that service disruptions are managed, potentially cascading impacts are mitigated and services are maintained. For further details and for guidance on developing a crisis management capability see http://epcollege.com/epc/news/ pas200-crisis-management---new-guidance-for-crisis/ (including link to the BSI website).6.7. The BCM duty, however, is determined by the definition of emergency in the Act. The Act therefore imposes a duty on Category 1 responders to put in place plans to ensure that they can continue to exercise their functions in the event of a much narrower range of disruptive challenges.36.8. The duty applies only to those events or situations defined as an emergency in section 1 of the Act - events or situations that threaten serious damage to the human welfare, environment or security of a place in the United Kingdom. This should be read in conjunction with section 2(2) of the Act, which provides that an event or situation is only an emergency when it overwhelms existing response arrangements, and cannot be dealt with within existing resources or procedures (see Chapter 1 for an in-depth description of the definition of “emergency” underpinning Part 1 of the Act).6.1. 
3 s.2(1)(c) and s.2(2)
PAGE 5
6.9. While the duty focuses on the most challenging situations, it is likely that plans put in place to fulfil their duty under the Act will help Category 1 responders to prepare for a much wider range of day-to-day (i.e. non-emergency) interruptions. By putting in place plans to keep themselves going in the event of an emergency, Category 1 responders will build resilience to a wider range of less serious events.Practicability6.10. Ideally, Category 1 responders would be able to continue all of their functions at ordinary service levels in the event of an emergency. In practice, this may not prove possible, and therefore the duty is qualified.6.11. The Act requires Category 1 responders to put in place arrangements to ensure that they continue to exercise their functions in the event of an emergency so far as is reasonably practicable.46.12. The qualification “so far as is reasonably practicable” has three elements to it:o Criticality: Category 1 responders should focus on ensuring thatthey can deliver critical functions. Which of its functions are critical is a matter that can be determined only by the organisation itself, and may depend on the nature of the emergency in question. Category 1 responders should not lose sight of the common supporting infrastructure underpinning these functions. The following guiding principles should be used when deciding whether or not a serviceor activity is critical. It is not intended to be a definitive list, but rather a series of useful indicators:4 s.2(1)(c)
ï Emergency management/civil protection: Functions that underpin the Category 1 responder’s capability to respond to the emergency itself, and take effective action to reduce, control or mitigate the effects of the emergency.ï Impact on human welfare, the environment and security: The significance of services to the effective functioning of the community in the event of an emergency, or an adverse effect on the environment.ï Legal implications: Statutory requirements on Category 1 responders and the threat of litigation if a service isnot delivered, or is delivered inadequately.ï Financial implications: Loss of revenue and payment of compensation.ï Reputation: Functions that impact on the credibility and public perception of a Category 1 responder.o Service levels: The Act does not require Category 1 responders to continue to deliver their functions at ordinary levels in the event of an emergency. Some critical functions may need to be scaled up, while others (which are non-critical) may need to be scaled down or suspended. Acceptable levels of service in the event of an emergency are a matter for the Category 1 responder itself to determine in the light of its capabilities, constraints and the needs of the community.o Balance of investments: No organisation will be in a position to commit unlimited resources to BCM. It is the role of the Category 1 responder itself to decide the level of protection sought.o 
6.13. Category 1 responders must therefore put in place a process for effectively managing the prioritisation of services - and getting high-level endorsement for these decisions - prior to an emergency occurring. The business impact analysis (BIA) process described later in this chapter gives a methodology for undertaking this work.Risk assessment6.14. It is important that Category 1 responders identify the significant risks threatening the performance of critical functions in the event of an emergency or disruption, as this will enable them to focus resources in the right areas, and develop appropriate continuity strategies.56.15. In this context, there are two strands to risk assessment, relating to external threats (i.e. risk of an emergency occurring) and internal risks (i.e. business risks) that could cause loss or disruption of critical services required to control, reduce or mitigate the effects of an emergency or disruption.6.16. The Act requires Category 1 responders to identify and assess significant risks of an emergency occurring in their area 6 - in accordance with their particular functions - as a basis for performing their other civil protection duties (see Chapter 4). The Regulations require Category 1 responders to have regard to assessments of risk maintained pursuant to the Act when developing BCPs.7 The Act requires Category 1 responders to consider whether a risk assessment6.1. 
makes it necessary or desirable to review a BCP.8
It is good practice, in any
instance, to review BCPs in conjunction with risk registers and vice versa.5 regulation 216 s.2(1)(a)7 regulation 198 s.2(1)(e)
Generic and specific plans6.17. As with emergency plans, the Regulations provide that Category 1 responders may use generic plans, specific plans, or a combination of the two in business continuity planning. A generic plan is a core plan which enables a Category 1 responder to respond to a wide range of possible impacts, setting out the common elements of the response to these (e.g. invocation procedure, command and control, access to financial resources).6.18. Specific plans may be required in relation to specific risks, sites or services. Specific plans provide a detailed set of arrangements designed to go beyond the generic arrangements when these are unlikely to prove sufficient.6.19. Specific plans will usually operate within the framework established by the generic plan. It is a matter for Category 1 responders themselves to decide - in the light of assessments of risk - what, if any, specific plans are required.Plan invocation6.20. The Regulations specifically require Category 1 responders to establish a procedure for determining when an emergency has occurred which affects its6.1. 
ability to continue to perform its functions.9
In other words, there must be a
clear procedure for invoking the plan. Where continuity of critical functions is threatened in the event of an emergency, there should be a clearly laid out escalation procedure. This should be identified, agreed and documented within the plan. The Regulations specifically require this procedure to:9 regulation 24
o identify the person who should determine whether such an emergency has occurred;o specify the procedure that person should adopt in taking that decision;o specify the persons who should be consulted before such a decision is taken; ando specify the persons who should be informed once a decision has been taken.Exercising BCPs6.21. Exercises provide demonstrable evidence of a business continuity and incident management competence and capability. A BCP cannot be considered reliable until it is exercised and has proved to be workable. As part of the BC process there is a continual need to prove plans and strategies by testing. No matter how well designed and thought-out a BCM strategy or BCP appears to be, a series of robust and realistic exercises will identify areas that require amendment.6.22. The Regulations require Category 1 responders to put in place arrangements for exercising BCPs in order to ensure that they are effective1.0 These arrangements should encompass the three principal purposes of exercising:o validating plans - to verify that the plan works;o rehearsing key staff - to familiarise key staff with what is expected of them in a crisis and preparing them for crisis conditions; ando testing systems - to ensure that systems relied upon to deliver resilience (e.g. uninterrupted power supply) function correctly and offer the degree of protection expected.10 regulation 25(a)
6.23. As a simple rule, if it has not been tested it does not work. Exercising must be maintained to hold credibility and encourage ownership across the organisation. Tests should build on the organisation’s past experience. The exercising programme should be flexible, and the focus and frequency of exercises should be responsive to:o the rate of change - where the pace of change (e.g. to the organisation or risk profile) is particularly rapid, exercises may need to be more frequent; ando outcomes of previous exercises - the identification of particular weaknesses and subsequent changes to plans may necessitate further exercising.Training key staff6.24. It is important to ensure that relevant people across the Category 1 responder- and in other organisations where appropriate - are confident and competent concerning the plan. It is particularly important that staff receive appropriate training prior to exercising. This will ensure that they are adequately prepared for what can be a challenging experience.6.25. The Regulations require Category 1 responders to put in place a training programme for those directly involved in the execution of the BCP should it be invoked.11 This should be reflected in plans. This should cover:o the contents of the plan - how is the plan invoked? What arethe key decision-making processes? Who else needs to be involved?11 regulation 25(b)
o their role in implementing the plan - what is expected of them? How do they fit into the wider picture?o key skills and knowledge required in crisis response.Reviewing and maintaining BCPs6.26. The Act specifically requires Category 1 responders to maintain business continuity plans to ensure that they can continue to deliver key services in the event of an emergency.12 This means that Category 1 responders must not only put plans in place, but ensure that they are reviewed and kept up to date.6.27. Category 1 responders exist in a dynamic environment - organisations themselves and the environment they operate in are subject to change. BCPs need to be reviewed and updated to ensure that they remain valid. The following aspects of plans should be reviewed:o personnel - staff turnover means that contact details will need constant updating;o the responsibilities of the Category 1 responder - where a Category 1 responder takes on new functions or delivers new services, this should be reflected;o organisational structures - where responders have experienced restructuring this may need to be reflected in plans;o suppliers or contractors - ensuring that the details of suppliers and contractors are kept up to date;o risk assessments - the Act requires Category 1 respondersto review plans in the light of changes to risk assessments; 13 ando business objectives/processes.12 s.2(1)(c)13 s.2(1)(e)
6.28. The frequency of plan review will depend on the rate of change within the organisation and the environment it operates within. Plan maintenance should take place on an ongoing basis, but all business continuity plans should be comprehensively reviewed at appropriate intervals.Publication of BCPs6.29. Communication with customers or service users - who may need information about service continuity in the event of an emergency - is important to community resilience. Emergencies cause serious disruption to people’s lives and increase reliance on public sector bodies - provision of information about what they can and cannot expect from Category 1 responders in the event of an emergency, may help to minimise this disruption.6.30. The Act requires the publication of aspects of BCM plans in so far as this is necessary or desirable for the purposes of preventing, controlling or mitigating the effects of an emergency or otherwise responding to the emergency.146.31. Category 1 responders need only publish information where there is a positive benefit in doing so. For example, a Category 1 responder need not publish internal management information which would be of little relevance or interest to the public. Furthermore, the Regulations prohibit the publication of sensitive information (e.g. commercially confidential information, personal data) where consent has not been received from the originator of the information, or where the public interest in disclosure fails to outweigh the interests of the organisation or individual concerned.14 s.2(1)(f)
Box 6.0: Further advice and informationHow the Act and Regulations apply in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland6.32. The Act and the Regulations apply in Scotland to bodies outside devolved competence in the same way as they apply in England.6.33. The Regulations made by the Scottish Ministers make provision as to how Category 1 responders in Scotland that fall within devolved competence, should exercise their duty under the Act to maintain business continuity plans.Wales6.34. The Act and the Regulations apply in Wales in the same way as they apply in England.Northern Ireland6.35. The Act and the Regulations apply to Category 1 responders exercising functions in Northern Ireland in the same way as they apply in England, but see information in Chapter 12 in relation to the Police Service of Northern Ireland.6.1. 
6.36. This section provides practical guidance on taking forward a BCM programme within a Category 1 responder organisation. It describes the discipline of BCM and outlines a methodology for implementing it. Category 1 responders must have regard to this material and may find it useful in fulfilling their duties under the Act. While the Government considers this to be a sound approach, Category 1 responders may use other models to deliver statutory requirements where there are compelling reasons for doing so.6.37. The Government is keen to give Category 1 responders the flexibility to make the best use of the resources and expertise available to them. The Regulations permit Category 1 responders to enter into collaborative arrangements in order to fulfil the BCM duty1. 5 Category 1 responders may:o deliver the duty separately;o deliver the duty jointly (e.g. by forming a joint BCM unit or resource);o agree that one Category 1 responder will facilitate the delivery of a BCM programme on behalf of a number of other Category 1 responders; oro enter into collaborative arrangements in which one or more Category 1 responder gives assistance to others in fulfilling their BCM duties (e.g. managing the overarching programme, developing framework plans).15 regulations 8 and 9
6.38. However, BCM must be owned and driven within the organisation itself - and engage the expertise and resources of its staff - in order to be effective. While collaborative arrangements can be used to make use of BCM expertise or resources in other Category 1 responders, responsibility for the robustness of BCM arrangements must remain within the organisation.What is business continuity and business continuity management?6.39. Business continuity 16 is the strategic and tactical capability of the organisation to plan for and respond to incidents and business disruptions in order to continue business operations at an acceptable predefined level.6.40. Business continuity management provides the strategic framework for improving an organisation’s resilience to interruption. Its purpose is to facilitate the recovery of key business systems and processes within agreed time frames, while maintaining the delivery of the Category 1 responder’s identified critical functions. It assists organisations to anticipate, prepare for, prevent, respond to and recover from disruptions, whatever their source and whatever aspect of the business they affect.6.41. BCM is a holistic management process that identifies potential threats to an organisation and the impacts to business operations that those threats, if realised, might cause. It also provides a framework for building organisational resilience with the capability for an effective response that safeguards the interests of its key stakeholders, reputation, brand and core business activities. Business continuity management involves managing the recovery or continuation of activities in the event of a disruption, and management of the overall programme through training, exercises and reviews, to ensure business continuity plans stay current and up-to-date.16 BS25999 definition of business continuity
6.42. BCM is valid across the public, private and voluntary sectors. It is about maintaining the essential business deliverables of an organisation in an emergency. The primary ‘business’ of private sector organisations is the generation of profit, a process that BCM seeks to protect. Category 1 responders provide services to the public, and it is equally important that these are protected and resilient.BCM methodology6.43. The British Standard for business continuity (BS25999) works on a six-stage process widely acknowledged as best practice. This model provides a generic framework that is applicable across the public, private and voluntary sectors. This standard, or its equivalent in the water industry, the Security and Emergency Measures Direction (SEMD), provide a good basis for BCM.6.44. Figure 6.1 illustrates this approach. The rest of the chapter describes this process, and supports Category 1 responders in using this framework to fulfil their duties under the Act.Figure 6.1: The business continuity management lifecycleBS 25999-1:2006 BRITISH STANDARD business continuity management Part 1: Code of Practice 1717 Permission to reproduce extracts from BS25999 is granted by BSI. British Standards can be obtained in PDF or hard copy formats from the BSI online shop: www.bsigroup.com/Shop or by contacting BSI Customer Services for hardcopies only: Tel: +44 (0)20 8996 9001, Email: cservices@bsigroup.com.
6.45. As Figure 6.1 shows, the six stages of the process are:o Stage 1: BCM programme management: Programme management is at the heart of the process. It requires the participation of senior management and establishes the organisation’s approach to business continuity.o Stage 2: Understanding the organisation: This element assists in the understanding of the organisation through the identification of its key products and services and the critical activities and resources that support them. This element ensures that the BCM programme is aligned to the organisation’s objectives, obligations andstatutory duties.o Stage 3: Determining business continuity strategy: This element allows the organisation to select its strategies in order to meet its objectives.o Stage 4: Developing and implementing a BCM response: This stage looks at the need for Category 1 responders to develop and implement plans and arrangements to ensure continuity of critical activities,and the management of an incident.o Stage 5: Exercising, maintaining and reviewing BCM arrangements: An organisation’s arrangements cannot be considered reliable until exercised. This element ensures that an organisation’s BCM arrangements are validated by exercise and review and thatthey are kept up-to-date.o Stage 6: Embedding BCM in the organisation’s culture: Business continuity must become part of the way an organisation is managed to be effective. This stage provides the overarching element that ensures that opportunities are used at the various stages of the BCM process.o 
Delivering BCM arrangementsStage 1: BCM programme management6.46. In order to be successful, BCM must be regarded as an integral part of a Category 1 responder’s normal management processes.6.47. Achieving top-level buy-in is vital to developing robust BCM arrangements.Engaging senior officers is crucial to the success of any major programme because of the influence they have over resource allocation and the culture of an organisation. However, the commitment of the top level is particularly important in relation to BCM because:o it requires the leverage they exert across the organisation in order to be effective;o it requires decisions about attitudes to risk and service prioritisation that can only be taken at the top level; ando the top team is responsible for ensuring that effective governance arrangements are in place.Leadership6.48. Experience has shown that there is merit in giving a member of the executive management board overall responsibility for the BCM process by being appointed as the champion within the organisation. This will ensure that the profile of BCM issues is increased and decisions are made at the appropriate level.6.1. 
6.49. BCM is an ongoing process and it is important to gain the support and endorsement of the board at the end of each stage of the cycle. Critically, it should be the responsibility of senior management to provide the assurance that BCM arrangements are robust and meet the requirements of the Act.BCM co-ordinator6.50. Governance is about accountability, responsibility and control. A person with the appropriate seniority and authority should be identified as accountable for BCM policy, implementation and operation.6.51. Implementation planning should include arranging appropriate training for staff and exercising the capability; this stage is best carried out using a project management method to ensure that the implementation is effectively managed.6.52. Ongoing management of your BCM arrangements will contribute to business continuity becoming embedded within the organisation. Regular review, exercise and updating plans will ensure this happens. A review must take place of arrangements after change in the organisation; such as operating procedures, environment personnel, technology, and after an incident or exercise. If the change is significant to the organisation then a review of the Business Impact Analysis is also advised.Stage 2: Understanding the organisation6.53. An accurate assessment of the Category 1 responder’s organisation and its business is critical, as it will provide the basis upon which all subsequent BCM policies and processes are based.6.1. 
6.54. An understanding of the organisation comes from:o the organisation’s objectives, obligations, statutory duties and operating environment;o the activities, assets and resources that support the delivery of key products and services;o assessing the impact and consequences of failure of these activities; ando identifying and evaluating the threats that could disrupt these.6.55. Category 1 responders should carry out a business impact analysis that assesses over time the impacts if the activity was disrupted; and establish the maximum tolerable period of disruption (MTPD) of each. MTPDs can be worked out by looking at the:o time period after disruption that the activity must be resumed;o minimum level needed upon resumption; ando time period for achieving normal levels of operation.Key to  this  is  identifying  interdependencies  (assets,  infrastructure,  and resources) to be maintained.6.56. Category 1 responders should consider the following when assessing impacts:o the impact on staff or public wellbeing;o the impact of damage to, or loss of, premises, technology or information;o the impact of breaches of statutory duties or regulatory requirements;o 
o reputation damage;o damage to financial viability;o deterioration of product or service quality; environmental damage; ando external services and suppliers.Category 1 responders should document this process (approach, findings and conclusions).6.57. Identification of critical activities is essential to prioritise the areas that need to be focused on. In basic terms, an organisation’s critical activities are those that would have the greatest impact in the shortest time.6.58. Risk assessment is vital in evaluating threats, and risk should be understood in respect of the organisation’s critical activities. By utilising recognised risk techniques, a scoring can be achieved. Guidance on conducting risk assessments can be found in Chapter 4 of this guidance. Annex 4F sets out a risk matrix that can be used to score impacts.6.59. Having identified those areas where the Category 1 responder is most at risk, a decision has to be made as to what approach is to be taken to protect the operation.  This decision along with a documented list of key products and services, the business impact analysis and the risk assessment should be signed off by top management to ensure that the work is a true reflection of the organisation.6.1. 
6.60. As Annex 4F explains, the nature of the risk - defined in terms of its likelihood and impact - will determine which business continuity strategy is appropriate and what, if any, action is required. At one end of the spectrum, disruptions that are low likelihood and low impact may require no specific action, and may merely be dealt with through generic arrangements. Risks that are high impact and high probability, on the other hand, may point to the development of specific plans and risk mitigation strategies.6.61. A number of the strategies that could be adopted are given below:o do nothing - in some instances top-level management may consider the risk to be acceptable;o change, transfer or end the process - such decisions to alter business process must be taken with regard to the organisation’s key objectives and statutory responsibilities;o insure - may provide some financial recompense or support but will not aid the organisation’s response and will not meet all losses(e.g. reputation and other non-financial impacts, human consequences);o mitigate loss - tangible procedures to eliminate or reduce risk within the business; ando plan for business continuity - an approach that seeks to improve the Category 1 and 2 responders’ resilience to interruption, allowing for the recovery of key business and systems processes within therecovery time frame objective, while maintaining their critical functions.
6.62. Any strategy must recognise the internal and external dependencies of the organisation and must have general acceptance by the management functions involved. The continuity strategies adopted here will shape the ability of a Category 1 responder to perform its critical functions in the event of an emergency, and it is important that these decisions are taken by the appropriate officers in the full light of the facts.6.63. The Act requires Category 1 responders to assess the risk of emergencies occurring (“emergency risk assessment”) and use these assessments to inform emergency6.1. 
planning and business continuity planning (see Chapter 4).18
The development
of community risk registers will mean that Category 1 responders have access to up-to-date information about risks in their area. Contingencies that seriously disrupt the activities of the community may also limit the ability to respond to them effectively.Stage 3: Determining business continuity strategy6.64. Category 1 responders should look at strategic options for its critical activities, while bearing in mind the most appropriate strategy will depend on factors such as: the maximum tolerable period of disruption, cost, and consequences of inaction.6.65. Strategies should be considered for the following areas:
18 s.2(1)(a),(b) and (e)o 
people - e.g. multi-skill training; separation of core skills; use of third parties; succession planning; and knowledge retention and management;o premises - e.g. alternative premises/locations; working from home and remote sites;o technology - e.g. geographical spread; holding emergencyo 
replacement, such as old equipment and spares, additional risk mitigation for unique or long lead-time equipment; remote access; third-party;o information - e.g. confidentiality; integrity; availability; and currency;o supplies - e.g.: storage of contingency stock at additionallocation; third part arrangements; assessing the BC capability of your suppliers; dual sourcing and; contractual and service level agreements; ando stakeholders - e.g. protect the interests of key suppliers and good relationship management.6.66. Senior managers should sign off documented strategies.Stage 4: Developing and implementing a BCM response6.67. Business continuity planning is at the heart of the BCM process. The business continuity plans provide the framework in which the Category 1 responder mobilises its response to a BCM challenge in the event of an emergency. Plans normally consist of an Incident Management Plan, a Business Continuity Plan and a Business Recovery Plan.6.68. In developing all plans, consideration should be given to:o keeping it short, simple and user-friendly - it will need to beread and understood in challenging and pressured circumstances;o ensuring the assumptions contained are realistic – e.g. numbers of staff directly affected by the incident, the effect of the ‘backlog trap’ (i.e. the impact of the accumulation of tasks left uncompletedon recovery);
o references to other sources of information and supporting documentation – e.g. guidance, databases, lists of key contacts, resources and suppliers;o action plans and checklists – what should be providedo ownership of key tasks - these should be reflected in job descriptions;o pro-formas - giving templates and model documentation;o version control - the need to implement document management procedures, including a list of all plan holders, which has to be maintained, together with a distribution and change control process; ando communications - effective communication with stakeholdersand, where appropriate, the media is crucial to an effective response6.69. The structure, content and detail of the BCPs will depend on the nature of the Category 1 responder, the risk and the environment in which it operates. In particularly large or complex organisations, it may be necessary to have departmental plans which integrate into one high-level plan. Further advice on plan presentation can be found in Chapter 5.6.70. The method by which an incident management, business continuity or business recovery plan is invoked should be clearly documented. As part of this, the individual(s) that have the authority to invoke them should be recorded along with: how to mobilise the team(s); rendezvous points; and command centre locations.6.71. Each incident management plan, business continuity plan and business recovery plan should set out prioritised objectives in terms of: the critical activities to be recovered; the timescales in which they are to be recovered; and the recovery levels for each critical activity.6.1. 
6.72. The purpose of a business continuity plan is to enable an organisation to recover or maintain its activities in the event of disruption. Invocation supports the critical activities of an organisation; plans may be invoked in whole or part and at any stage.6.73. An Incident Management Plan is a clearly defined and documented plan-of- action for use at the time of an incident. It should typically cover: task and action lists; emergency contacts; people activities; media response; stakeholder management; and locations. Other useful information to consider: contacts; mobilisation details for relevant agencies; log templates; maps, charts, plans and photographs.6.74. A Business Continuity Plan will typically contain: action plans and task lists, for example: how the BCP is invoked, who is responsible, the procedure, who does what when and where, services available, communications; resource requirements, for example: people, premises, technology, information and supplies; responsible person(s) and; forms, templates and annexes.6.75. A Business Recovery Plan aims to support the recovery and resumption of operations to a “normal” state. However, with some incidents it may not be possible to define what “normal” looks like until some time after an incident. Category 1 responders might, therefore, wish to ensure that BCPs are capable of extended operation, giving time for the development of recovery plans.6.76. The below diagram provides an illustration of how these three sorts of plan will come into play during a disruption.6.1. 
Figure 6.2: Incident TimelineBS 25999:2006 BRITISH STANDARD Business Continuity Management Part 1: Code of Practice 19Stage 5: Exercising, maintaining and reviewing BCM arrangements6.77. The Regulations require Category 1 responders to put in place arrangements6.1. 
to exercise BCPs to ensure they are effective.20
An organisation’s business
continuity and incident management arrangements cannot be considered reliable until exercised. Exercising is essential to developing teamwork, competence, confidence and knowledge, which is vital at the time of an incident. Arrangements should be verified through exercising, and a process of audit and self-assessment, to ensure that they are fit for purpose.6.78. When developing a BCM exercise programme, Category 1 responders will need to consider the:o focus of the programme;o types of exercise to be used19 Permission to reproduce extracts from [Name of Standard] is granted by BSI. British Standards can be obtained in PDF or hard copy formats from the BSI online shop: www.bsigroup.com/Shop or by contacting BSI Customer Services for hardcopies only: Tel: +44 (0)20 8996 9001, Email: cservices@bsigroup.com.20 regulation 25(a)
o involvement of senior management in developing, executing and quality-assuring the programme;o process for delivering exercises; ando relationship between the BCM exercise programme and the exercising of emergency plans.6.79. Exercises should focus on impacts and test capabilities. While there is an infinite number of scenarios and possible responses, the list of impacts and capabilities is limited.Figure 6.3: Types and Methods of Exercising BCM Strategies 21ComplexityExerciseProcessVariantsGood PracticeFrequency ?SimpleDesk checkReview/ amendment of content Challenge content of BCPUpdate/validation Audit/verificationAt least annually AnnuallyMediumWalk- through of planSimulationExercise critical activitiesChallenge content of BCPUse ‘artificial’ situation to validate that the BCP(s) contain both necessary and sufficient information to enable a successful recoveryInclude interaction and validateparticipants’ rolesIncorporate associated plansDefined operations from alternative site for afixed timeAnnuallyAnnually or twice yearlyAnnually or lessInvocation in a controlledsituation that does not jeopardise business as usual operation21 Regulation 4(4)(b), 4(7)
ComplexityExerciseProcessVariantsGood PracticeFrequencyComplexExercise full BCP including incidentmanagementBuilding-/ campus-/ exclusion zone- wide exerciseAnnually or lessThe frequency of exercises should depend upon both the organisation’s needs, the environment in which it operates, and stakeholder requirements. However, the exercising programme should be flexible, taking into account the rate of change within the organisation and the outcome of previous exercises. The above exercise methods can be employed for individual plan components, and single andmultiple plans.6.80. Exercising can take various forms, from a test of the communications plan, a desk- top walk-through, to a live exercise (See Figure 6.3 above). In all cases though, exercises should be realistic, carefully planned, and agreed with stakeholders, so that there is a minimum risk of disruption to business processes.6.81. The exercise programme should have the full support of the executive lead for business continuity issues. But the involvement of senior management should not be limited to defining the structure of the programme. In addition to taking part in exercises, senior management should be involved in quality-assuring the exercise programme and endorsing the outcomes.6.1. 
6.82. Figure 6.4 suggests a process for carrying out an exercise programme. Exercising is not about ‘passing’ or ‘failing’, it is all about learning lessons. There should be a debrief after each exercise in order to capture the experience of all the participants. What is important is that the captured data is recorded and considered as part of the post-exercise analysis.Figure 6.4: Exercising your BCP – the learning cycle6.83. Every exercise should have clearly defined aims and objectives. A post-exercise debriefing and analysis should be undertaken which considers the achievement against these.6.84. The post-exercise analysis is usually undertaken individually by the exercise manager or as a meeting of the exercise-planning group. A post-exercise report should be produced that contains recommendations and a timetable for implementation.6.1. 
6.85. This report must be submitted to the executive lead for business continuity within the Category 1 responder organisation for approval of the recommendations.6.86. Once approval has been obtained, the changes to the BCP can be implemented. This should drive changes to the BCM and will be tested as part of any future exercising programme by the business continuity managers. This process provides the audit trail of BCP maintenance and testing.6.87. When exercising a specific part of a plan it may be more appropriate for the output to be a simple memorandum detailing the part tested. For example, for a call-out cascade exercise that tests the contacts listed within the plan for activation, a memo to the organisation’s executive lead for business continuity that the test took place, was completed satisfactorily, and that all the contacts listed in the BCP are correct, would be sufficient to create the audit trail of that aspect of plan testing.6.88. It is important that business continuity planning and exercising are not done in isolation from wider emergency planning work. In part, BCPs are in place to ensure that Category 1 responders are able to deliver their emergency response function in the event of an emergency. Category 1 responders should not forget the close synergies between emergency plans and BCPs when learning the lessons of exercises and making changes as a result. Post exercise reports may have implications for both.6.89. The purpose of this exercise programme is to test the robustness of BCPs in the event of an emergency - will it enable the Category 1 responder to cope effectively with disruptions to the provision of critical services? One such critical function must be the emergency response function itself.6.1. 
6.90. The Act specifically requires Category 1 responders to maintain BCM plans to ensure that they can continue to deliver key services in the event of an emergency. It is essential that Category 1 responders must not only put plans in place, but also ensure that they are regularly reviewed and kept up-to-date.6.91. Plan maintenance should therefore be an ongoing process. It is good practice to undertake a comprehensive review of the state of the plan periodically.6.92. A process should be established whereby the BCM team is informed of relevant changes and developments, and that these are incorporated into the plan. Effective version control procedures should be implemented to ensure that relevant members of staff are working from the correct edition of the plan.Stage 6: Embedding BCM in the organisation’s culture6.93. Documenting the BCP is one element of developing a BCM strategy. Its success, however, depends upon:o implementation of the recommendations made, across the entire organisation;o a programme of training for those directly involved in the execution of the plan; ando an education and awareness programme to ensure understanding and adoption of the plan in relevant parts of the organisation - this applies to both internal and external stakeholders (e.g. employeesand suppliers).
6.94. Category 1 responders should deliver a programme of training and awareness to ensure that the relevant parts of the organisation are confident and competent concerning the plan. All parties must appreciate the importance of BCM to the operation’s survival and their role in this process. This means that business continuity should be ‘mainstreamed’ in emergency management and should be a core element of the emergency planning culture the Act establishes.6.95. As the first part of this chapter notes, the Regulations require Category 1 responders to give appropriate training to those involved in implementing BCPs.23 This section of the chapter also sets out the objectives of such training programmes and what they should cover.6.96. Training will need to be done on a rolling basis to cover staff turnover. BCM co-ordinators should establish a training database to monitor the take-up of training opportunities.6.97. It is also important to ensure that awareness of BCM issues is raised throughout the organisation, to ensure that all relevant staff have confidence in its ability to manage in a crisis, and know how they should respond in the event of a disruption. For example, some organisations distribute ‘z-cards’ to all staff, setting out what they should do in the event of a range of contingencies (e.g. details of secondary sites or evacuation points). The box overleaf sets out some of the key messages and the means of getting them across.23 regulation 25(b)
Box 6.1: The Business Case for BCMPart of embedding a ‘continuity culture’ within an organisation is to convince senior staff of the business case for BCM. It makes sense to put in place BCM arrangements because they help to:o protect the reputation of the Category 1 responder. The community expects continuity of critical services, even inthe most challenging of circumstances. They expect you to be fully in control, and to be seen to be in control - your organisation’s reputation is at risk if you are not.Maintaining the reputation of statutory services in an emergency is a vital element for public reassurance;o produce clear cost benefits. Identifying, preventing and managing disruptions in advance can reduce the costs to an organisation in terms of financial expenditure and management time. The demands of the insurance market have also increasingly become an important driver;o protect the organisation, ensuring that Category 1 responders can help others in an emergency. For Category 1 responders to help others, they first have to be able to keep themselves going in the face of a disruption. BCM will help ensure that they can mobilise the capabilities they need to deal with the emergency. It will also help ensure that the impact of the emergency on the day-to-day functions of the Category 1 responder is kept to a minimum, and that disruptions to vital services do notdeepen the impact of the emergency on the wider community;
6.98. To be truly effective, BC must form part of the culture in an organisation. This can be achieved by: leadership from senior personnel; assigning clear responsibilities; awareness raising; skills training; and exercising plans.6.99. Category 1 responders should extend their awareness-raising activities to those third parties upon whom the Category 1 responder depends in both normal and crisis operations. They need to be aware of how the response will develop when a BCM event occurs, and what this will mean for them.6.100. Category 1 responders also have an interest in ensuring that their suppliers and contractors have in place robust BCM arrangements. To ensure the resilience of operations, it is necessary to ensure that other aspects of the delivery chain are resilient too. It is important to build BCM into procurement and contract management processes. The Office of Government Commerce provides detailed advice on these issues which is freely available on its website: http://www.ogc.gov.uk.6.1. 
6.101. Business continuity as part of Civil Protection is very much a multi-agency activity, where Category 1 responders must work together - and understand each other’s capabilities and vulnerabilities - if they are going to be effective.6.102. In the emergency planning area, it is essential for Category 1 responders to be aware of each other’s plans. BCM arrangements underpin emergency management capabilities - it is important that Category 1 responders have an awareness of the continuity issues facing their partners in the event of an emergency. Which functions will be discontinued? How will functions be scaled down or up in the event of an emergency? Where are partners’ contingency sites?6.103. The Local Resilience Forum (LRF) provides a framework for dialogue about business continuity issues. Category 1 responders should consider using the LRF process as a means of raising mutual awareness, ensuring that plans dovetail, developing frameworks for mutual assistance, and sharing best practice.6.104. The Act requires Category 1 responders to publish aspects of their BCPs in so far as this is necessary or desirable for the purposes of dealing with emergencies.246.105. The purpose of this requirement is to ensure that Category 1 responders make relevant information available to the public about what will happen in the event of an emergency. There are three principal classes of information which Category 1 responders should consider communicating to the public:o a descriptive account of the business continuity plans they have in place for the purposes of reassuring the public;24 s.2(1)(f)
o information about the implications of emergencies for the continuity of a Category 1 responder’s ordinary operations – e.g. possibility of service suspensions or adjustments. Proactively publishing this sort of information in advance of an emergency allows the public to think about their preparations. For example, parents might find it useful to know under which circumstances schools might be closed in the event of severe weather;o sources of information and advice about service continuity issues that the public could consult in the event of an emergency.6.106. This communication can take place through a variety of means, including websites and other publications. This could also be achieved by integrating business continuity issues within mission statements, statements of service and other public information brochures, relating either to the organisation as a whole or to individual services.6.107. Responders can get further guidance and support from the following website http:// shop.bsigroup.com/. In particular, the British Standard on business continuity, BS25999 parts 1 and 2, will be useful along with PB25666: Guidance on exercising and testing for continuity and contingency programmes.6.108. The International Standards Organisation (ISO) are in the process of producing a requirements and guidance document on business continuity; ISO22301 and ISO22313. Publication of these two documents has not been agreed. Early indication is however that if published, there will be nothing substantially different to the British Standard BS 25999, parts 1 and 2. Therefore, alignment with the British Standard will not only provide a good basis for BCM but at this stage would also appear to align with the forthcoming international standards.6.1. 
 Annex 7 A: Communicating with the public: NewsCo-ordination CentreRevision to Emergency PreparednessCivil Contingencies Act Enhancement ProgrammeMarch 2012

7A.1.7A.2.7A.3.
The scale and nature of any emergency will dictate the level of national involvement in the handling of it, particularly on the communications side. If ministerial involvement becomes necessary, then the News Co-ordination Centre (NCC) will be set up in Whitehall by information staff within Cabinet Office. The NCC will function alongside the government department leading the response1 and liaise closely with staff from the Central Office of Information News and Public Relations 2 at the scene of the emergency, if outside London.The NCC will help to co-ordinate the information activities of the various government departments and agencies involved, by pulling together briefing from the different expert bodies for ministers and ensuring that interview bids for ministers are handled appropriately. They will work closely with the national and international media and monitor the output of major broadcasters, in order to correct inaccuracies and spot subject areas where additional material would provide better balance in coverage. It can be up and running within 90 minutes and can operate 24 hours a day as required.The NCC will have responsibility both for meeting the needs of the news agenda and managing the delivery of public information and safety advice at a national level. It will be manned by staff from the various affected departments, to ensure effective co-ordination of activities. Where necessary, it may invoke standing protocols with the media to issue Public Safety Information either nationwide or in particular regions.
1 http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/resource-library/list-lead-government-departments-responsibilities explains more about the role and responsibilities of the2 lead government departmentMore information about the Central Office of Information News and Public Relations can be found at www.coi.gov.uk

7A.4.7A.5.
Robust communications links will be established with those at the scene and in charge of operations to make sure that strategic and high-level political decisions are based on accurate, up-to-date information. The NCC, or the Assembly Press Office in Wales, may send someone from the team to the site of the incident as a contact point, who can keep those on site in touch with central, political activities and interests.The NCC will not be directly involved in operational decisions on site about media arrangements. However, the central operations team that manages the NCC has, in close co-operation with central government, the devolved administrations, local government, emergency services, utilities and other operators, produced detailed protocols. These cover many logistical aspects of dealing with the sort of massive influx of media organisations into an area which would be generated by a national-level catastrophe.
 Annex 7 B: Lead responsibility for warning and informing the publicRevision to Emergency PreparednessCivil Contingencies Act Enhancement ProgrammeMarch 2012
Arrangements for warning, informing and advising the public, including identification of the lead responder
7B.1.7B.2.7B.3.7B.4.7B.5.
The range of emergencies listed in the first column of the table at the end of this annex, matches the main classification of emergencies in Annex 4B of chapter 4: Local responder risk assessment duty. The remaining columns deal with the following:Suggestions as to the Category 1 responders likely to have a duty to maintain arrangements to warn, inform and advise the public in relation to particular emergencies.Suggestions as to which of those Category 1 responders should take the lead on behalf of the Category 1 responders in maintaining arrangements to warn, inform and advise the public in the initial stages of an emergency. Responsibility may of course transfer from one Category 1 responder to another as the emergency situation develops.Category 1 responders must of course make their own decisions about identifying which will take the role of lead responder in the light of local conditions. They may wish to make a more detailed breakdown of responsibilities, as suggested by the detailed classification of types of hazard in Annex 4B.It is important to recognise that the lead Category 1 responder will not necessarily take the lead overall in warning, informing and advising the public. This role may in certain circumstances fall to a Category 2 responder or an organisation which is not a responder. This is dealt with in column 3 of table 7B. Column 2 suggests which Category 1 responder might be the most appropriate to take the lead on behalf of Category 1 responders within these overall arrangements.

7B.6.7B.7.7B.8.7B.9.7B.10.
Suggestions of non-Category 1 responders who, in particular circumstances, may play the lead role, or a significant role, in arrangements to warn, inform and advise the public.The Act imposes a duty to maintain arrangements to warn, inform and advise the public on Category 1 responders only. In practice, Category 2 responders and the Met Office, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra), or the Food Standards Agency (FSA) will have a significant role in these arrangements in relation to particular emergencies. In some cases, it will even be appropriate for a Category 2 responder or the Met Office, Defra and the FSA to take the lead role. Included in column 3 of table 7B are organisations which are relevant in this way.The Regulations provide that Category 1 responders must have regard to the arrangements maintained by these bodies in performing their duty under the Act. The Regulations also provide that Category 1 responders need not unnecessarily duplicate the arrangements maintained by these bodies.Suggestions of other organisations which will have an important role in arrangements to warn, advise and inform the public and with whom Category 1 responders may wish to liaise.In addition to Category 2 responders and the Met Office, Defra, and the FSA, there are other organisations which will play an important role in communicating with the public. These bodies are unlikely to play such a significant role that it is appropriate for Category 1 responders to be required to have regard to their activities under the Regulations. Nonetheless, there will often be merit in Category 1 responders considering the role that these bodies will play in communicating with the public in an emergency and in liaising with them in the planning phase.
GENERIC HAZARD OR THREAT1. Category 1 responders likely to have a duty to maintain arrangements to warn, inform and advisethe public2. Suggestions ofCategory 1 responders from whom a lead responder to maintain arrangements to warn etc may be identified3. Organisations, notCategory 1 responders, which may also playa lead or a significant role in maintaining arrangements to warn, inform and advisethe public4. Other organisations, which may havean important role in maintainingarrangements to warn, inform and advisethe publicIndustrial accidents and environmental pollutionPolice, Fire, Environment Agency, Maritime and Coastguard Agency, local authorities, NHS Trusts, HPAPolice, Fire, Environment Agency or Maritime and Coastguard AgencyOperators of facilities covered by the Control of Major Accident, Hazards, Radiation (Emergency Preparedness and Public Information) and PipelineSafety RegulationsHighways Agency, utilities and Met OfficeTransport accidentsPolice, British Transport Police, Maritime and Coastguard Agency, localauthorities, NHS TrustsPolice, British Transport Police or Maritime and Coastguard AgencyAirport or port operator, train operating companies, Highways Agency,Network RailAirlines, shipping companiesSevere weatherPolice, Fire, Environment Agency, local authorities, HPA, NHS Trusts, Maritimeand Coastguard AgencyPolice, Fire or Environment AgencyMet Office, utilities, transport, including Highways AgencyStructural hazardsPolice, Fire, local authoritiesPolice, Fire, local authoritiesUtilities, including water companiesOwners and operators of structuresHuman healthPolice, Health Protection Agency, NHS Trusts,Port Health Authority,local authoritiesHealth Protection AgencyFood Standards AgencyUtilities, Strategic Health Authority
GENERIC HAZARD OR THREAT1. Category 1 responders likely to have a duty to maintain arrangements to warn, inform and advisethe public2. Suggestions ofCategory 1 responders from whom a lead responder to maintain arrangements to warn etc may be identified3. Organisations, notCategory 1 responders, which may also playa lead or a significant role in maintaining arrangements to warn, inform and advisethe public3. Other organisations, which may havean important role in maintainingarrangements to warn, inform and advisethe publicAnimal healthPolice, local authority, Port Health AuthorityPolice or local authorityDefraPlant diseasePolice, Port Health AuthorityPoliceDefra, Food Standards AgencyPublic protestPolice, local authorityPoliceIndustrial actionPolicePoliceIndustrial technical failurePolice, local authorityPolice, local authorityUtilities
 Annex 7 C: Checklist of suggested protocolsRevision to Emergency PreparednessCivil Contingencies Act Enhancement ProgrammeMarch 2012
Emergency Preparedness | Annex 7 C: Checklist of suggested protocolsChecklist of suggested protocols for warning, informing and advising the public:o To agree the identity of lead responders to warn, inform and advise the public on those scenarios which can reasonably be anticipated.o To agree the process to be used to identify the lead responder to warn, inform and advise the public on any other type of emergency.o To agree joint working procedures and allocation of responsibilities in support of the lead responder for warning, informing and advising.o To agree the trigger points for the handover of the lead responsibilityfor warning, informing and advising from one responder body to another, and the procedures to achieve this.o To agree how services or products for warning, informing and advising (eg equipment for media centres) will be sourced.o As appropriate, to agree with local companies and organisations the circumstances in which their facilities or resources (eg premises, call centres), may be made available to the responder bodies, to help deliver adviceand information to the public in the course of an emergency.PAGE 2Last updated:March 2012
 Annex 7 D: Duty to communicate with the public – The Ten Step CycleRevision to Emergency PreparednessCivil Contingencies Act Enhancement ProgrammeMarch 2012
The Ten Step Cycle – Guidance NoteThe following Ten Step Cycle has been designed to assist Local Resilience Forums (LRFs) in implementing the Communicating with the Public duty, as laid down in the Civil Contingencies Act (2004).The CCA states that Category 1 responders should:o maintain arrangements to warn, and provide information and advice to, the public if an emergency is likely to occur or has occurred;o put in place arrangements to make information available to the public about civil protection matters.The Ten Step Cycle can be used by LRFs in a number of ways. The following are examples:i) LRFs can work through the Ten Step Cycle step-by-step, in the same way LRFs approach the Risk Assessment duty.ii) put LRFs can choose to use the Ten Step Cycle, alongside the Expectations and Indicators of Good Practice for Category 1 and 2 responders, as a guide and barometer, dipping in and out at various steps as required.Ultimately, LRFs will reach the final step, and will have taken a big stride towards implementing a full set of warning and informing arrangements, which are fit for purpose and in line with the risks, set out in their Community Risk Register (CRR). This process will help local communities better understand the risks they face, and the actions they need to take in the event of an emergency. At that stage, as in all aspects of emergency planning, LRFs will find themselves back at
the beginning, and following a review of the work carried out previously, will be ready to start the Ten Step Cycle once more.The Ten Step Cycle for Communicating with the PublicStep 1a) Establish a Public Warning Task Group as a subgroup of the LRF General Working Group.The LRF will need to set up a multi-agency task group to take this work forward, ensuring that it has a representative from all Category 1 responders - the duty applies to all of them. The LRF should consider inviting emergency planning officers, communications professionals, members of local and regional media, as well as appropriate Category 2 responders. Not only will this enhance partnership working and governance, but will allow the LRF to explore all possible solutions in making recommendations on possible control measures in this area.b) Establish an audit process – rationale for decisions madeThis is obviously important with any emergency planning process but the LRF should establish an auditing process to log all decisions that are taken, and processes followed throughout this cycle. This will help the LRF to review progress, answer Freedom of Information (FOI) enquiries and any other queries received, as well as helping to support any post-incident reviews.
Step 2Use the Community Risk Register as the task group’s starting point:o What is the Emergency Risk Management Context for the LRF area? Is the LRF area urban or rural in nature? Consider the geographical profile of the landscape in the LRF area. What hazards do the LRF need to manage – are there main rivers prone to slow-onset riverine flooding, for example, or streams that are prone to flash flooding?What is the infrastructure like – motorways or B-roads? Do the LRF have large international communities where English may not be the first language? Asking such questions about the Emergency Risk Management Context will enable the LRF to set the background against which the task group will work, and allow the LRF to identify the most appropriate control measures for the area, the hazards, and the public.o What are the timescales and impact for each risk?Assess the warning and informing timescales for each hazard, using the outcome descriptions from the CRR as a guide – what are the warning periods for each, or does the hazard have no-notice characteristics?Identifying these factors will also assist the task group to identify the most appropriate control measures against each hazard.
o What are the priorities identified within the CRR?The task group should familiarise itself with those hazards which require the most urgent risk treatment to be carried out on them in relation to warning and informing control measures. This will obviously have a bearing on any future recommendations to the LRF regarding proposed control measures.Step 3Identify and agree the lead responders for each risk in the Community Risk Registero Purpose of appointing lead respondersWhy do LRFs need to identify lead responders? Firstly, the Civil Contingencies Act (2004) states that LRFs are required to identify those Category 1 responders who will take the lead in maintaining arrangements to warn and inform and educate the public, and educate the public about risks and other civil protection matters, for eachrisk identified in the LRF Community Risk Register (CRR).However, in communicating with the public, there is a need to avoid causing confusion during an incident, and in the absence of a lead responder, every Category 1 responder would be obliged to issue warnings, thereby increasing the potential for confusion. Identifying lead responders also helps to avoid duplication of effort – there is no sense in all agencies using valuable resources to issue the same warning and / or information.
In short, selecting lead responders to maintain arrangements for warning and informing the public helps the LRF to ensure that the public receives consistent and agreed safety information from a lead source only. This can play a significant role in mitigating the impact of an emergency on a community.o Regulations require Category 1 responders to have in place a mechanism for selecting lead responders either (a) in advance, or (b) at the timeof an incident.The ideal scenario is that the LRF will select lead responders in advance (i.e. before an emergency occurs). This will not only save the multi-agency tactical command valuable time during a major incident, but will also smooth the path to full implementation of the duty as a whole. Agreeing lead responders in advance for each risk in the CRR will enable the LRF to put in place a minimum number of warning protocols, thus keeping the process as simple as possible. Crisis management can be challenging enough without having to go through the process of choosing a lead responder at the same time.However, if the LRF cannot agree on lead responders in advance, or indeed would prefer to leave it until the response phase of an incident, mechanisms must be put in place to allow that decision-making process to take place effectively when it is required.o Regulations permit Category 1 responders to have a mechanism for changing the lead as the emergency evolves.o 
As an incident proceeds through the response phase to recovery and beyond, the lead responder for warning and informing may need to change, and the Civil Contingencies Act allows for mechanisms to be established enabling these changes to be made. For example, at the conclusion of the response to a flood incident, the police may pass management of the incident to the relevant local authority (as was the case during the Carlisle floods in 2005). This might also be the appropriate time to change the lead responder for warning and informing the public, in this case from the police to local authority.NOTE: It is important to note that the lead responder is not expected to carry out the maintenance of warning and informing arrangements in isolation. The communicating with the public duty falls to all Category 1 responders. The lead responder concept steers LRF partners to provide support, advice and guidance to those agencies designated as lead responders throughout all stages of the disaster cycle. Partnership working is critical to success in implementing this duty effectively by assessing procedures against the risks identified in your CRR. This will help to ensure that the right messages are issued to the right people at the right time and help to promote a co-ordinated approach to communicating with the public.Choosing the LRF’s lead respondersThe following steps provide LRFs with a simple process for selecting lead responders for warning and informing the public. Although this may seem a challenging task at first, it can actually be relatively straight forward if task groups follow the simple steps below:
o Call together a specific ‘Task & Finish’ session for the LRF Public Warning Task Group, ensuring that all Category 1 responders are present – over the course of the next couple of hours, the task is to assign a lead responder agency against each of the risks contained in the LRF’s CRR.o Ensure that copies of the CRR are available with an additional column added, so that task groups can insert the agreedlead responder for each incident phase as the process develops.o Now, with one task group member taking the lead, ‘walk through’ each risk scenario, analysing every phase of the disaster cycle, and deciding which agencies have a role as lead responder as the scenario / incident evolves. These agencies should then be inserted into the amended CRR table. The task group will also have to identify trigger points for the handover of the lead responsibility for warning, informing and advising from one responder body to another, andthe procedures to achieve this (see Annex 7C).However, the task group, where possible, should attempt to select one overall lead responder to take the lead against each risk, to ensure arrangements are maintained, and most importantly, to issue warnings during the immediate aftermath of an incident being declared (no-notice), or in the period prior to a potential incident (notice), to prevent imminent danger to life and property. This agency is the lead responder for both the planning, and immediate emergency response phase. As stated above, they should expect the full support of all Category 1 responders in undertaking this role.
The following scenarios are provided as examples – one notice type scenario (Flooding – major fluvial), and one no-notice (toxic release).Notice type scenario: Flooding – major fluvialo Outcome description (taken from CRR): Sustained period ofheavy rain for two weeks; rising river levels over all regions; thousands of properties affected for 7 to 21 days; some risk to life; impact on roads and rail infrastructure.o Pre-flood: right up to the point where the water is about to breachthe river banks, the Environment Agency (EA) will have issued a series of warnings to the public and other key stakeholders (i.e. Flood Watch, Flood Warning, and Severe Flood Warning). Therefore, the EA as the lead responder at this stage is the agency best placed to issue an alert in the run-up to the incident.o Flood response: once the multi-agency response is activated, and the emphasis changes to consequence management, the Police willcoordinate all public safety messages, to ensure that a common message is being transmitted. In addition, all other Category 1 responders will be communicating with stakeholders that are specific to their own individual organisations (e.g. local authorities will communicate with their internal services, the voluntary agencies, schools, residential care homes, and elected members). Once the flood situation has receded, the EA will then issue an ‘All Clear’ message. At this stage, as the incident enters the recovery phase, the lead responder role will probably change from police to local authority.PAGE 9
o Outcome? In this example there are three major changes in lead responder for this scenario: Environment Agency – police – local authority. However, from a preparedness perspective, the task group may wish to select one agency to take the lead. Its role would be to lead on the preparations for (a) maintaining arrangements to warn and inform, and (b) to educate the public about risk. However, as indicated above all other Category 1 responders would have a duty to assist that lead agency in completing these tasks.No-notice type scenario: Toxic releaseo Outcome description (taken from CRR): Toxic chemical release, up to 3 km from site, resulting in a number of fatalities and casualties.o Pre-incident and response: There are three types of scenario considered here: the first is where the site is known, and is operated by a company governed by the COMAH, REPPIR, or PSR Regulations. The second involves a site that is not known, and is not governed by the aforementioned Regulations.1And finally, the third is a ‘mobile incident’ – in other words, a tanker, ship, and rail carriage – an incident thatcan occur anywhere and at any time.Consider scenario 1. The site operator/ pipeline owner has a duty under COMAH/ REPPIR/ PSR to provide safety information to the public working in, living in, or passing through its Public Information Zone (PIZ). This frequently takes the form of calendars and/ or letters. The site operator / pipeline owner also has a duty under the above legislation to warn the public of a major accident when they occur. However, the task group still needs to designate a lead responder(s) to ensure that warning and informing arrangements are maintained – this might involve site visits, assessment of existing warning infrastructure, and provision1 Radiation (Emergency Preparedness and Public Information) Regulations (2001) (REPPIR); Control of Major Accident Hazards Regulations (1999) (COMAH);
Pipelines Safety Regulations (1996) (PSR).
PAGE 10
of safety information outside of the PIZ. Again, the task group should walk- through the scenario – in the pre-incident phase, all Category 1 responders could theoretically take a lead role.As an example, Cheshire LRF has agreed that the police will be the lead responder agency for several scenarios involving COMAH, REPPIR, and Major Accident Hazard Pipelines. In that case, the task group agreed that the police would be the lead responder for warning and informing during the response phase, as local arrangements require that agencies coordinate all safety messages issued to the public for these types of incident (whether supplementary to the operator’s initial warning, an initial warning as a result of an operator’s failure to warn, and / or subsequent safety action information, such as ‘Go In, Stay In, Tune In’. In the recovery phase, the lead responder changes to the local authorities, with key input from healthcare agencies.o Outcomes? In this example, there are two major changes in lead responder for this scenario: police – local authority / health agencies. Again, from a preparedness perspective, the task group may wish to select one agency to take the lead. Its role would be to lead on the preparations for (a) maintaining arrangements to warn and inform, and (b) educating the public about risk. And as indicated above, all the other Category 1 responders would have a duty to assist that lead agency in completing these tasks.It is likely that, as the task group assesses through each hazard sub-category, they will find that a natural rhythm develops within the task group, with patterns emerging as they proceed. The key factor to remember is that this is very much a partnership exercise with support flowing from all partners involved in managing communications in an emergency. Even if a particular Category 1
responder is assigned more lead responder tasks than another, it should expect to receive the full support and cooperation of all other responders.The selected lead responders need to be recorded on the LRF’s adapted Community Risk Register.Step 4Carry out a gap analysis:o What systems and arrangements are already in place in the LRF area?o What level of capability is in place already and what are the limitations?o Where are the gaps in local capability?To develop effective plans and deliver suitable warning and informing arrangements, it is important to assess the existing capabilities and limitations for communicating with the public against the risks that have been identified in the LRF area. By carrying out this analysis the LRF will be able to establish a baseline set of existing control measures to compare against the risks identified in the CRR which can then be built upon further into this cycle.After mapping out existing capability, the task group should make a considered judgement as to the gaps in the control measures for warning and informing the public against the risks identified in the CRR – this will be re-assessed following Step 5.
Step 5o Identify the target audiences for each risk in the CRR. Where are they located?o Identify vulnerable groups. Has the gap analysis changed as a result?At this stage the task group should have completed the following:o Consideration and agreement of emergency management risk context;o Selection of Lead Responders against all risks identified in the CRR; ando A gap analysis of all existing and proposed warning, informing, and education arrangements in the LRF area.So, what’s next? The LRF will now need to identify the target audiences against each risk in the CRR. Who are they? Where are they? Will the chosen method of communication change depending on the time of day or night? What safety action do they need to take for each risk, according to the risk characteristics and timescales outlined in Step 2?What about vulnerable groups and people in the LRF area? Are there any residential care homes or schools? Are there any members of the community with hearing or sight impairments? How will the LRF engage vulnerable people? These groups, and their warning and informing requirements, need to be addressed not only from a site specific perspective, but generically as well.The LRF now need to re-assess the gap analysis by adding the target audiences into the equation. How effective are the existing systems in the light of this re-assessment? Where are the gaps now against each risk in the CRR?
Step 6Consult the public in the LRF area, discuss the partnership’s work with neighbouring LRFs and seek out examples of good practice.The task group will now be approaching the stage where it will need to consider making recommendations to the LRF in order to fill the gaps in the warning, informing, and education arrangements to meet with both elements of the communicating with the public duty established in the Civil Contingencies Act (2004).However, before continuing, there are a few more actions that the LRF need to take:a) Consult the public in the LRF areaWhat do the communities want to see put in place? What problems have they faced in previous incidents? For example, could they hear the off-site sirens? Do they understand the meaning of various siren tones? How would they like to be kept informed? Consultation could be carried out through door-to-door or postal surveys, websites, and consultation with elected members, public meetings, or setting up a stall in the local supermarket or shopping centre.b) Talk to the neighbouring LRFs and other practitionersWhat arrangements do neighbouring LRFs have in place? Talk to each other, and come to an understanding about the best way forward for the whole community. There are obvious advantages to partnership working. Joined-up arrangements across administrative boundaries can enhance the resilience of control measures and can help to improve the effectiveness of what would otherwise be ‘stand-alone’ arrangements.
c) Seek out and take advantage of examples of good practiceThere are 42 LRFs in England and Wales, the key members of which are required to carry out this duty. As a result, there is already a range of good working practice in this area. Seek it out and let neighbouring LRFs know about the ideas that the task group has developed. Be prepared to be influenced also. As is often said in emergency planning circles, ‘don’t re-invent the wheel’ – if one sees a good idea working in another area, adopt it for the LRF, and pass it on.Step 7a) LRF to decide what is sufficient – set the standard.The Task Group is now at the stage where it needs to develop and agree recommendations to present to the LRF, on the basis of the work above. When doing so, consider the following factors:o Ensure that the LRF have consulted with all stakeholders, including other LRF task groups - be inclusive.o Put ‘address resilience issues’ in the task group’s recommendations: what resilience does the package of proposals have? For example, are the task group recommending any back-up systems should loss of power be experienced? Could the package be affected by staff shortages?o Is the recommended package multi-layered? It is very unlikely that one system will be sufficient to provide coverage for all ‘at-risk’ communities. Consider how the LRF would communicate with the public (i) at different times of the day (or night) and (ii) who are living and working in different locations. Take this into account when designing the solutions package. Remember to design adaptability into the package, so that it can be enhanced in the future, be that as a result of changes to Publico 
Information Zones around COMAH sites, or changes to a particular risk’s characteristics.o What are the risks that need the most urgent attention froma ‘communicating with the public’ duty perspective? This may influence the task group’s recommendations.o Give the LRF a number of options to consider, including the task group’s favoured package. Additionally, avoid recommending only a ‘deluxe’ option – be expansive, and provide a variety of solutions, with supporting business cases where necessary. All options should have community safety and resilience at the forefront.Present the task group’s recommendations to the LRF. The LRF will now need to decide which of the recommendations it is prepared to endorse, in line with the duties members have as Category 1 responders under the Civil Contingencies Act (2004). This will probably require resourcing (both financial and human), initiation of projects, and time.The LRF will need to decide what level of control measures it is willing to implement against the risks presented in the CRR. Throughout its deliberations, the LRF should focus on the legislative duties, and a duty to keep their communities safe.b) Implement LRF agreed control measuresDevise and initiate a work programme to implement those recommendations approved by LRF.
Step 8Implement a comprehensive training and exercising regime, to test the LRF’s warning and informing arrangements.When discussing this element as a task group, members need to ask the following questions?o How will the LRF ensure the warning and informing arrangements within multi-agency plans are effective?o How will the LRF test systems to ensure that they deliverwhat they are designed to deliver while at the same time avoiding alarming the public unnecessarily?o How will the LRF train and maintain the required skills of key staff?o What training needs exist?Step 9Ensure that all stakeholder communities are informed on a continuous basis through the design and implementation of a regularly updated education and awareness raising campaign.Recommendations for an enhanced public education programme need to be presented to the LRF in conjunction with the proposed package of warning and informing solutions. These recommendations should address not only the issues of required safety actions and details of how the public will be warned and informed, but should also inform them of the risks they face, and how they can help to mitigate, prepare for, and respond to those risks.
Recommendations should also provide a focus for annual, site, and subject specific risk awareness raising programmes.Note: The above awareness raising programmes should be started as early in the Ten Step Cycle as possible – task groups do not need to wait until reaching Step (9) to implement these types of initiatives.Step 10Measure the effectiveness of the implemented control measures, review, and adjust as appropriate.As with any emergency planning process, it is important that all arrangements are reviewed on an annual basis, (or in line with agreed CRR priorities), to assess and monitor their effectiveness. These reviews should include not only internal LRF assessments and technical analysis, but also community perspectives; are the arrangements working for them? Could they be improved? All results should help improve the arrangements for the future, and in doing so help keep the LRF’s communities safe and minimise the impact of emergencies.
 Chapter 7 Communicating with the PublicRevision to Emergency PreparednessCivil Contingencies Act Enhancement ProgrammeMarch 2012
Chapter 7 (Communicating with the Public) of Emergency Preparedness, Revised Versionï SummaryCategory 1 responders’ duties to communicate with the public under the Act are based on the belief that a well-informed public is better able to respond to an emergency and to minimise the impact of the emergency on the community (paragraphs 7.6).ï The Act includes public awareness and warning and informing as two distinct legal duties for Category 1 responders - advising the public of risks before an emergency and warning and keeping it informed in the event of an emergency (paragraphs 7.1).ï Arrangements for warning and informing the public complement emergency planning arrangements (paragraphs 7.26).ï Category 1 responders need both to plan their communications and to test their communications arrangements to ensure they are effective (paragraphs 7.28).ï In the same way that Category 1 responders must ensure that their emergency plans are appropriate for the scale and type of risks involved, communications arrangements should be appropriate for the message and the targeted audience (paragraphs 7.32).ï 
 WHAT THE ACT AND THE REGULATIONS REQUIRE	7.1. There are two aspects of the duty in relation to communicating with the public.The first is that the public be made aware of the risks of emergencies and how Category 1 responders are prepared to deal with them if they occur. The second is that arrangements are made to warn the public and that the public be provided with information and advice as necessary if an emergency is likely to occur or has occurred.Arrange for the publication of assessments and plans7.2. The duties to assess risks and to prepare plans (covered in Chapter 4) are followed by a further duty on Category 1 responders to arrange for the publication of all or part of risk assessments and plans they have made, where publication is necessary or desirable to prevent, reduce, control, mitigate or take other action in connection with an emergency. 17.3. Arranging for publication means that the Category 1 responders do not necessarily have to publish these documents themselves but they must arrange for them to be published.7.4. The duty is not necessarily to arrange to publish the whole of a risk assessment or a complete plan but only those parts which it is necessary or desirable to publish where this will add value in raising public awareness and would assist in dealing with an emergency.7.5. Category 1 responders meet these requirements by publishing a Community Risk Register (CRR), which provides an agreed assessment of the risks affecting a local area and an agreed position on the planning and resourcing priorities required to prepare for those risks.7.1. 
1 s. 2(1)(f)
PAGE 3
7.6. The more information the public has access to, and the better educated they therefore become before an event, the more open they are likely to be to the warnings and advice they are given at the time of an emergency. A well informed public is better able to respond to an emergency and this will minimize the impact of an emergency on the community. Responses to a number of emergencies over recent years have highlighted the need to encourage individuals and communities (including businesses) to be better prepared and more self reliant during emergencies. This allows the authorities to focus on those areas and people in greatest need.7.7. The duty to make the public aware of the risks of emergencies does not extend to a requirement to assist individuals/organisations in developing community resilience or to promote community resilience. However, responders should recognise the benefits of engaging with the community and promoting individual and community resilience.Avoid alarming the public unnecessarily7.8. At the same time, when publishing assessments and plans, the Regulations require Category 1 responders to have regard to the need not to alarm the public unnecessarily. 27.9. There is a similar duty to avoid alarming the public unnecessarily when making arrangements to warn, inform and advise them.3Sensitive information7.10. Where risk assessments or plans contain sensitive information,4 then only edited or summary versions of all or part of the document should be published.
2 regulation 273 regulation 304 See regulation 45 and the discussion in Chapter 3
PAGE 4
Joint discharge of functions and other forms of collaborative working7.11. The duty to arrange for the publication of all or part of assessments and plans falls on all Category 1 responders but the Regulations permit them to collaborate with others in delivering the duty. It should be noted that voluntary sector and community groups may help responders to fulfil this duty but cannot discharge it on their behalf. Private sector organisations should also be encouraged to provide necessary advice and information where relevant (see also paragraph 7.25).7.12. There are several options for Category 1 responders in deciding how best to discharge their responsibility. They may decide to undertake the task:o on their own;o collaboratively, by agreeing with partners to act under the leadership of a lead responder; 5o jointly, by making arrangements with another Category 1 responder; 6 oro by delegating the task to another Category 1 responder.77.13. They may also support collaborative arrangements with the use of protocols. 8Maintain arrangements to warn, inform and advise the public7.14. Category 1 responders are required to maintain arrangements to warn the public if an emergency is likely to occur or has occurred. In addition to warning, they must also have arrangements to provide information and advice to the public ifan emergency is likely to occur or has occurred.9
5 regulations 9-116 regulation 8(a)7 regulation 8(b)8 regulation 79 s.2(1)(g)
PAGE 5
7.15. The Act places a duty on Category 1 responders to maintain arrangements to warn. This reserves decisions about when, how, what and to whom warnings should be issued, to the local Category 1 responders themselves (see Figure 7.1). Plans, processes and protocols can be co-ordinated through the relevant warning and informing groups within the Local Resilience Forums. At the same time, there is a clear expectation that the arrangements to warn will be utilised where an emergency has occurred, making it necessary for responders to take action collectively to ensure a consistent messageIdentification of Category 1 responder with lead responsibility7.16. Confusion would be caused, if more than one Category 1 responder were to plan to warn the public about the same risk at the same time and to the same extent. To avoid duplication, the Regulations effectively support flexibility by requiring those Category 1 responders whose functions are affected by an emergency to co-operate for the purpose of identifying which organisation will take lead responsibility for maintaining arrangements to warn in regard to that particular emergency. 107.17. If agreement cannot be reached, each of them must maintain these arrangements separately, but should be mindful of the potential consequences of conflicting information. (Further guidance can be found later under “Who” – lead responder paragraph 7.94)7.18. The Regulations envisage two ways in which a lead responder for warning, informing and advising the public may be chosen:o by identification before an emergency; 11oro by adopting a procedure to be followed at the time of emergency.12
10 regulation 3211 regulation 32(3)(a)12 regulation 32(3)(b)
PAGE 6
7.19. In addition, a procedure may be adopted by which the role of lead responder may be changed from one Category 1 responder to another during the course of an emergency, including the recovery period.13 Co-operation to identify the lead responder for warning, informing and advising the public must identify which of these procedures has been chosen in relation to the particular emergency and include hand over protocols.7.20. Arrangements must ensure that at the time of an emergency, the Category 1 responder which has accepted the lead responsibility for warning, informing and advising the public:o is able to contact the other Category 1 responders whose functions are exercisable in relation to that emergency; 14o informs those Category 1 responders of the actions it is taking;15 ando is able to collaborate with those Category 1 responders in warning, informing and advising the public.167.21. The Regulations clearly envisage that the Category 1 responder with lead responsibility for warning, informing and advising the public will collaborate with its partners in fulfilling its role. There is no question of the lead responder assuming sole responsibility for carrying out the task. The Regulations place a reciprocal responsibility on those Category 1 responders which are not the lead responder, but which also have a duty to warn, inform and advise the public in relation to a particular emergency. They must maintain arrangements to:o consult with the lead responder in relation to that emergency on a regular basis;17 and13 regulation 32(3)(c)14 regulation 33(2)(a)15 regulation 33(2)(b)16 regulation 33(2)(c)17 regulation 34(a)
o inform the lead responder of the actions they are taking, and proposing to take, in relation to warning, informing and advising the public.187.22. The critical element in the effective delivery of information to the public will be the partnership established between the responder bodies involved and the sharing of information between them to ensure consistency.Joint discharge of functions7.23. Category 1 responders may also decide to deliver their responsibility to maintain arrangements to warn, inform and advise the public by:o making arrangements to operate jointly with another Category 1 responder; 19o delegating the task to another Category 1 responder. 20These collaborative arrangements, including the identification of a lead Category 1 responder for warning and informing, may be supported with the use of protocols.21Category 2 responders and other bodies7.24. Category 1 responders are not the sole responder bodies likely to be involved in arrangements to warn, inform and advise the public. The Regulations recognise that some Category 2 responders, such as utilities, have a duty under their own regulatory frameworks to provide warning, information and advice in certain circumstances when their services are interrupted. Similarly, the Meteorological
18 regulation 34(b)19 regulation 8(a)20 regulation 8(b)21 regulation 7
PAGE 8
Office, the Food Standards Agency and the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, which are not covered by the Act, also provide a warning service for a number of events including, for example, severe weather emergencies. Accordingly, the Regulations require that Category 1 responders in performing their duty to warn, inform and advise:o should have regard to these arrangements; 22 ando need not duplicate them unnecessarily. 237.25. It is important that responders consider how the CCA duty to communicate with the public interfaces with the duties contained in other site specific legislation such as the Control of Major Accident Hazard Regulations 1999 (COMAH) (as amended 2005 and 2008) and the Radiation Emergency Preparedness and Public Information Regulations 2001 (REPPIR). Where possible, Category 1 and 2 responders as well as site operators should develop joint arrangements for communicating with the public. Further guidance on “The Fit with Other Legislation” can be found in Chapter 19.Have regard to emergency plans7.26. Warning, informing and advising the public is not a stand-alone duty. The Regulations require that a Category 1 responder in carrying out its duties in7.1. 
this respect must have regard to its emergency plans.24
As with any other part
of planning for the response to an emergency, the communications strategy - either direct with the public, or via the media - should be fully integrated into the responder’s emergency plans. Equally, in maintaining its emergency plans, it must have regard to its warning and informing duties.
22 regulation 35(1)(a)23 regulation 35(1)(b)24 regulation 28
PAGE 9
Generic and specific arrangements7.27. In regard to emergency planning, the Regulations distinguish between generic and specific plans. Similarly, in relation to the duty to have arrangements to warn, inform and advise the public, the Regulations recognise that these may be generic or specific.25 Which arrangements are chosen, will depend on the type of emergency being planned for and the particular circumstances in a locality.Training and exercises7.28. Emergency plans must include arrangements for the provision of training and7.1. 
carrying out of exercises.26
Similarly, the Regulations in regard to warning and
informing the public also require arrangements to include provision for training and exercises.27 It is recommended that exercises include warning and informing messages that test the public acceptance, acknowledgement and action on the messages. Simple, regular community engagement activities can assist in developing public awareness.How the Act and Regulations apply in Northern Ireland7.29. Regulations 32 to 34 do not apply to Category 1 organisations in relation to the delivery of their functions in Northern Ireland. In addition, the application to the transferred functions of the Police Service of Northern Ireland would be in accordance with arrangements set out in Chapter 12.25 regulation 2926 regulation 2527 regulation 31
Box 7.1: Further advice and information7.30. The previous section has described the nature of the legislation and what it permits and requires Category 1 responders to do. This section outlines how the duties described may best be carried out. It describes good practice.7.31. Communicating with the public is an integral part of preparing for and responding to incidents and cannot be done in isolation. The timely provision of relevant information and appropriate warnings and advice is a crucial part of the effort to promote and foster resilient communities. Responders need to consider how to warn and inform in conjunction with other aspects of the CCA, such as co-operation, information sharing, risk assessment, the role of the voluntary sector and other relevant legislation. These are set out elsewhere in Emergency Preparedness.7.1. 
7.32. At every stage of the process, the key to effective communication with the public is getting the message right for the right audience. Co-ordination between Category 1 responders is vital and every effort should be made to engage with Category 2 responders and the voluntary sector. Even when specific information has to be given by one body in a very specialist field, the others involved in the response should be aware of what is being issued, when and to whom. Arrangements to ensure that such co-ordination can take place effectively should be included in the planning process and assist in the smooth handover of responsibility if it is necessary.7.33. Advance preparation is essential and developing an outline communication strategy to deal with incidents is vital. When an incident/emergency occurs, this rolling strategy can be quickly developed to ensure a comprehensive and co-ordinated strategic communications approach is taken. This strategy however should continue to evolve over the duration of the incident to ensure that the most effective and appropriate action continues to be taken. Where possible, there should be a range of communications specialists involved in developing the strategy so that all communication disciplines, from free to paid media, e-media to direct mail, are considered.7.34. For the most part, public information should cover the interests of a number of different Category 1 responders involved in handling the emergency. All those with an interest need to contribute to the development of the information. Apparent conflicts of interest need to be resolved quickly. The stages in the decision-making process should be logged to provide a record which can be examined after the event to identify lessons for the future. Suitable systems should be devised as part of the planning process.7.35. Responders should be encouraged to set out a strategy for communicating with the public before, during and after a crisis. The key principles are set out under the following themes – when, what, how, who and to whom (see Fig 7.1) and are described under each heading in this Chapter:7.1. 
7.36. Annex 7D provides responders with details of The Ten Step Cycle, which aims to assist responders to meet the duty to communicate by setting out a step by step process to work through. It is seen as a continuous cycle and the process can be adapted to suit local needs and aid the planning process.Figure 7.1Public communications timeline: what responders’ plans need to achieve7.37. Although the duty is in two parts, there are three recognised stages to communicating with the public. There is a clear link between them and it is not always easy to separate them.7.1. 
Public awareness: developing understanding and preparedness before an emergency7.38. The more information the public have prior to an incident, the better prepared they are likely to be and the better able to respond appropriately to warnings and advice during an emergency. Past events and commissioned research have shown the population in the UK not to be particularly risk aware and to expect responders/ government to deal with emergencies as they occur, rather than preparing themselves to respond. Responders have a duty to make the public aware of the risks so that they can be encouraged to be more self-rescue orientated.7.39. Raising the awareness of children can help provide the long term solution to changing behaviour. Children absorb information and influence family behaviour; they can also influence the wider community.7.1. 

Risk communication / risk perception7.40. Effective warnings typically begin with risk communication and pre-incident public awareness campaigns that explain how individuals may receive emergency information, and actions the public can take to prepare for emergencies. Preparedness efforts also strengthen the credibility of, and compliance with, warnings and alerts.7.41. Understanding how people perceive and view risk is important as it can help responders tailor their communications appropriately and align messages with public perception. Perceptions are likely to vary widely across different cultures and groups. Perceptions will also be informed by a number of factors such as familiarity, control, vulnerability, timing, trust in authorities and social responsibility. How individuals perceive risks, both likelihood and impact, will influence their behaviour. High levels of risk perception are associated with higher levels of intended compliance and the tendency to act appropriately to warning information. However, there is comprehensive guidance available on how best to communicate about risks to the public without causing disproportionate concern, and Category 1 responders should be familiar with this.Public warning / alerting at the time of an emergency or when one is likely to occur7.42. An alert or warning needs to reach as many people as possible and as quickly as possible. Key communications objectives in an emergency response are to deliver accurate, clear and timely information and advice to the public so they feel confident, safe and well informed. Arrangements should be sufficiently flexible and extendable to address any escalation of events. Responders should alert the members of a community whose immediate safety is at risk by all appropriate means, and be mindful of using a variety of available channels and existing community resilience networks to reach community groups and vulnerable people.7.1. 
Recent examples of research that considered risk perception include:o Plymouth University “factors influencing risk perception, information spread and reliability”. The research sought to improve understanding of the psychological and behavioural reactions that the UK public might display following a CBRN related incident. It considered the need to design clear, comprehensible messages that meet the public’s information needs and whether these messages altered behavioural intentions. There was a need to use emergency communications to correct erroneous beliefs. The research developed evidence based guidelines for design of emergency communication based on literature review and research.o Kings’ College London noted that the management ofincidents involving CBRN risk is often complicated when members of the public adopt unexpected behaviours or display levels of fear that seem disproportionate to the level of threat that is involved. One of the key messages from this research wasthat the drive to maintain family contact is strong. Therefore emergency planners need to facilitate communication following an incident – prioritise information / advice about schools and reassure parents that schools have emergency plans. Preparation goes up at times of threat so remind the public of what preparations would be most effective.
Speed7.43. Responders should issue an early warning or alert of an incident as quickly as possible to help to save and/or protect lives. The initial alert may be hampered by the possible lack of information; therefore the warning/alert will be restricted to a very basic message or sound such as a siren or evacuation notification. As the incident unfolds, more detail can be given in warning messages.7.1. 
Figure 7.2Amount of information	Number of people to reachInforming and advising7.44. Responders need to provide relevant and timely information about the nature of the unfolding event and this should continue throughout the event. The demand for more and more information will increase, and the advice given will become more specific. Information should include an explanation of the immediate actions being taken by responders to minimise the risk to human or animal health and welfare, the environment or property; actions being taken by responders to assist the recovery phase, as well as the actions the public themselves can take to minimise the impact of the emergency and details of how further information can be obtained.7.1. 
7.45. It is also important for responders to communicate the end of the emergency and the return to normal arrangements. Good communication should be maintained in the recovery phase as people will require ongoing advice and information.Awareness7.46. At national level, more information has been put in the public domain. The National Risk Register (http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/resource-library/national- risk-register) explains how the government regularly assesses the natural hazards and manmade threats that could affect the UK. It explains the likelihood of a risk occurring and possible effects of an emergency if it happens.7.47. Generic advice to the public on how to prepare for emergencies is available as part of the Community Resilience Programme launched in March 2011. This programme aims to encourage individuals and communities to become more aware of the risks they face and think about what actions they could take7.1. 
to reduce the impacts of emergencies and to make their community more resilient.  More information about the Community Resilience Programme can be found at : www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/communityresilience. From time to time, government also undertakes national campaigns through TV and press advertising.7.48. The DirectGov website has information for the general public on what to do to prepare for emergencies and, in the event of an emergency occurring, it can carry key messages and signpost the public to different relevant sites for further information. This can be found at www.direct.gov.uk/preparingforemergencies.7.49. The key central advice in the event of an incident is summarised by the phrase “Go in, Stay in, Tune in”. This is targeted at those who are not involved in the incident, but are close by or believe themselves to be in danger. There will be occasions when this message is not applicable, and responders should be ready to give instruction on the best course of action to take in the circumstances.Box 7.2: Public information produced by central government and national bodies
7.50. Once Category 1 responders have identified the emergencies that will trigger their public communication duties through the risk assessment process (Chapter 4), they should consider what information is already in the public domain. This will help them determine what additional information from the risk assessments and plans they have made they should publish to meet the requirements of their duties. 287.51. The generic material is likely to be supported by the Community Risk Register (CRR) and Category 1 responders’ generic planning arrangements. Specific plans, prepared in relation to specific risks and also supported by the CRR, are likely to include a requirement for much more detailed advice to the public on what may happen.Awareness-raising: what the public should do in an emergency7.52. The Act requires information to be published about the risks and plans. Under the Act, plans describe the actions the Category 1 responders themselves will take in the event of an emergency. However, in practice, Category 1 responders may also want to attach to their plans details of possible useful actions that the public could do to help themselves. These may include obtaining in advance useful protective or preventive materials or other items to ensure community resilience in an emergency. It makes28 s. 2(1)(f)
sense for public awareness messages to include what the public should do in the face of the risk of emergency, to complement the actions that the Category 1 responders themselves propose to take. More information and advice is available through the Community Resilience Programme at www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/communityresilience.7.53. Many local authorities and other bodies have websites and literature which provide either generic advice on emergencies, or detailed advice specific to their own areas of responsibility.7.54. Each decision will clearly have to be based on a balance of assessment. Two types of publication may be found to be necessaryo generic advice referring to the risks of emergencies in the locality; ando specific advice linked to particular risks and plans.The information should be designed to encourage members of the public to be prepared for the risks that they are most likely to face.
Box 7.3: Examples of locally produced or topical Information
How much to publish7.55. The objective of this duty under the Act needs to be kept in mind. At all stages of the decision-making process, Category 1 responders should ask themselves whether the material published will enhance the public’s response in an emergency. In this regard, the mere fact of publication may have a beneficial effect on public confidence. Research suggests that people look to the authorities to ‘do something’, and that they will be relieved and reassured to see that plans are in place.Unnecessary alarm7.56. Any inclination towards full disclosure may be tempered by the requirement to “have regard to the need to avoid alarming the public unnecessarily”. 29 Responders should consider the benefits of reducing the classification of sensitive information through various means to improve public understanding of risks and to establish some of the good practice highlighted in this chapter.7.57. Information relating to events, particularly terrorist events, where the consequences would include mass fatalities and casualties could be unsettling and upsetting. However, there is a clear need to strike a balance between not causing public alarm and providing necessary information to enable people to understand the threat and respond in an appropriate manner in the event of an incident occurring. There is no evidence to suggest the public panics when receiving information. They want to feel they have all the relevant facts so that they can take informed decisions. Communication needs to be handled sensitively. Responders should use clear terminology, providing factual information which avoids sensationalism or emotive language. The content should not be overly negative or graphic, and should be asbrief as possible to avoid confusing or overwhelming readers.29 regulations 27, 30
Relevant research includes:Sussex University Social PsychologySussex psychologist Dr John Drury has published the first social-psychological study of crowd reactions among survivors of the London bombings on 7 July 2005.One of the key findings in the research was that – “there was no ‘mass panic’ and little selfishness, despite the fact that people felt in danger of death, saw little hope of escape and were mostly among strangers.” Research has found evidence that, in emergencies, rather than panic, some people have a delayed reaction to alarm signals and warning signs. To counter this, researchers have suggested that traditional alarms could be replaced by more advanced mass communication tools, such as public- address systems and LED screens, to inform the evacuating crowd of the seriousness and location of danger. www.sussex.ac.uk/affiliates/panic/index.htmlNATO guidelines on psychosocial care for people affected by disasters and major incidents. www.healthplanning.co.uk/nato/
Public warning / alertingWhat information is needed and when7.58. Immediately when an emergency occurs, and during the first hour, the public needs:o basic details of the incident - what, where, when (and who, why and how, if possible);o to know the implications for health and welfare;o advice and guidance (e.g. stay indoors, symptoms, preparing for evacuation); ando reassurance (if necessary).o 
The public wants to know:o practical implications such as the effect on traffic, power supplies, telephones, water supplies, etc;o a helpline number; ando what is being done to resolve the situation.Broadcasters will require:o well thought out and joined-up arrangements between the emergency services, local authority and other organisations, capable of providing agreed information at speed;o an immediate telephone contact; ando a media rendezvous point at the scene.7.59. Responders need to take into account what the public wants to know not simply what the authorities need to say. Understanding how emergency communication will be perceived and acted upon by the public will help to achieve greater success in compliance. Responders also need to consider how technical information can be communicated in a way that the public will understand.7.60. Responders need to consider the potential for disparity between local and national messages. Ensuring consistency and clarity of messaging in the context of potentially differing approaches and experiences is key to successful UK-wide response to emergencies. Responders should explain why national messages might differ from local messages and ensure that local media are aware of the importance of local information.7.1. 
7.61. There will often be a number of routes through which messages are disseminated, and to avoid inconsistent or conflicting messaging, they should be synchronised and checked to ensure that the data is correct. A common information picture should be shared at all levels. The News Co-ordination Centre (NCC) will help to co-ordinate the information activities at a national level – see Annex 7A for further information on the NCC.7.62. Category 1 responders should not release, (without consultation), information or advice which covers the areas of responsibility of partner organisations. The damage done to public confidence by the release of inconsistent or contradictory messages can be hard to repair. Similarly, great damage can be done by speculation about causes or future developments when facts are not known.Informing and advising7.63. It is important to maintain a flow of information and provide the public with practical information in the mid and longer term following a major incident, and signpost individuals to sources of additional support. It is essential to recognise that some communication outlets may not be available for the long term distribution of essential information to the public and alternative methods should be established.7.1. 
7.64. Local authorities co-ordinate the provisions of welfare support to the community and take on a key role in the recovery phase of emergencies. Local authorities have their own websites which can provide people with information on services available. Other mechanisms include individual and public meetings; one stop shops; use of media and mailing; as well as using existing voluntary/community networks.
Pre-event information7.65. The simplest and most cost-effective solution may be to make all or part of the relevant documents available in downloadable web format. For those who do not have internet access, paper copies can be made available on request and in the reference sections of public libraries.7.66. Available information should be identified clearly in the responder Freedom of Information Publication Scheme. 3030 The Freedom of Information Act requires each public authority to adopt and maintain a publication scheme setting out details of information it will routinely make available, how the information can be obtained and whether there is any charge for it. A publication scheme is therefore both a public commitment to make certain information available and a guide to how that information can be obtained. All publication schemes have to be approved by the Information Commissioner and should be reviewed by authorities periodically to ensure they are accurate and up to date. More information can be found at http://www.informationcommissioner.gov.uk

Design and distribution7.67. All material produced should look interesting and attractive enough for people to want to read it, otherwise it may be a waste of resources.7.68. It is a good idea to seek professional design and editing assistance. If professional support is not available, advice on good practice is available online and in published manuals.7.69. Once a product is available, the public will need to know about it. Unless it is going to be mailed directly to householders, people will need to be told how to get copies. This may be achieved by the conventional range of publicity methods.7.70. Avoiding duplication of effort is important. Good communication between responder bodies should include development of joint programmes for the production of general information material.7.71. It is good professional practice to evaluate the effectiveness of every information campaign. If this is done, evaluation should include research which shows how well any specialist versions have met the needs of vulnerable members of the community.7.1. 
Reaching vulnerable persons and those who have difficulty understanding the message7.72. The needs of vulnerable people will be evident in some areas, which have, for example, a high proportion of elderly residents who may welcome the option of a large print version of a document, or where there may be significant numbers who speak a minority ethnic language. Where vulnerable members of the community are in the care of an institution such as a school or old people’s home, the most effective delivery of information will be through the management. Where vulnerable members of the community are not cared for within an institution, local responders should consider going through interest groups or voluntary sector organisations to disseminate messages. It may be that the most effective communications route is a single leaflet expressed in very simple language (or more than one language) backed up with pictures and symbols, which includes a request that the reader should share the information with family, friends and neighbours who are not able to read the information themselves. Research shows that it can be particularly effective to communicate with children, who then act as a conduit for the message to reach other family members. It should include a link to Directgov emergency pages which have useful prompts/questions to encourage people to be prepared. The Red Cross has produced a family of products and resources to inform and prepare organisations, communities and individuals to work together, at www.informedprepared.eu.7.1. 
7.73. Vulnerable groups will be a changing entity depending on the event (e.g. hard of hearing, elderly, transient population, etc) and might change during the event. Responders need to use a variety of different communication methods to help to capture these vulnerable groups. Responders should consider issues such as language and methods of communicating: mobile phones may not be used by some people, radios and televisions may not be on late at night, etc.7.74. Vulnerable people who live in residential homes or sheltered accommodation or attend day centres etc. are relatively easy to identify and therefore it will be easier to put arrangements in place to warn during an emergency because the establishment will be known to local authorities and other responders.7.75. Vulnerable people living in the community are more difficult to contact.General advice to the public to adopt a ‘good neighbour’ approach to help those less able to help themselves is always advisable; but specific efforts will sometimes be needed by the public authorities to deliver alerts to those vulnerable people who are known to them.  Local community groups preparing for emergencies or local emergency groups (such as neighbourhood policing – Safer Community Teams) may be a useful way to identify and get information to vulnerable people.7.76. The Category 1 responder with lead responsibility for communicating with the public will need to be assured that these vulnerable people can be contacted. Arrangements will need to address how information and assistance can be managed by local authorities and health authorities who are in regular contact with the vulnerable individuals.7.1. 
7.77. People who have difficulty understanding the message because they use a different language may require pre-prepared print or broadcast messages in their own language.Review and renewal7.78. The provision of public information should be an ongoing process. Any information that is produced should be in a reasonably durable format, whether paper or electronic, and should be available over time. It should be regularly reviewed and renewed whenever necessary in the light of changing circumstances. LRFs might want to agree a schedule for review.7.79. This will mean that published material will need to be looked at afresh every time the CRR or an individual risk assessment or plan changes. Only new information which is “necessary or desirable” for prevention or mitigation of an emergency will require a new version to be produced.
7.80. The methods available to deliver urgent information to members of the public are extremely varied. A mix of techniques should be utilised to maximise the chance of receipt, comprehension & effective response from the public. Some depend on the availability of power supplies or phone lines. Some may require careful consideration of the risks to human life and health, in case, at the time of an emergency, staff or members of the public are exposed to hazardous substances while they are warning or being warned. Arrangements for complementary and co-ordinated public warnings, advice and media facilities should be carefully managed between the various bodies. This will enhance public safety and information will be delivered more effectively.7.1. 

7.80.7.81. 7.82. 7.83. 31 regulation 29
Figure 7.3 Process for developing effective warning proceduresThe process of reaching agreement on the warning process is shown schematically in Figure 7.3.Generic and Specific WarningsSome systems are defined as ‘generic’ arrangements,31 in that they can be called into play in a range of scenarios. Others have only limited use, or are capable of delivering only a closely targeted message.Warning during a malicious incidentThe police will lead in any malicious incident, including terrorist attacks, and have primary responsibility for providing effective and timely information to the public. Communication strategies will be developed for specific scenarios. There will be a need to balance rapid dissemination of warnings whilst ensuring accuracy. It is recognised there may be little specific information during the initial stage of an incident and confirmation of detailed facts will take longer.
7.84. When developing the warning in response to a malicious incident, the potential for any planned secondary attack should be considered in determining an evacuation route for the public. The means of delivering the message to the public also needs to be considered to ensure public safety and to avoid further potential damage. Additionally, responders should be aware of the different arrangements for media relations for such an event, as it will most likely be nationally led, with local delivery. Where credible and specific threats to national security are identified in advance, information is handled at a national level and public warnings issued by the police and/or Home Secretary. Any threat connected with international terrorism will be a national – even international – issue and information about it will be co-ordinated centrally regardless of what part of the country is under threat.Existing publication and warning regimes7.85. Some organisations excluded from the Act because they have existing statutorily defined emergency procedures, also have an important role in generating public awareness about emergencies and issuing warnings when necessary. The management of emergencies on nuclear and major industrial sites, including communicating with the public, is already regulated. Site operators have well-established procedures for communicating with the public in the vicinity of their sites. The CCA legal framework does not override existing ones. It will be important to ensure that plans made by Category 1 responders do not duplicate existing arrangements. Category 1 responders may choose to cover in their communications planning the potential for an emergency to spread beyond the scope of individual site plans produced under the Control of Major Accident Hazards Regulations, Radiation (Emergency Preparation and Public Information) Regulations or pipeline regimes, but this is not an explicit requirement of the Act.7.1. 
7.86. Consistency of message is important in an emergency situation and Category 1 responders should have regard to the early advice and information relayed to the public by Category 2 responders and site owners/operators. Category 1 responders should seek to enhance this communication.7.87. Category 1 responders should consider the options available in detail as part of the planning process to ensure that they have an adequate range of methods at their disposal. No single system will be the solution to all situations or achieve a wholly resilient alerting capability. A variety of methods will always be necessary to capture the largest proportion of the target audience. Differentinformationsourcesappealtodifferentdemographicgroups. Anindividual who receives multiple but consistent messages is likely to respond favourably. Overlapping methods help to ensure a higher level of successful access to the targeted population.7.88. Alerting systems also need to be resilient. Much can be achieved through trusted stakeholders and low-technology solutions. Indeed, these may be the most resilient to disruption to telecommunications and power. Using trusted stakeholders (such as building managers to communicate with their tenants) allows the public to receive messages from a known (and possibly more trusted) source.7.1. 
7.89. The need for back-up staff and equipment, and the risk of warning arrangements being disrupted by the emergency itself, should all be considered in business continuity management plans.Types of warning methodPossible public warning methodsCapabilityo		Mobilising officers to go round on foot and knock on doorsgenerico	From car or helicopter, by loudhailer or other amplified meansgenerico		National and local media (TV, radio, online)generic or specifico	Social Media generic or specificgeneric or specifico	Electronic/variable message boards,e.g. at the roadside or on motorways generic or specificgeneric or specifico		Variable message signs (some authorities have protocols in place to utilise these in emergencies)specifico		Direct radio broadcasts to shipping (in maritime incidents)generic or specifico		PA announcements in public buildings, shopping centres, sports venues, transport systemsgeneric oro		Automated telephone/fax/e-mail/ text messages to subscribersspecifico	Site sirensspecific
Helplines and public inquiry points7.90. The information delivery methods discussed so far have been based upon the Category 1 responders’ decision about what information needs to be provided. However the public are likely to have all sorts of queries and perhaps offers, to direct towards the responder bodies. Responders should plan how to make best use of helplines and public inquiry points (which may be telephone, e-mail or SMS based, or multimedia) in any emergency. These can either provide a limited amount of recorded information, or connect with a call centre where people answer individual questions.7.91. Helplines may already be in place for other purposes. Plans can be developed to take them over and provide their staff with relevant briefing or suitable recorded messages. Facilities run by other operators or companies in the area may also be co-opted into the public information effort as a result of protocols put in place in advance.7.1. 
7.92. Setting up a dedicated call centre from scratch is a significant undertaking, but may be achieved quite quickly if suitable call-off contracts have been put in place as part of the planning process. The Police Casualty Bureau and the Consulate Crisis Group of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office regularly operate effective call centres. Responders might also consider working with voluntary sector organisations, for example, through the British Red Cross to provide this function as they may have the capability. However, it is essential to ensure that the people working at the call centres are competent, fully briefed and provided with a core brief. It is important to consider the capacity of the system, and Category 1 responders should take advice from network providers to avoid the risk of overloading the telephone system.7.93. Such inquiry points are not a panacea. There will always be a significant proportion of dissatisfied callers, whatever the method used - callers for whom the recorded message is inadequate or unsuitable, or who cannot get answers to their particular questions, or who simply cannot get through because the lines are too busy. Planning should address the management of callers expectations, to limit irritation and disappointment, by establishing procedures to make it clear what information is available and how busy the lines are.
The fact that the casualty bureau does not provide information directly over the phone places an onus on Category 1 responders (for example local authorities), as part of integrated emergency management, to plan to set up a public information line. This may be achieved through the use of the British Red Cross co-ordinated support line, provided through its Memorandum of Understanding with the Association of Chief Police Officers, or through the use of the voluntary sector delivered facility referred to in paragraph 7.91. Such support lines do not provide information about casualties, of course, but they may be able to provide callers with a range of practical and emotional support, including the provision of travel and accommodation advice to relatives and friends who may wish to come to the area. Planning to provide public information lines will help ease the burden on the casualty bureau.Planning should also include special arrangements in the local area to provide face-to-face information and support to those bereaved relatives who come to be close to the scene of the emergency. The police are likely to provide Family Liaison Officers who will take on all or part of this role. But special attention needs to be paid to relatives and friends trying to get information at receiving hospitals for the incident; and to those who may be taken to, or congregate at, the emergency mortuary. Rest and reception centres set up by the local authority with the support of voluntary organisations may also require regularly updated access to information and advice.
Identifying a lead responder7.94. It is preferable, in relation to particular types of emergency, if a lead responder for warning, informing and advising the public is identified and agreed beforehand by the Category 1 responders. Annex 7B provides an indicative list of which Category 1 responders are likely to lead in a range of examples. (The list is advisory only). Step 3 of the 10 Step Cycle (Annex 7D) offers further guidance on identifying a lead responder.Case Study: North Yorkshire Local Resilience Forum Media and Communications PlanThe NYLRF Media, Warning and Informing group has produced a Communications and Media Plan which included a specific appendix on identifying the lead responder. The group approached this by classifying the types of risk and looking at the risk register and agreeing to focus on high and very high risks rather than the register as a whole. All parties then agreed who would generally lead on communications and/or media during that type of emergency.The communications plan itself was very short and its focus was on the 11 appendices which had specific details and actions as well as detailing the needs of the media during an incident.To look at the NYLRF plan or the lead responder sheet please visit www.emergencynorthyorks.gov.uk and contact the emergency planning unit emergency@northyorks.gov.uk for a username and password.
7.95. In many instances, the lead Category 1 responder for warning and informing the public will be the organisation which leads on the response to an emergency. In a number of instances, this role is likely to be filled by the police, but it should not be assumed that this will always be the case. The lead responder for the recovery phase will normally be the Local Authority. It is essential the public continue to receive appropriate information during the recovery phase.7.96. A wide area emergency such as flooding is a good example of how responders all have to play their part. It is clear that the role of lead Category 1 responder for warning, informing and advising, is likely to fall in England to the Environment Agency, in this instance, but that does not absolve non-lead responders from playing their part. When a potential flood impinges on the functions of another Category 1 body, then it too has a duty to warn, for example, where it is likely that the flood will require a response from the local authority or the police, e.g. because the flood will impact on the delivery of education or the welfare of clients on a social services care list or, in the case of the police, because lives and property will be at risk. The Agency is also responsible for warning other responders, who must make decisions on, for example, evacuation, in the same way it does the public. In similar wide area examples, such as health emergencies, the lead Category 1 responder with responsibility for warning and informing will be a health organisation, but it will also require assistance from other Category 1 responders. Different bodies may undertake the lead Category 1 response role in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.7.97. Where identification of the Category 1 organisation taking the lead responder role for warning, informing and advising cannot be done in advance, the Regulations permit a procedure to be established for identifying at the time of an event who should be the lead responder. However, choosing this option may cause unwanted delay and confusion. A possible example where Category 1 responders might want to delay identifying a lead responder could be a severe weather emergency. Even so, in Annex7.1. 
7D, it is suggested that the police should be identified in advance for the lead role in this type of wide area emergency, where the likely impact is on road traffic. They, of course, would expect to be supported by a range of other Category 1 responders.7.98. Procedures may also be adopted for changing the lead responder with responsibility for warning, informing and advising during the course of an emergency. On land, the police, and in maritime emergencies, the Maritime and Coastguard Agency are likely to co-ordinate warning and information strategies in the early stages of many emergencies. In the later stages, the lead in distributing information and advice about longer-term issues, for example, connected to health or the environment, may be handed over to the relevant expert organisation.Use of Protocols7.99. Category 1 responders are likely to want to support these arrangements with protocols.32 (A checklist of possible protocols appears at Annex 7C). These may be negotiated directly or through the LRF.7.100. Protocols should be recorded formally and in some detail, so that they can be implemented immediately in the event of an emergency. They should describe the process which will be used to identify stages in the emergency when the lead communicator responsibility ought to be changed during the handover from response to recovery, and the point at which normal operating practices should be resumed and reviewed.32 regulation 7
Role of the lead responder7.101. The planning arrangements of the lead responder for warning, informing and advising the public are likely to include:o Procedures and a capability for:ï contacting other relevant responder organisations and informing them of action being undertakenor proposed;ï delivering urgent emergency warnings, or ensuring they are delivered;ï co-ordinating all communications activity at the timeof an emergency, so that public information is consistent, timely and without unnecessary duplication;ï delivering information and advice in relation to its functional areas of responsibility;ï assisting other participating responder organisations to deliver information and provide advice in relationto their functional responsibilities.o Provision of:ï a media facility;ï a lead spokesperson to work with the media;ï facilities for staff from different responder organisations to work together on a public information service.o Procedures for:ï handing over the role to another lead Category 1 responder as determined by the course of events.ï 
Who delivers?7.102. How information and advice are delivered can greatly affect how they are received.Category 1 responders should give careful thought to this ahead of any emergency, and should identify individuals who may act as official spokespeople and undertake media interviews. These individuals should receive suitable training.7.103. If the figure is already recognised as a trustworthy and authoritative person, the message will be delivered all the more effectively. This might be because they already have a good public profile in the area or are in uniform (research shows that the public have great confidence in spokespeople from the emergency services).7.104. In addition to those who will be taking a frontline media role, it is important that other staff who may come into direct contact with the public (receptionists, security and switchboard staff, for example) are provided with at least a basic level of information and can handle inquiries confidently.7.105. Category 1 responders are, required in the Act to make local arrangements for delivering information and advice about an emergency to the public with the purpose of mitigating the effects and aiding recovery. They should plan to be able to meet the needs of many different audiences. These can be grouped as follows :7.1. 
Survivors (Group A) and others affected by the emergency (Group B)7.106. The needs of these two groups are the main focus of attention in the initial response to an incident and beyond.7.107. Providing information to Group A is, in effect, an extension of the warning phase.Those at the scene are under direct instruction from the emergency services. Those in charge of operations are best placed to decide what advice or instructions are required, by whom and how quickly.
7.108. Group B urgently need to know what they need to do immediately - this may be a message to stay indoors and shut windows, to evacuate, to follow decontamination instructions, or to report somewhere for medical checks. Planning should address these issues. Group B may also need (and certainly will want) to know why the advice is being given.7.109. Responders should take into account different response behaviours and tailor their messages appropriately. The majority of people need leadership and direction; some need to be controlled. Messages should focus on encouraging positive actions. Group behaviour can manifest itself positively (helping others) or negatively (endangering others), but the majority of individuals are likely to need some level of support.7.110. In the earliest moments following an incident, vital operational decisions are often made by the first police officers, emergency workers or even members of the public at the scene. Pre-planning should ensure that decisions about the nature and timing of advice to the public have a prominent place among the urgent matters to be dealt with. If official information is not quickly communicated to the public, there is a greater risk of inaccurate information from informal sources (such as SMS text or social networking messages) becoming widely spread and accepted.7.111. Responders are unlikely to be able to rely solely on the media to reach the Group B audience. Planning should recognise that targeting will need to be more precise than can be achieved by broadcasters. Procedures should include some form of audit trail of who has or has not been contacted. The media may be used to provide basic safety messages.7.1. 
Local people (Group C), friends and relatives (Group D)7.112. Local media can be particularly helpful in addressing Group C, providing general information about the emergency, information on how the public can help and advice on disruption in the area, e.g. traffic bulletins. It is important for communications planning to ensure that Group C, in particular, can get access to regular progress updates.7.113. Category 1 responders should work closely with the media, especially local radio, ahead of time to prepare useful standard material. The text of announcements should, where possible, be agreed with broadcasters in advance to avoid unnecessary questions of editorial control under pressure.7.114. Group D will usually be alerted to an emergency through the national media. The most likely first response is to phone the people they know in the area, either to find out if they are safe or to get more information.7.115. There is evidence from past disasters that the emotional impact of watching the unfolding of events which may be affecting a close relative or friend can be very significant. Where people at a distance can be reasonably sure that a relative or friend is caught up in the incident they will be desperate for information. The Police Casualty Bureau will be a prime information tool. Communications planning must address this reality.The wider audience (Groups E and F)7.116. Group E are effectively ‘the public at large’. Their principal source of information is news broadcasts and whatever they can find on websites.7.1. 
7.117. The media (Group F) are the sixth audience for the information provided by Category 1 responders. They can influence both the short-term handling and the long-term impact of an emergency.7.118. The news media (broadcasting, print and text services) remain the primary means of communication with the public. The public’s picture of a crisis is largely shaped by the media. The need for information in a crisis is huge, and mass media are nearly always first and have the greatest impact. A false or inaccurate picture will be difficult to adjust later. Consequently, communication with the media has to work from the start and information from Category 1 responders should be as accurate and complete as possible.Working with the media7.119. While Category 1 responders have little control over the output on news channels, it is important that plans are in place to agree what the main public messages will be, to provide the media with as much relevant material as possible and to ensure it is accurate, consistent and regularly updated.7.120. As part of a general information strategy, in advance of an emergency, the media can help to raise public awareness of the issues and provide information about what to do if one occurs.7.121. More importantly, in the wake of an emergency, the media can deliver specific advice and information to large numbers of affected people more quickly and effectively than any other means of delivery. This can take any form, from short, simple messages repeated across all formats, to explanatory interviews and extensive background material on websites. The written press can deliver complex information and advice which people need to retain over a number of days or7.1. 
weeks. The media have ways of quickly reaching many different audiences with specific needs - the deaf, the blind, and those who do not speak English, for example. Radio, in particular, is the most resilient form of mass communication, available even if power and phone lines are down, via battery or wind-up portable radios and car radios.7.122. At the same time as providing useful advice and information to the public, the media are likely to operate in reporting mode. They may well produce round-the-clock rolling news coverage if the emergency is serious enough. It is important that Category 1 responders should have plans to play their part in providing authoritative information and spokespeople for interview, to ensure that the public gets a fair picture of how they are handling the situation, and to counter any inaccurate information, such as from informal sources like social networking websites. The needs of foreign broadcasters who work to different time zones/scales should also be considered.7.123. Planning should recognise that the media will seize upon any inconsistencies in presentation or message, either between responders at the local level, or between local and national responses. It is vital that Category 1 responders are equipped to liaise effectively with each other and with regional and UK bodies, otherwise the operation may appear chaotic.7.124. If the media do not get the information they want from Category 1 responders, they are likely to go elsewhere for footage and commentary. This may lead to a loss of messaging control for Category 1 responders, and put them in a position of having to defend themselves against unfounded criticism or inaccurate analysis. Category 1 responders should be aware that the handling of the emergency, as well as the emergency itself, will all be part of the story. No matter how positive relations are with the media ahead of an event, responders must expect to be criticised if events seem to be going badly. They should plan accordingly.7.1. 

7.125. 7.126. 7.127. 7.128. 
All Category 1 responders should be familiar with the media organisations and outlets in their own area and should develop good relations with them. Discussion with the media ahead of an event helps ensure that all parties can operate more effectively on the day, by preparing useful standard background material in advance, planning practical arrangements and building trust and confidence on all sides. This can be achieved through geographically based multi-forum groups (such as media emergency forums), which bring together the media and emergency planning communications specialists. In many areas, particularly those where there are long-standing known hazards, such as nuclear power stations or extensive industrial complexes, there are also local groupings with members from Category 1 and 2 responders, other organisations not covered by the Act, as well as the media. These are quite often chaired by local police representatives.The BBC’s local radio service is recognised as an emergency broadcaster for the UK and its editors can be contacted for advice and to agree contact details and processes in the event of an emergency. Planning before a crisis is key and the importance of a good pre-existing relationship between those in the media and those involved in emergency planning and work during a crisis cannot be overestimated. Editors contact details can be found via the BBC’s ‘Connecting in a Crisis’ framework 3.3The media landscape is continuing to develop. Some of the biggest growth has been in online news services. The media, particularly the broadcast media, can expect huge demand for their online service.Mobile phones with cameras and other similar devices mean that the public are able to publish their own content. Within seconds of a disaster, pictures can be broadcast around the world, sometimes before the emergency services have had a chance to respond.
33 http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-15250977
7.129. The broadcast media are much more audience focused and their questions will reflect audience concerns. They are also aware that big emergencies attract big audiences and responders need to be prepared to deal with such large numbers.
Social media7.130. Recent years have seen an exponential growth in the use of social media by society and, as such, it is an area that emergency responders cannot ignore; whilst having little control over it. The COI guidance Engaging through Social Media http://www.coi.gov.uk/documents/Engaging_through_social_media.pdf outlines the advantages and issues for consideration across a range of day-to-day government roles.7.131. The communications landscape has significantly shifted with the advent and development of social media. It has a role to play in preparing for, responding to and recovering from emergencies. It provides emergency responders with the capability to engage in two-way communication with the public in real- time, potentially sending messages ‘virally’ and, in doing so, creating a number of believable spokespersons. Analysis of social media can also aid situational awareness and better understanding of the working context.7.132. The benefits that social media can provide are clear. However, there are risks to its usage and these should be evaluated before deployment:o As an ‘opt-in’ service, it can be difficult to attract users in advance of events, ensuring they receive messages encouraging preparedness.o Messages can be altered and spoofed once transmitted which may cause the integrity of the message to be compromised.o Responders will want to be aware of activity on social media sitesand engage where possible to counter erroneous messages. Providing links through to official websites may help to alleviate this tosome extent.
7.133. LRFs may also wish to consider the benefits of agreeing a multi-agency social media protocol to ensure usage is consistent with both individual, and multi-organisational policy.Examples of use of social media:West Yorkshire Police used social media during demonstrations by the English Defence League and United Against Fascism in Bradford City Centre over the August Bank Holiday 2010. They monitored online forums and other social media to gather intelligence and identify potential partners and problems. The Police used channels such as Twitter and YouTube to update the media and spread key messages. An online forum was established through Huddle (www.huddle.com) to share materials and flag potential issues; a Daily Information Update for key partners was produced.The use and misuse of social media was again demonstrated during the public disorder in England during the summer 2011.ï No 10 Downing Street offers a host of social media channels including Flickr, YouTube, Twitter and Facebook. @number10govï The Highlands and Islands Strategic Co-ordinating Group (HISCG) have a Twitter page http://twitter.com/NorthernPolice and http://twitter.com/handiprepared.ï http://blog.scraperwiki.com/2010/10/21/wheres-safe-creating-a-tool-to- guide-people-in-an-emergency/ï Birmingham Resilience Team has a website which contains managed feeds: Vimeo, Flickr, Facebook and Twitter.ï www.birminghamprepared.gov.ukï 
Exercise and review7.134. It is important to exercise arrangements for communicating with the public. Public communications and media planning can be effectively tested in tabletop or full- scale exercises. These should be conducted regularly.7.135. Both the media and the public can take part in exercises. This can help to make them more realistic and will increase the challenge for participants. It will also help to promote community resilience messages.7.136. It will often be beneficial to involve some media as players in the exercise. News organisations with a role in reporting emergencies benefit from rehearsing their arrangements too. Where the exercise scenario involves security issues, it may not be possible to achieve full media involvement. However, it should, in most cases, be possible to agree effective rules that allow the media to participate without running news stories about the event. Media contacts, especially out of hours contacts, should be updated at least twice a year.7.137. Category 1 responders have always been sensitive to appearing to be underprepared, but with positive relations with the media established in ‘normal’ conditions, it should be possible to demonstrate how problems are being identified and remedied ahead of a real event.7.1. 
7.138. In tandem with these arrangements, Category 1 responders should also consider the role of exercises in building public confidence. Research shows that providing the public, through the media, with information about exercises that are taking place and showing pictures of what they may expect to happen can be extremely reassuring.7.139. When developing exercises, responders should consider inviting local media to cover the story as observers. The ground rules should be agreed in advance, with assistance from the appropriate media groups/forums as necessary.7.1. 
 Chapter 8 Business continuity advice and assistance to business and the voluntary sectorRevision to Emergency PreparednessCivil Contingencies Act Enhancement ProgrammeMarch 2012
Chapter 8 (Business continuity advice and assistance to business and the voluntary sector) of Emergency Preparedness, Revised VersionSummaryï The Act requires local authorities to provide advice and assistance to those undertaking commercial activities and to voluntary organisations in relation to business continuity management (BCM) in the event of an emergency (as defined by the Act) (paragraphs 8.1-8.8).ï Local authorities must provide general advice and assistance to the business and voluntary sector communities at large; may provide specific advice and assistance to individual organisations; and may give advice and assistance to individual businesses in relation to the engagement of business continuity consultants (paragraphs 8.8-8.22).ï Not all voluntary organisations would want - or benefit from - business continuity advice. A local authority may therefore define its own voluntary sector audience, targeting efforts where they will add most value (paragraphs 8.28-8.31).ï Local authorities may charge for advice and assistance provided on request, on a cost-recovery basis (paragraphs 8.34-8.35).ï Local authorities should have regard to relevant Community Risk Registers (CRRs) when developing an advice and assistance programme (paragraphs 8.36-8.37).ï Local authorities may enter into collaborative arrangements with other Category 1 and 2 responders in fulfilling their duties (paragraphs 8.38-8.41).ï 
ï Local authorities within a Local Resilience Forum (LRF) area are required to co-operate with each other in performing their duties; other Category 1 and 2 responders within a Local Resilience Forum are required to co-operate with local authorities (paragraphs 8.42-8.52).ï Local authorities are required to have regard to the BCM advice and assistance provided by other Category 1 and 2 responders to business and voluntary organisations in their areas (paragraphs 8.46-8.52).ï This chapter also sets out the considerations local authorities should take into account when developing a programme of advice and assistance (e.g. key messages, established support networks) (paragraphs 8.57-8.74).ï Local authorities should consider how to use the arrangements for multi-agency co-operation established by the Act to ensure BCM advice and assistance programmes are co-ordinated and effective (paragraphs 8.70-8.72).ï Local authorities have been discharging the business continuity duty since its commencement in May 2006. In this time a number of different methods have been used to reach out to local businesses. Some of these have been recorded as case studies, attached as an annex to this chapter.ï 
 WHAT THE ACT AND THE REGULATIONS REQUIRE	8.1. Scope of the dutyThe Act requires local authorities to provide advice and assistance to those undertaking commercial activities and to voluntary organisations in their areas
in relation to BCM in the event of emergencies (as defined in the Act).1 activity is undertaken to ensure preparedness.Rationale for the duty
This
8.2. The duty on local authorities to give advice and assistance to business and voluntary organisations in relation to business continuity management (BCM) is an integral part of the Act’s wider contribution to building the UK’s resilience to disruptive challenges.8.3. In the event of an emergency, Category 1 responders will give all the assistance they can, but there is merit in ensuring that communities themselves are resilient. In particular, it is important to ensure that the impact of an emergency on the continuity of commercial and voluntary organisations is kept to a minimum. This will lessen the economic and social impact of emergencies and speed up recovery.8.4. Establishing a source of BCM advice and assistance prior to an emergency occurring will raise business continuity awareness in the community, and help organisations to help themselves in case of an incident.1 s.4
8.5. A programme of business continuity advice and assistance will help in building community resilience; it will reduce reliance on public sector bodies in the event of an emergency and enable Category 1 and 2 responders to focus their resources on the most vulnerable. It will also help improve links between Category 1 and 2 responders and the business community and voluntary sector, which are crucial to effective emergency management arrangements.Advice and assistance duty in context8.6. As Figure 1.1 in Chapter 1 illustrates, the business continuity advice and assistance duty is closely related to other duties in the Act, and should not be seen as a stand-alone duty. Developing and exercising emergency plans may require close liaison with organisations that carry out commercial or voluntary activities - for example in the preparation of city centre evacuation plans. There is a clear link between this work and the duty to give BCM advice and assistance to businesses, in many ways, it is a logical extension of this work.8.7. In fulfilling their duty to assess risks in their area and collaborate in the preparation of the Community Risk Register, local authorities will have a good overview of the risk profile in an area. Furthermore, emergency planning work - and co-operation with other Category 1 and 2 responders through Local Resilience Forums (LRF’s) - will leave local authorities well-sighted on the arrangements that are in place to deal with emergencies (see Chapters 2 and 4).8.8. There is also a strong relationship with the warning and informing duty (see Chapter 7). This requires Category 1 responders to publish aspects of risk assessments and contingency plans, and to maintain arrangements to issue advice, information and warnings in the event of an emergency. The section 4 duty builds on this work, by requiring local authorities to provide information, advice and assistance targeted at organisations that carry out commercial activities and voluntary activities.PAGE 5
Box 8.1: Further advice and informationGeneric advice and assistance8.9. The Regulations specify that local authorities have a duty to provide generic advice and assistance to the business community at large 2 ; but its duty regarding voluntary organisations is to provide advice and assistance to those organisations it considers appropriate and in a way it considers appropriate.38.10. While the Act imposes a duty on local authorities to offer advice and assistance, it does not impose a corresponding obligation on those organisations to act upon it.8.11. In complying with this duty, local authorities must demonstrate that they have taken reasonable steps to promote BCM advice in their areas. This will involve developing a strategy that:o identifies what organisations need to know;o selects appropriate means of delivery; ando targets the message at its audience.[See the case studies at Box 8.3 for examples of how some local authorities have undertaken this.]
2 regulation 39(3)(a)3 regulation 40(2) and 40(3)
PAGE 6
8.12. As a result of local authorities’ generic awareness-raising work, individual firms may turn to the local authority for specific advice and assistance in relation to BCM. The Regulations permit local authorities to provide specific BCM services to organisations or groups of organisations, but do not oblige them to do so.48.13. Local authority officials can undertake this type of work themselves if they have the experience and competence to do so. Local authorities can work with individual organisations or other local authorities to establish the nature of the risks they face and the steps they can take to manage these risks. This might include, for example:o assistance with risk assessment;o provision of information and advice about local civil protection arrangements;o support in the development and validation of plans.8.14. With local authorities wishing to ensure value-for-money, it is reasonable that this applies in the area of promoting business continuity. Since the duty to advise and assist was introduced, local authorities, working in conjunction with partners such as police and fire services, have produced some good work that has made significant steps in building resilience in their communities. The result is that we now have a body of knowledge and experience within local authorities that can be used by others to discharge this duty in a cost effective way that has delivered demonstrably greater uptake.Signposting third party advice8.15. Alternatively, the local authority may give advice and assistance to individual organisations to facilitate the engagement of a business continuity consultant, who may be better placed to provide the support required. However, undertaking thiswork is discretionary, and is not a requirement of the regulations.5
4 regulations 39(3)(b) and 40(3)(b)5 regulations 39(3)(c) and 40(3)(c)
PAGE 7
8.16. Outside large organisations, most of the people responsible for business continuity are not professionals, and may require guidance when purchasing business continuity advice, services or facilities.8.17. Where it chooses to go down this path, the local authority must remain impartial and take steps to ensure firms are referred to practitioners that have8.1. 
the competence and experience to advise them.6 certain circumstances, give rise to legal challenge.Definition of an emergency
Failure to do so could, in
8.18. BCM arrangements can be put in place to manage the risks associated with the full range of business interruptions, which could comprise anything from minor supplier or technology failure through to the potentially catastrophic effects of terrorism or natural disaster. BCM is a flexible framework designed to help organisations develop resilience to the full spectrum of events. However, the Act imposes a duty on local authorities to give advice and assistance to commercial and voluntary organisations on developing arrangements to deal with a much narrower range of disruptive challenges.8.19. The duty applies only to those events or situations defined as an emergency in the Act.7 It does not extend to the wider range of day-to-day disruptions which can threaten the smooth running - or even the very existence - of an organisation. The Act does not require local authorities to give advice and assistance in managing risks that are purely internal to the organisation (e.g. technical, commercial or financial aspects of running the organisation). Nor does it require local authorities to give advice on dealing with smaller-scale incidents (e.g. minor fires or theft).6 regulations 39(4) and 40(4)7 S.1
8.20. An emergency is likely to affect a number of organisations, which may in turn threaten to seriously disrupt the effective functioning of the community at large. Advice and assistance to the business and voluntary sector community at large should therefore focus on generic disruptions that affect a significant part of the community. In this respect, the BCM duty will enhance community resilience by encouraging a local business climate able to withstand the disruptions caused by an emergency.8.21. A key objective of the BCM duty is to help organisations to link in with practical emergency planning arrangements put in place by Category 1 responders. Local authorities will be particularly well placed to give advice and assistance to organisations in preparing for events or situations whose scale and impact require assessments of risk to be made and emergency plans to be prepared by Category 1 responders.8.22. However, organisations that recognise the value of BCM planning for emergencies are unlikely to confine their forward thinking to this type of risk only.Audience8.23. A key objective of the BCM advice and assistance duty under the Act is to minimise the economic impact of emergencies on the local community. It delivers this by requiring local authorities to encourage greater preparedness among organisations that carry out commercial activities, and providing advice and assistance in improving their resilience.8.1. 
8.24. Commercial organisations are those private sector businesses operating for a profit.Charities are, by definition, voluntary organisations which carry out their activities on a ‘not for profit basis’. However, some charities have separate trading arms, and companies operating under these are classified as commercial organisations, whereas a ‘charity shop’, operated by the charity itself, is defined as a voluntary organisation. Building societies and credit unions carry out commercial activities, and although not privately owned, operate as a business and generate financial benefits for their members.8.25. The Regulations state that the duty to provide BCM advice and assistance only applies to businesses carrying on commercial activities in the local authority area.8 The duty will also extend to activities that operate in the area on a non-permanent basis e.g. music festivals or major construction projects. In many cases, the local authority will be aware of the presence of such activity in its area, for example through planning consents for construction projects, or through the local authority/emergency services Safety Advisory Groups set up to give advice and guidance to event organisers.8.26. The Act also requires local authorities to give advice and assistance to voluntary organisations in their communities, many of whom will not undertake commercial8.1. 
activities.9
Voluntary organisations play a critical role in local civil protection
arrangements; they also deliver a wide range of services that are crucial to the effective functioning of communities (e.g. providing advice, social care, cultural and spiritual services). Demands on their services are likely to increase in the event of an emergency, and, if they are unable to continue functioning, this could exacerbate its effects.8.27. Providing business continuity advice to voluntary organisations will help build the resilience of the wider community, and help limit the impact of emergencies on its ability to function effectively.8 regulation 39(2)9 s.4PAGE 10
8.28. However, the voluntary sector is large and diverse, and not all voluntary organisations would want - or indeed benefit from - business continuity advice. A large number of voluntary organisations, for example, do not employ staff or maintain premises. Given the large number of voluntary bodies (c. 600,000) - and the difficulty of reaching out to some of them - it is unrealistic to expect local authorities to proactively provide (even generic) advice and assistance to them all.8.29. The underlying principles of BCM are common to all organisations. In many instances- particularly where messages are made publicly available via websites - the costs to the local authority of extending their advice to all voluntary organisations will be minimal.8.30. However, when deciding how to prioritise when taking forward a proactive programme of advice and assistance, local authorities may need to take decisions about which voluntary organisations to approach, and where to target resources.8.31. The Regulations therefore permit a local authority itself to determine its8.1. 
target audience within the voluntary sector.10
The Regulations provide
that, in so doing, local authorities should have regard to a range offactors,11 including:o		Role in relation to emergencies: A large number of voluntary organisations play a direct role in preventing or responding to emergencies. In order to help others, they will need to be able to keep themselves operating in the event of an emergency.
10 regulation 40(2), s.411 regulation 40(5)
PAGE 11
o Contribution to the effective functioning of the community: In the event of an emergency, some organisations will be critical to the health and welfare of communities.o Economic importance: Staff numbers and turnover will also be an important consideration in determining target audiences. These will give an indication of an organisation’s importance to the local economy, and the likely value of business continuity planning adding value to an organisation.o Geography: It would not generally be appropriate for a local authority to give BCM advice to a voluntary organisation which does not carry out activities in the area for which the local authorityis responsible.Charging
8.32. 8.33. 12 regulation 44
The Regulations permit local authorities to make a charge for business continuity advice and assistance provided on request, where this is appropriate, but do not oblige them to do so.12It is unlikely that local authorities will be able to charge for promotional materials or awareness-raising materials supplied, which in many cases will not have been requested. However, local authorities may wish to make a charge for a number of activities including:o attendance at local authority organised events;o membership of business continuity forums;o provision of specific information (e.g. aspects of risk assessments);o provision of advice on an ad hoc basis (e.g. development or review of firms’ own plans); ando provision of an established BCM service.o 
8.34. The Regulations also provide that local authorities may only charge for BCM advice and assistance on a cost-recovery basis.13 Local authorities may charge for the full cost of all the resources used in carrying out activities for which a charge is to be made, and a reasonable share of any research or documentation that underpins this service. The regulations do not permit local authorities to seek to make a profit from activities in this area.8.35. Further guidance on charging policy can be found in the HM Treasury Fees and Charges Guide (http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk); however, local authorities will also want to consider the impact of their charging policy on the take-up of their advice and assistance.Risk assessment8.36. The BCM programme should reflect the risk profile of the area. When developing a BCM promotion strategy and materials, the officer responsible should ask: What possible disruptions do organisations need to know about? What impacts might they have? Are there any locations or firms that are particularly vulnerable?8.37. The Regulations require local authorities to “take into account” the Community Risk Register (CRR) agreed by the Local Resilience Forum (LRF) when developinga business continuity promotion programme.14	It may also be necessary toconsider risks outside the area that could impact upon businesses in a local authority area (e.g. major chemical plant in a neighbouring area), hence the requirement to have regard to “any relevant risk register”.13 regulation 4414 regulation 38
Developing collaborative arrangementsCollaboration with other local authorities8.38. The duty to provide advice and assistance in relation to BCM falls on all local authorities. The Regulations permit local authorities to enter into collaborative arrangements with other Category 1 or 2 responders (e.g. a Fire and Rescue Authority) in delivering the duty. 158.39. There are a number of options open to authorities in deciding how best to discharge their responsibility. This permissive approach gives local authorities the flexibility to decide how to make the best use of the skills, expertise, networks and resources available in an area. Working collaboratively could help ensure that efforts are co-ordinated and that economies of scale are achieved. There are a number of case studies with contacts contained in this guidance, at Box 8.3, which detail some of the ways that local authorities have discharged this duty in a cost effective and beneficial way to local businesses. This has been demonstrated by a measurable increase in website activity and engagement.8.40. However, it remains the responsibility of each authority to ensure that the programme is delivered effectively, and its statutory duties are fulfilled. Whichever option - or mixture of options - is chosen, each authority should ensure that:o roles and responsibilities are clear;o clear review and evaluation mechanisms are in place;o the programme adequately reflects the diverse business needs and risk profile within an LRF area; ando elected members and senior officers are brought into the processwhere necessary.15 regulations 41(3) and 41(4)
Box 8.2: Delivering BCM in partnershipBusiness continuity management and promotion has become an integral part of the Local Resilience Forum structure within the Northumbria area. Responsibility for promotion lies with the five councils of Tyne and Wear and Northumberland Emergency Planning Department and is discharged by the Tyne and Wear Emergency Planning Unit who coordinates activity on behalf of the Tyne and Wear Councils. The Business Continuity Management Promotion Strategy is focused on maximising business resilience within the Northumbria LRF by facilitating the coordination of promotional materials and events.On a day to day basis, responsibility includes the Tyne and Wear Emergency Planning Unit providing a comprehensive resilience planning service to all five councils in the Tyne and Wear area as well as work on specific business continuity initiatives. This includes:o Provision of advice and guidance.o Training of staff earmarked with business continuity roles within procurement.o Speaking at seminars.o Facilitating workshops.o Supporting internal business promotion days.Promotional aspects have included the recent Business Continuity Conference (March 2010) and current involvement includes the organising and management of business continuity Information events which will be taking place during Business Continuity Awareness week in March 2011.
8.41. Delegation, or the appointment of a lead authority, does not absolve the local authority of the duty, but merely transforms the mode of delivery. The local authority remains under a legal duty to ensure the programme is delivered, even when a third party is contracted to complete the work.Partnership working in BCM promotiono Separate programmes: Local authorities deliver BCM programmes separately, while ensuring the coherence of the message and means of delivery.o Delegation: All or some local authorities in an LRF area delegate the duty to a single authority, which then delivers the duty on their behalf. Delegation can be to any Category 1 or 2 responder not just to a local authority.o Joint working: This would involve a single programme being delivered jointly by a number of local authorities.o Appointing a “lead authority”: This involves giving one or more partner authorities a leading role within the delivery of the programme, with other authorities fulfilling a lesser, supporting role. The lead authority could, for example, co-ordinate the content and production of promotional material for othersto deliver.
Co-ordination of BCM promotion programmes8.42. The Regulations require local authorities within an LRF area to co-operate with each other when performing their duties under section 4 of the Act1.6 The purpose of this requirement is to ensure that local authorities within an LRF area deliver a coherent programme of advice and assistance to organisations undertaking commercial activities in their communities.8.43. This co-operation may take place bilaterally or within a single forum. Whatever form this co-operation takes, authorities will need to take steps to ensure that:o the message they are giving out is consistent;o the means of delivery are co-ordinated where appropriate;o external partners are not unduly burdened; ando lessons are identified and learned and best practice is shared.8.44. The BCM promotion programme in an LRF area should be driven by the needs of local organisations, not local authorities’ administrative boundaries. Organisations in an LRF area will often operate across local authority boundaries, hence the importance of delivering a co-ordinated message with promotional or awareness- raising work.8.45. Local authorities will also want to consider the need to adopt a coherent approach to the provision of specific advice and assistance where this is requested.16 regulation 41(1)
Co-ordination with other Category 1 responders’ work8.46. The duty to provide advice and assistance in relation to BCM falls on local authorities, but this does not mean that other Category 1 responders should not support these programmes.8.47. A number of other Category 1 responders are already engaged in providing BCM advice. This work should be supported and encouraged by local authorities as part of the wider promotion programme under the Act.8.48. The Regulations require local authorities to have regard to the business continuity assistance work other Category 1 responders are doing in the community.17 In practice, this means that local authorities are required to develop an awareness of the business continuity work other Category 1 responders undertake with organisations, and consider the implications of this work for their own business continuity advice and assistance programmes.8.49. This will help local authorities to ensure that programmes complement other work.Local authorities should take steps to ensure that their BCM advice and assistance programmes dovetail with work undertaken by other Category 1 responders, that synergies are exploited, and that they work collaboratively where possible. The Regulations additionally provide that local authorities need not unnecessarily duplicate the work done by other responders with local organisations.1817 regulation 43(1)18 regulation 43(1)(b)PAGE 18
8.50. Furthermore, BCM awareness material will address public sector response arrangements and risk profiles, which will require the collaboration of other Category 1 responders. It is, therefore, important that local authorities have access to the right information and advice to inform their promotion strategies, and that the assumptions they make about other Category 1 responders’ response arrangements are accurate. The Regulations impose a duty on all Category 1 and 2 responders to co-operate and share information on request pursuant to local authorities’ duties under section 4 of the Act.198.51. This co-operation may take place bilaterally, as required, or via a subgroup of the LRF.Other Category 1 Responders’ work with commercial organisations
19 regulations 41(2) and 45 to 53
PAGE 19
Crime Their work is co-ordinated by the National Counter Terrorism and Security Office (NACTSO), which published the Expecting the Unexpected document (https://vsat.nactso.gov.uk/SiteCollection Documents/OurServices/expecting-the-unexpected.pdf) in conjunction with London First and the Business Continuity Institute. CTSAs can be contacted via local police headquarters.o		Advice on emergency response procedures: Police services seek to raise awareness among local businesses about emergencyresponse procedures (e.g. evacuation procedures, cordoning in the event of an incident). Project ARGUS (http://www.nactso. gov.uk/OurServices/Argus.aspx) is a NACTSO initiative, which takes businesses through a simulated terrorist attack and identifies prevention, handling and recovery measures. Project Griffin (http://www.projectgriffin.org.uk/) was developed by the City of London Police as a joint venture between the City and Metropolitan police forces. Its remit was to advise large public and private sector organisations on security, counter-terrorism and crime prevention issues. It is increasingly being adopted by other police forces.Fire AuthoritiesSince 1947, fire authorities have been under a duty to provide, on request, information about fire prevention and mitigation. The Fire and Rescue Service Act 2004 conferred a new duty on fire authorities to make provision for actively promoting fire safety within their area. This involves the provision of advice and assistance to local businesses. They work with occupiers/owners in the business community to offer advice over a broad range of topics - proactively and on request.
This work will be undertaken in different ways according to the priorities in the area.In Hereford and Worcester, specialist Fire Safety Inspecting Officers receive technical training so that they can offer advice and assistance to commercial organisations on issues such as:o arson reduction;o business continuity; ando community fire safety.Fire-fighters reinforce this proactive approach to fire prevention by taking forward aspects of this approach in their day-to-day work. They may work closely with other enforcement agencies and bodies providing business continuity advice to explore opportunities for partnership working.Maritime and Coastguard AgencyThe Maritime and Coastguard Agency is committed to preventing loss of life, continuously improving maritime safety, and protecting the marine environment. Various aspects of this work involve BCM promotion.In addition to enforcing contingency planning requirements, the Agency undertakes a range of educational initiatives with the shipping, fishing, and offshore oil and gas industries, as well as with those who visit the sea or coast for leisure. Further information can be found at: http:// www.dft.gov.uk/mca/.
8.52. Local authorities must observe the limits on sharing sensitive information set out in the Regulations when taking forward their programme of advice and assistance. Local authorities may have access to - or be asked for - personal data or information that relates to national security or public safety. Even where this would assist the local authority in its BCM advice and assistance work, this information should not be disclosed, unless appropriate consent has been obtained or the public interest in disclosure outweighs the interests of the organisation or individual concerned. The same applies to commercially sensitive information, which must also be treated appropriately. Chapter 3 sets out in more detail the limits on dealing with sensitive information. [See also case studies 3 and 5 in Box 8.3]How the Act and the regulations apply in Scotland, Wales and Northern IrelandScotland8.53. The Regulations made by the Minister which relate to the promotion of business continuity do not apply to local authorities in Scotland. The Regulations made by the Scottish Ministers make provision as to how local authorities in Scotland should exercise their duty to provide advice and assistance in relation to business continuity.Wales8.54. The Act and the Regulations apply in Wales in the same way as they apply in England.8.1. 
Northern Ireland8.55. The duty to provide advice and assistance to business and voluntary organisations in relation to business continuity does not apply to local authorities in Northern Ireland.8.56. This section outlines how the Government believes the duties described may best be carried out. It describes good practice. Category 1 responders must have regard to this guidance.20Why should organisations put BC plans in place?8.57. Whilst the duty to promote BC is founded on the wider contribution to national resilience, to use this reason as a way to encourage businesses to take up business continuity may not encourage businesses to take that step and make that investment.8.58. For the majority of commercial businesses, any decision to adopt a system or activity will focus on ‘business benefits’. It is therefore imperative that when promoting business continuity, the arguments used resonate with those responsible for making these decisions. These should promote the financial benefits that can be accrued by:o conducting a business impact analysis to evaluate the critical activities to a business (e.g. the processes for producing and selling those products that have the highest profit margin);o demonstrating processes in place to deal with disruption to existing and potential new customers;20 s.4(8)(b)
o reduction of costly downtime, through alternative arrangements such as dual-sourcing and contingency measures;o reduction in insurance premiums for policies such as ‘business disruption’ when demonstrating resilience measures;o the ability to retain, and possibly gain new contracts and customers through being able to deliver when others can’t.8.59. The following information will be useful to local businesses in assessing the need to develop business continuity plans:o the kinds of disruption which could occur, ando the impacts they may have (e.g. loss of utilities or access to premises);o the arrangements that Category 1 responders have in place to assess the risk of, prepare for, respond to and recover fromemergencies, and their implications for the business community (e.g. evacuation or recovery plans);o the steps individual organisations can take to prepare for, or mitigate the effects of, an emergency (e.g. implement BCM); ando sources of warnings, information and advice in the event of an emergency.8.60. Levels of BCM awareness and activity will vary considerably between organisations.In some cases the challenge will be to get BCM on the agenda, and in others the challenge will be to sell the concept or help organisations already doing BCM to refine their plans.
Delivering a programme of advice and assistance / discharging the duty8.61. Since 2005, local authorities have developed various means of discharging the duty: providing a service to the communities and contributing to national resilience.  Some believe they have achieved real value in this area.  Some of these are included as case studies at Box 8.3. They have been generously provided by local authorities, whose contact details can be found at the foot of each case study.8.62. Practical advice in delivering the duty to provide business continuity advice and assistance is set out below.
In addition to specific advice on business continuity, a website can be used to direct businesses to other sources of information about civil protection issues, including the CRR and other Category 1 and 2 responders’ sites and to reference other sites offering guidance on the development of business continuity arrangements.Press releasesArticles in appropriate publications can raise awareness of business continuity issues, or to direct readers to relevant materials. Local authorities publishing an annual business or voluntary sector directory can use them to publicise the message. References in publications issued by partner organisations (e.g. business or social action representative groups) can also be useful.MailingsLocal authorities have various means, e.g. business rate letters, of disseminating guidance to the business and voluntary sector, this might include existing reference materials on BCM, available from a wide range of sources, including the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, the Federation of Small Businesses and the Business Continuity Institute.Participation in seminars/eventsExisting events/seminars targeted at businesses or the voluntary sector, whether organised by the Local Authority Economic Development Department or other local partners, can be used to communicate the
message on BCM promotion and to publicise sources of information on BCM, either provided by the local authority or by a third party.Facilitating or hosting eventsLocal authorities may choose, individually or in collaboration with others, to organise their own BCM events, e.g. regional or local business continuity fairs or seminars. A seminar or fair could be used to launch a new BCM forum. The costs incurred by local authorities might be met by charging a small attendance fee, inviting firms to sponsor such events, or by seeking collaboration from business or voluntary sector representative bodies. (See Box 8.2 for a short case study of similar activity undertaken by Tyne and Wear Emergency Planning Unit.)Establishing a business continuity forumThe formation of business continuity forums, facilitated by local authorities, can encourage members of the business community to participate. These forums can promote business continuity management, and help to consolidate a local network, within which businesses can learn from each other and liaise with Category 1 and 2 responders.Local authorities and the emergency services are often already engaged with the business and voluntary sector communities, for example, in planning for evacuation in the face of a threat of flooding or terrorism or the fire prevention work undertaken by the Fire and Rescue Service. These links provide a strong basis for developing a business forum looking at BCM or emergency planning issues in the round. Forums can be used to strengthen the links between businesses and LRFs. (See also the case studies 2 and 5 in Box 8.3.)
Specific advice8.63. Whilst local authorities are more likely to achieve value for money through events and promotion activities that reach out to a wide audience, there is nothing to prevent the provision of specific advice as part of the method of discharging the duty. However, this is likely to be more time consuming and the following paragraphs should be noted.8.64. Whichever approach local authorities take to the provision of specific information and advice to businesses or voluntary organisations requesting further support, they should consider developing a documented policy statement, in order to manage the expectations of local organisations and ensure consistency and fairness.8.65. Local authorities should also be aware of professional liability issues when giving specific advice and assistance. In order to reduce the risk of claims of negligence or breach of contract, local authorities should:o only become involved in areas where they are competent and experienced enough to give advice and assistance;o be clear about the status and limits of advice;o clearly flag up areas of uncertainty or assumptions that have been made; ando consider the use of disclaimers where appropriate.8.66. However, liability issues should not deter local authorities from giving detailed advice and assistance. If managed correctly, the risk of legal challenge is limited, and far outweighed by the demand from organisations for support, and the possible benefits in terms of community resilience.8.1. 
Referring organisations to a third party8.67. The local authority should avoid giving definitive recommendations, or endorsing individual consultants. Its role is to direct firms to organisations that could assist them, and suggest the criteria for selecting a service provider. These could include:o professional qualifications/certification;o membership of a professional organisation;o experience in relevant aspects of BCM;o track record of completing similar tasks; ando adequate professional indemnity insurance.8.68. The Business Continuity Institute (BCI) (http://www.thebci.org) provides a certification scheme for business continuity professionals. It publishes a list of consultants it deems to be experienced, qualified and competent in particular areas, and operates a code of practice for members. The Continuity Forum also provides a service designed to help connect consultants with clients: Consultancy Signpost lists individuals and organisations who provide consultancy services covering business continuity and its related disciplines. It is publicly available via the front page of the Continuity Forum’s website http://www.continuityforum.org. The BCI and the Chartered Management Institute are useful sources of advice on commissioning consultants. The local authority can also facilitate the sharing of feedback on consultants by maintaining records of the organisations who have sought its advice about the engagement of a third party.8.69. Nonetheless, the local authority will need to make it clear to firms that the choice of consultant is their sole responsibility, and that the local authority shall not be liable for any damage or loss suffered as a result.8.1. 
BCM advice to the community and the LRF process8.70. The arrangements for multi-agency co-operation established by the Act will establish a framework for delivering joined-up and effective civil protection. BCM promotion is an integral part of the wider package of civil protection activity, and requires multi-agency co-operation and information-sharing to be effective.8.71. Local authorities will want to consider how they use this wider framework to deliver the co-ordination and buy-in required for effective BCM advice and assistance activity. Much can be achieved through informal working-level contact, but there may be some merit in formalising this co-operation. This could take the form of:o regular discussions at working-level liaison groups;o establishing a community resilience subgroup of the LRF; oro discussion at LRF meetings.8.72. The approach taken will depend, in large part, on the nature of the local authorities’ programmes, the means used to deliver the message, and the extent of the involvement of other agencies in the process. It is good practice for the full LRF to be given a chance to discuss BCM promotion work once each year.Identifying and engaging other external partners8.73. Local authorities should consider engaging partner organisations in the process of providing information, advice and assistance to organisations that carry on commercial activities and to voluntary organisations. This should prove useful in communicating with firms and gaining their buy-in, providing support in organising events or forums, and as a source of BCM expertise.8.1. 
Figure 8.1: Network of BCM promotion partnersRepresentative groups   Local AuthoritiesAgenda groups8.74. Figure 8.1 shows a range of organisations in both the public and private sectors that may be willing to collaborate with local authorities in this work. These are:o Within local authorities: Local authorities themselves have established links with the business community, which can be utilised when promoting BCM (e.g. Economic Development Units, City Centre Management Units and Community Safety Teams). Local authorities also have close links with voluntary organisations, which are often engaged as partners in service delivery.o Representative groups: There are a number of groups that represent the business community or sections of it (e.g. Confederation of British Industry, British Chambers of Commerce, and Federation of Small Businesses). Councils for Voluntary Service (CVS) are voluntary organisations which are set up, owned and run by local groups to support, promote and develop local voluntary and community action. CVS support their members by providing them with a range of serviceso 
and by acting as a voice for the local voluntary and community sector.They provide a useful way to identify the local voluntary sector community. There is a CVS working in almost every district and city in England, and they usually work within the same geographical boundaries as the local authority. To find your local CVS visit http://www.ncvo-vol.org.uk/o Education bodies: Higher education institutions and collegesof further education may be effective partners in the promotion of BCM through their business courses. A number of higher education institutions also offer BCM qualification courses which may be useful to local authorities seeking to develop their competence in this area.o Professional bodies: There are a number of organisations that exist to promote the take-up and standards of business continuity in the business community, including the Business Continuity Institute andContinuity Forum. There are also professional bodies or institutes with a wider remit - including the Chartered Institute of Management andBritish Institute of Facilities Management - which can provide a way into the business community in an area.o Agenda groups: There are a range of bodies that can act as a conduit for BCM promotion work (e.g. Local Strategic Partnerships, Crime and Disorder Reduction Partnerships).o Commercial BCM providers: Commercial organisations providing a range of BCM services may be willing to sponsor business continuity initiatives or events.o Individual businesses: Experience has shown that gaining the support of larger firms is important in taking forward a BCM promotion programme. Larger firms are more likely to be familiar with the discipline of BCM, and may already have established relationships with Category 1 and 2 responders. They may provide useful support in establishing business continuity seminars and companies - or large 
 well-established voluntary bodies - in their area. Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are also crucial to the UK forums, and give assistance in raising the profile of BCM within the business community (e.g. through supply-chain leadership, membership ofassociations). Professional services firms (e.g. banks, accountants) may be willing to distribute information through their websites.(See case studies 3 and 5 in Box 8.3.)Targeting adviceSize of organisations8.75. BCM arrangements are crucial to the sustainability of all organisations. Local authorities should not assume that business continuity is well established in the large national or multi-national companies - or large well-established voluntary bodies - in their area. Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are also crucial to the UK economy, accounting for some 99.9% of the UK’s 4.8 million businesses. They account for 59.8% of the number in employment in the private sector and generate 49 per cent of private sector turnover. In total, turnover in SMEs is estimated to be£1.589 billion (Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, October 2010 http:// www.bis.gov.uk/assets/biscore/statistics/docs/b/bpe_2010_stats_release.pdf).8.76. Local authorities should ensure that materials used are appropriate to the needs of businesses, which may vary considerably. While the underpinning principles remain the same, the approach taken when approaching a small owner-managed firm will be different to that taken with a large, well-established firm. Local authorities will need to be proactive in engaging the SME community, and ensure that materials are pitched at the right level.8.1. 
8.77. It may be helpful to think of the business community in terms of the following definitions used by the Department for Business Industry and Skills:o Micro firm: 0-9 employeeso Small firm: 10-49 employeeso Medium firm: 50-249 employeeso Large firm: Over 250 employees8.78. Where it is not possible to engage smaller businesses directly in a community resilience initiative, it may be possible to include them through a variety of umbrella groups that can disseminate information and advice. This can be achieved through groups such as the Chamber of Commerce, Business Link, The Federation of Small Businesses and Local Retail Initiatives. Voluntary organisations can be reached through local Voluntary Service Councils, Social Councils, Volunteer Bureaux and other local umbrella bodies. (See case studies 4, 5 and 6 in Box 8.3.)Added value8.79. Local authorities may wish to focus on organisations that are well placed to give support to the programme by helping to raise awareness or by offering practical support (e.g. venues). Local authorities may also wish to target organisations that are able to provide help or resources to other organisations or Category 1 responders in the event of an emergency, or organisations whose activities are crucial to the effective functioning of the wider community (e.g. food suppliers).8.1. 
Maintaining a BCM advice and assistance programme8.80. In order to ensure that they continue to fulfil the requirements of the business continuity advice and assistance duty, local authorities will wish to undertake a continuous cycle of assessing the content and delivery of the promotion programme against the requirements of the legislation, assessments of risk, needs of the audience, and resources and support mechanisms available. This is likely to involve:o Developing objectives and message:ï Clear objectives should be established in consultation with partners in the LRF, and the message and target audience should be defined with reference to the CRR. Are proposed approaches coherent and will they be effective?o Reviewing promotion materials:ï There is a wide range of existing materials illustrating the importance of BCM and how to develop businesscontinuity arrangements. Is there a need to develop further materials tailored to local circumstances? And what form might these take (e.g. printed, web-based, etc)o Reviewing the means of delivery:ï Choose means of delivery in the light of available resources and support from partners. Publicise events and services offered, and publicise any charging policy.ï 
o Delivery:ï The case studies contained in this chapter will give authorities guidance on ways in which the duty is delivered in other areas. The details of those responsible can be found at the end of the individual case studies and should be contacted with any questions?o Evaluate and review programme:ï Gathering feedback along the way is a useful way to judge if the programme met its stated objectives? Has feedback been positive? How could it be improved or extended? What lessons can be learned from experience elsewhere inthe country?Box 8.3: Business continuity advice and assistance to business and the voluntary sector: Case studies
BackgroundIn May 2008, a decision was taken by the Planning and Environment Committee to focus on business continuity; in particular, how small to medium size enterprises and charities could best cope with emergency situations both within their own company and on a wider scale.A business continuity sub-committee was formed involving representatives from Woking and Surrey Chambers of Commerce, local businesses, Woking Borough Council, and Surrey County Council. The sub-committee provided a steer on developing a strategy and this led to a series of meetings, discussions and presentations on how this could best be delivered to local business.By early 2009, a draft proposal was in place to develop a website to act as a business continuity hub in order to help local businesses understand the basic principles of BCM together with signposting them to find additional information if required. Woking Borough Council and Surrey County Council agreed to part fund this, with the Surrey Local Resilience Forum agreeing to co-sponsor the initiative and provide additional funding to develop the project.The sub-committee put out to tender and a company was short- listed and commissioned to deliver the website. The company has an innovative way of delivering the website using panoramic views summarising phases of the business continuity process, case studies featuring local business incidents and an interactive quiz.
ConclusionAlthough Surrey delivers business continuity advice through traditional methods such as leaflets, conferences and local forums, surreycontinuity helps promote other local initiatives such as Project ARGUS and GRIFFIN.Surreycontinuity has been kept simple and is able to be used by those with no previous experience of business continuity. This gives it the flexibility to target a generic audience within the community such as small to medium enterprises, independent care providers and schools, also reaching a global audience.Detailed weekly and monthly web traffic reports are providing useful in validating the success of the website. Although limited in determining the type and exact location of the organisation accessing the website, they do provide detail of number of hits, method of access and global location. The most popular part of the site is the case studies.The results have certainly raised the profile of the county; and the work of the Surrey Local Resilience Forum; and proved that engaging and working in partnership can deliver benefits to the local community.Kevin SmithDeputy Head of Emergency Management Chief Executive’s OfficeSurrey County Council Kingston upon Thames KT1 2DNTel: 0208 541 9160
Case Study 2 – Milton Keynes CouncilMilton Keynes Council is a unitary Council with approx 220,000 citizens. The concept of a Milton Keynes Business Resilience Forum (MKBRF) was initially proposed by Milton Keynes Council at the local BCI Forum in June 2006. It was seen to be the best way to promote BC to local businesses and encourage the involvement of local businesses. Following the first MKBRF event, an independent lead team was established consisting of, and chaired by, voluntary representatives from local businesses. The MKBRF was established to promote the benefits of effective business continuity by:o providing information and advice;o sharing experiences between members;o holding business continuity and incident management exercises;o sharing threat and opportunity data (horizon scanning);o provide informal mentoring;o create a networking opportunity for local organisations and BC practitioners; and,o providing mutual help and support.Currently the membership of the MKBRF stands at over 300 local organisations, predominantly from the Milton Keynes area, but several from further afield. There is also an active LinkedIn forum which does not require MKBRF registration.In addition to developing and facilitating events, Milton Keynes Council, in conjunction with the MKBRF, provides a website BC toolkit and an informal mentoring scheme. The website receives on average 1500 hits per month.
Analysis of feedback received following exercises and events, as well as key topics of the moment and market research carried out by the MKBRF lead team during 2010, drive the requirement for the next event. Attendees are also asked to suggest topics for future activities which ensures that the needs of the audience are consistently met.All events have been free of charge. Milton Keynes Council has been supportive of all events and gained sponsorship from businesses based in Milton Keynes to assist with the costs.Timeline of events

The most difficult hurdle to overcome is getting organisations to consider business continuity. Part of the County Council’s strategy is not to promote business continuity using ‘scare tactics’ but rather promote the benefits of practical and effective contingency planning. The County Council believes that good business continuity is good business.Furthermore, the County Council accepts that not everyone would be interested in, or understand, the relevance of BS25999 to their organisation, so decided against promoting the standard in its entirety. We do, however, actively promote its methodology and the benefits of adopting the Standard as good practice. As an organisation’s business continuity programme matures, with minimal effort it will become more aligned with the standard.The Council’s initial approach to promoting business continuity was linked into the embedded procurement and supply-chain processes. This enabled us to prioritise and assess the levels of resilience in place for key suppliers/providers and, if necessary, provide them with guidance, support and assistance so that they were able to meet the Council’s supplier requirements in terms of business continuity practice.Leicester, Leicestershire and Rutland (LLR) have an active, Local Resilience Forum (LRF). In early 2010, the LRF established a business continuity subgroup – called the Business Continuity Practitioners Forum (BCF). This group, as part of its remit, aims to promote business continuity good practice across all business sectors in the LLR region.During Business Continuity Awareness week 2010, the BCF published a one-page supplement in some of the regions newspapers and their related websites which generated a substantial interest and response from the business community.
The BCF and County Council have combined their business continuity planning and exercise workshops and these have now been rolled out as a LRF initiative across the region. Separate planning and exercise workshops are run on a monthly basis. The BCF has –o strong links into all the regions Trading Standards teams as well as other business networks e.g. Federation of Small Businesses and Chamber of Commerce;o started to develop initiatives with its partners (police and fire) to further promote business continuity (e.g. Emergency Response Planning for Schools and Residential Care Providers); ando launched the LLR Business Continuity Working Group for businesses, regardless of sector and size, in the region. This free, one day workshop, introduced the business community to the LRF business continuity advisors who are available to assist organisations in developing their own practical resilience programmes. The working group will meet on a regular basis (every 8 weeks) to share and develop good practice amongst businesses across the region. The service is provided free of charge to all business sectors.The County Council and the LRF accept that the aims may not be achieved overnight, but remain optimistic that, over time, their approach will become embedded as one of the key support services offered in the LLR region.Officer to Contact:Mondy Holliday, Business Continuity Manager,Leicestershire County Council 0116 305 5400; businesscontinuity@leics.gov.uk
Case Study 4 – Cardiff CouncilCardiff Council has adopted a unique approach by attempting to embed business continuity promotion as a key strand of its EVAC Cardiff initiative. EVAC Cardiff is a multi-agency service which combines a number of statutory duties and national policing initiatives under one brand. The initiative was a finalist in the 2008 Wales Innovation Awards where it was commended for combining different strands of Cardiff’s resilience programme delivered by using clever technology and strong easily distinguishable branding.The business continuity element of EVAC Cardiff has been delivered in three specific ways, these are –o electronically via a BCM promotion website – The website has been developed to be eye catching and easy to navigate. The site delivers key messages using simple language with an emphasis on selling the positives rather than focusing on the negative reasons for undertaking this work. It uses different technologies such as video/flash and many downloadable templates and tools. It also links to other sites and a feedback questionnaire which also gathers important statistical data on which sectors and size of business are using the website: http://www.nonverba.com/admin/ cardiff/welcome.htmEVAC Warden training – The training is aimed at any business irrespective of their size or sector. It covers risks specific to Cardiff, how the scheme works and the importance of business continuity, signposting businesses to the promotion website for advice and guidance. Businesses also have the ability
of booking their staff on to EVAC warden training via the promotion website.Cardiff has developed its own Area Risk Register which is published on the website. The register has been developed by a multi-agency group and also co-opting specific sector specialists to ensure that the register reflects Cardiff’s issues and also to cross reference current plans are adequate enough.The Council managed to negotiate the site development as part of a deal it brokered for internal business continuity software. The only small costs incurred are when updates are required but these very small. Using technology also reduces the amount of officer time as businesses can `help themselves` to whatever resources they choose to use from the website. E-mail has been used to send promotional information to businesses in Cardiff by tapping in to distribution lists from the Council’s economic development department which has proven to be an effective and free way of raising awareness of the website.The strength of the brand locally has made it easier for Cardiff to get buy in from local businesses. The initiative is supported by all the emergency services and this has enhanced the Council’s relationship with partners and in particular the business community.Reaching every business in Cardiff is a challenge and indeed not all businesses have access to the internet in order to benefit from the resources on the website. SMEs are more difficult to engage for a variety of reasons but the Council is always looking to`piggy back` onto other local initiatives as an opportunity to promote the key messages.Contact:Cardiff Emergency Management UnitTel: 02920 871838 email: emergencymanagement@cardiff.gov.uk
Case Study 5 – Manchester City CouncilManchester’s partnership approach to delivering Business Continuity Advice and AssistanceManchester City Council delivers its business continuity advice and assistance programme via the Manchester Business Continuity Forum (MBCF), which has a membership or nearly 400 organisations. The Council has provided resources (staffing and financial) to support the MBCF’s work programme. It remains an equal partner with the other MBCF member organisations. The MBCF is increasing the resilience of Manchester based organisations, through cross-sector collaboration and partnership working. It aims to:o improve the resilience of Manchester’s communities, businesses and voluntary organisations; encouraging them to respond effectively to internal or external threats of disruption, thereby lessening the economic and social impact of emergencies and speeding up the subsequent recovery; ando contribute to Manchester’s prominence as a leadingeconomic hub by showcasing its ongoing commitment to building safe, sustainable and resilient communities by continually increasing the resilience of the city.MBCF has a number of notable features:o activities and priorities for the MBCF are always member coordinated, led and driveno 
o recognition of the part every organisation has to playin ensuring Manchester has ‘Business Continuity Whatever the Disruption’o firm commitment to building on and facilitating the sharing of BCM knowledge and expertise already present in Manchestero commitment to partnership with leading professional bodies, academia and complementary networkso real opportunities for a wide range of organisationsto learn from each other, share good practice and experience and opportunities to work together to increase the resilience of Manchestero willingness to share the learning and successes of MBCF outside of Manchester – regionally, nationally and internationally.The MBCF’s accountability to its members is demonstrated by the existence of a Steering Group, which consists of member organisations working to terms of reference and overseeing the delivery of a formal work plan for MBCF.To help reflect the needs of the City and the ability to provide a wide range of general and specific business continuity advice and guidance, the Steering Group is made up of representatives from a variety of organisations and subject matter experts in the field of resilience. Current Steering Group representation includes senior representation from large blue chip companies, Third Sector organisations, business networks, including the Chamber of Commerce, universities, and the emergency services.
Crucially, Manchester City Council has facilitated the creation of a clear and individual identity for the MBCF to ensure that it is an independent and successful initiative, rather than being identified as a city council project. The membership reflects the diversity of the organisations within the city.MBCF is dedicated to achieving tangible outcomes including regular educational and awareness seminars, mentorship programme, networking events, scenario based testing and exercise opportunities, publications and consultation activities some of which are described below:Buddy SchemeThe MBCF is particularly keen to support small and medium enterprises in the city, as well as third sector organisations, by the creation of a mentorship programme. The MBCF Buddy Scheme has been designed so that representatives from organisations with well- developed business continuity arrangements can ‘buddy up’ with representatives from organisations that would benefit from extra support in this area.MBCF Network groupThe idea behind the MBCF Network Group is to provide an informal space for MBCF members to discuss ‘BCM in action’ with a very practical focus to help members help each other, by sharing good practice, experience and lessons learned from BCM incidents.
Events and seminarsThe MBCF has hosted a variety of events, including a large launch event, which helped shape the direction of the Forum’s activities based on direct feedback. Most of the events are aimed at any member of the Forum; however ‘Keep Calm and Carry On’ was aimed at people from Third Sector organisations specifically, designed to give an introduction to business continuity management. There are plans to hold the event as an annual initiative. In addition to the large scale events, there have been a number of smaller breakfast seminars, focusing on topical issues such as Pandemic Flu preparedness and Counter Terrorism issues.MBCF publishingThe MBCF has created on-line support, which includes signposting to existing good practice for BCM as well as creating templates and other ‘how-to’ guides.City wide exerciseIn late summer 2010, the MBCF ran the city’s first public-private collaborative exercise, which aimed to exemplify best practice in collaborative exercising. Several businesses participated with representation from emergency services, the council and Manchester University. The participants explored how their various business groups would react individually, collectively and in partnership.This was one of the first such exercising initiatives in the UK. The objective was to see how the main parties would react to an incident. The exercise was not an emergency services exercise but rather a simultaneous exercise for a large number of major employers and significant companies within the Manchester City Centre area. It ensured that all parties’ responses and plans were exercised as they would be in reality.

“We needed to overcome the common attitude that insurance companies would take care of any disasters,” said Ingrid. “What businesses often didn’t consider was, if their business had to temporarily close due to a disaster, would they find an alternative supplier, would they lose customers, and would they lose staff? These are the themes that the new training aims to develop.”Such issues are particularly important in the Shetland Islands, which has seen more than its share of commercially damaging incidents in recent years, from storms to maritime disasters. Working closely with the consultants, the Council recognised the vulnerability of the islands to natural and man-made catastrophes, and was keen to make this factor a key component of the online campaign.The course uses a series of tailor-made online video and audio presentations to help business owners understand the practical relevance of BC to their businesses and to their local environment. As the presentations are online, users can view them at their own pace, and then complete a workbook and a series of contingency checklists to help them develop their own BC plan.The course begins with a ‘newsreader’ highlighting some of the perils of island life and of coastal climates. The checklists use specific examples of local industries. For instance, the section covering asset protection cites creel boats and lobster pots as key assets to protect. And the island’s unique logistical challenges are also explored, addressing the potential absence of the ferry service in times of severe weather and rough seas.
For Ingrid, this practical, local focus, and the ability for users to dip in and out at their own pace, is key to overcoming business apathy when faced with generic BC information, or one-off seminars, “The website is very practical, easy to work through, and means people can have a full contingency plan of their own within a matter of hours. It’s short, sharp and, above all, specifically relates to the businesses and challenges we have here on the islands.”After the initial start-up costs, the website has proved to be a cost-effective way for the Council to meet it business continuity responsibilities – a statutory duty of all local authorities.“Running seminars can be quite expensive, especially if you don’t get many people attending,” explained Ingrid. “Now the website’s active, it is pretty much self-sustaining and won’t need much updating. We’re going to further address business continuity at the Shetland Business Gateway for new businesses, and we’re also linking it to the Shetland Emergency Planning Forum – so it all forms part of a rolling programme.”Feedback has so far been excellent for the www.shetlandcontinuity.co.uk website. Since its launch in November 2010, take-up has exceeded expectations and many users have contacted the council requesting experts to come and talk to them about other benefits of emergency planning.For further details contact:Ingrid GallEmergency Planning & Resilience Officer Emergency Planning & Resilience Service

 Chapter 9 LondonRevision to Emergency PreparednessCivil Contingencies Act Enhancement ProgrammeMarch 2012
Chapter 9 (London) of Emergency Preparedness, Revised Version

 WHAT THE ACT AND THE REGULATIONS REQUIRE 9.1. In most respects, the frameworks and duties set out under the Act and the Regulations will apply to London in the same way that they apply everywhere else. In terms of the respective functions, Category 1 and 2 responders in London are no different from those in other parts of the country. However, London has particular patterns of public service provision and government which mean that some aspects of civil protection have to be organised differently. As London is the capital city, the effects of any incident can be felt right across the UK and potentially internationally.Local Resilience Forum in London9.2. London has the same need as elsewhere for multi-agency co-operation at the local level. To achieve multi-agency co-operation at this level, the Regulations establish one pan-London LRF covering all of London1 , incorporating the Metropolitan Police and City of London Police areas.9.3. The LRF will operate in much the same way as LRFs elsewhere, working to the model set out in Chapter 2.Borough Resilience Forums (BRF)9.4. As elsewhere, the LRF will maintain a Chief Officer Group, however, there are very distinct areas in London, each with specific emergency planning considerations which will require planning at a more local level than that of pan-London. For this reason, the revised Regulations specify that the London LRF must include, in respect of each borough, a BRF that meets at least once every six months.1 This is the area comprised of “the areas of the London boroughs, the City and the Temples” and defined as Greater London in s2(1) London Government Act 1963
The BRFs will primarily facilitate co-operation and information sharing at the operational level between local authorities and the emergency services, and should not duplicate the work of the LRF. They may refer issues to the LRF multi-borough tier, as appropriate.The role of the London Fire and Emergency Planning Authority9.5. Unlike other areas, the Regulations provide that London’s local authorities will be supported in discharging their duties under the Act by the Fire and Rescue Authority - in this case, the London Fire and Emergency Planning Authority (LFEPA).2 LFEPA will take on a number of distinct tasks which might otherwise have been taken on by local authorities.9.6. LFEPA will carry out certain emergency planning activities. In particular, LFEPA will support pan-London local authority arrangements:o Local authority ‘Gold’: In the event of the most serious emergencies in London, local authorities would need to work closely together and operate in a consistent way. To deliver this, they have agreed to pooldecision-making authority and place it with a single chief executive who will speak for local authorities as the pan-London response is managed. LFEPA will maintain these arrangements, keeping them updated through review and revision.o Control centre: In order to support local authority ‘Gold’, planning will have to be maintained to deliver an effective control centre.Should local authority ‘Gold’ arrangements be required, the centre would collect and disseminate information, and facilitate the collective decision-making process. LFEPA will put in place and maintainthese arrangements.
o Provision of training to support pan-London arrangements:Certain elements of plans maintained under the Act will be consistent across all London boroughs, and this in turn leads to a consistency of training need. This need will be met by training programmes provided on request by LFEPA.o Provision of exercising of pan-London arrangements: Pan-London local authority plans need to be validated through exercising. LFEPA will design and deliver an annual programme of exercises to test these arrangements. This programme will include both local authority-only exercises, and multi-agency exercises in which local authority activities are engaged.9.7. LFEPA is funded separately for this work, with funding top-sliced from London local authorities.9.8. London boroughs will retain responsibility for discharging all other duties under the Act. However, LFEPA will continue to make an informal input into wider planning work within the framework of multi-agency co-operation. Should boroughs so wish, they may negotiate to delegate further functions to LFEPA.9.9. In discharging its responsibilities as set out above, LFEPA will also need to work closely with those Category 1 responders that are not local authorities. This has long been a matter of standard practice in London, but the Regulations reinforce this point by requiring co-operation between Category 1 responders and LFEPA at the latter’s request.3 This obligation is limited to that co-operation necessary for LFEPA to carry out its own obligations in relation to co-ordination of pan-London local authority planning.9.1. 
Sub-groups of the Local Resilience Forum9.10. Apart from the Chief Officer Group and the maintenance of BRFs, the London LRF’s make up will be determined by the Category 1 responders represented at the LRF, as set out in chapter 2. The LRF will determine which sub-groups are required for their particular area.9.11. While the Regulations set out that the London LRF must include, in relation to each borough, a BRF held once every six months, they do not specify which responders must attend them as they do for the LRF. Category 1 responders at the London LRF must therefore review and recommend which Category 1 responders should form the core membership for each BRF. As a group of the LRF all responders must consider whether to attend the BRF for any borough in which they exercise functions. In making this decision, those responders that have been identified by the London LRF as appropriate to form the core membership of a particular BRF must take this recommendation into account.9.12. Given its unique makeup and London’s role as the capital city, the London LRF will need to maintain a tier of multi-borough sub-groups of the LRF. These will consist of groups of boroughs, drawn up to reflect existing mutual aid groupings. This will assist emergency planning at the local level, bringing together those boroughs with particular issues and bridging the gap between the local level and the pan-London level. Previously these “sub-regional” LRFs have been set out in Regulation and therefore some groupings are already in place. The Category 1 members of the LRF will review and agree the groupings.9.1. 
9.13. The new Regulations create a pan-London LRF, which includes Borough Resilience Forums, and this statutory guidance sets out the need for multi-borough LRFs as sub-groups of the London LRF. This creates a three tier structure to emergency planning in London, with each tier having a very specific role to play in London resilience.Local Resilience Forum9.14. The role of the LRF is to provide strategic, senior level direction for co-ordinated and effective multi-agency emergency planning in London; bringing together national government (via the London Government Liaison Team in DCLG), the Mayor of London, London’s emergency services, other key public services and the business, faith and voluntary communities.9.15. The LRF will ensure that London is fully prepared to deal with the consequences of a wide range of disruptive incidents, from terrorist attacks through to the impact of climate change or a pandemic.9.16. The LRF will:o agree joint strategic and policy approaches relating to London’s preparedness and response;o produce and maintain a Risk Register for London, ensuring that it provides a robust basis for planning and reflects the current risks that are affecting the capital. This was formerly a duty carried out by LFEPA on behalf of the six multi-borough groupings but has now moved from this level to the pan-London level through the LRF. The regulations allowed for a transitional period of up to a year to facilitate this move;o 
o provide a mechanism for information on threat, hazard and risk management, flowing in both directions between local,sub-national and national organisations;o ensure that appropriate pan-London multi-agency plans, procedures, training and exercises necessary to address the identified or foreseeable local and wider area hazards are in place and outstandinggaps identified;o improve co-ordination across the capital by supporting cross-boundary working, mutual aid agreements and information sharing;o improve co-ordination with other areas;o review and recommend the core membership of each BRF;o review and agree the groupings of boroughs that comprise the multi-borough tier of emergency planning.Borough Resilience Forum9.17. Borough Resilience Forums will be responsible for multi-agency emergency planning at the local level as determined by borough risks and needs. They will also contribute to emergency planning for London, as directed by the London LRF. They will facilitate co-operation and information sharing between resilience partners at the local authority level and the London LRF.9.18. The LRF will:o agree on joint strategic and policy approaches relating to the area’s emergency preparedness and response;o approve the Risk Register for their area, ensuring it provides a robust basis for planning and records both borough level and relevant London wide risks;o 
o co-ordinate the individual approaches and responsibilities ofeach organisation to ensure that they complement each other and dovetail with partners’ arrangements; ando have regard to the implications of legislation and national initiatives and undertake its activities in accordance with strategic decisions agreed by the London LRF for the Borough Resilience Forum.Multi-borough sub-groups9.19. The multi-borough sub-groups of the LRF will support effective emergency planning by facilitating communication between member boroughs as well as communication between BRFs and the London LRF. The Category 1 responders of the LRF will review and agree from time to time whether the current groupings remain appropriate. These sub-groups will have a key role in driving up performance in emergency planning, ensuring comprehensive and consistent approaches are taken by BRFs in response to risks identified at the London LRF, as well as priority risks identified by member boroughs.9.20. Multi-borough sub-groups will:o establish mechanisms for ensuring a consistent approach to emergency planning at borough level around key and relevant risks identified by the London LRF and BRFs; ando establish mechanisms for ensuring that the London Resilience Forum emergency plan is delivered at the borough level;o 
Duty to assess risk9.21. BRF members, as Category 1 responders, have a duty to assess risk (see also Chapter 4). However, given that many of the risks in London are common to most boroughs, it is recommended that BRFs produce a Borough Risk Register. The requirement for a Community Risk Register will lie with the pan-London LRF and this should be used by BRFs to inform their risk assessment and emergency planning. Equally, the findings of BRF risk assessments will feed into the pan-London risk assessment.The Mayor of London / Greater London Authority (GLA)As the elected leader of London’s regional government, the Mayor of London9.22. plays a full part in supporting the effective implementation of the Act and improving the preparedness of the capital.In particular, the Mayor/GLA9.23. o is closely engaged in high-level discussions and decisions relating to the management of emergencies in London;o (or an appointed deputy) is currently Chair of the LRF;o contributes as necessary to the pre-informing of Londoners about the content of emergency plans, the correct behaviour in an emergency and good practice in terms of preparedness in the home, as part of initiatives organised both locally and at the UK level;o prepares to play a key role in warning and informing the public during an emergency in London; ando takes responsibility for civil protection issues in connection with the management of Parliament and Trafalgar Squares.o 
9.24. The GLA is a Category 1 responder under the Act and as such has the same responsibilities as other Category 1 responders. However, there are a number of duties that the GLA currently takes on in relation to London that are additional to other Category 1 responders.9.25. In particular, the GLA:o is responsible for the secretariat of the LRF;o is responsible for producing and maintaining a pan-London risk assessment; and publishing all or part of it in line with regulations; ando is responsible for the planning and exercising of pan-London emergency plans.o 
 Chapter 10 ScotlandRevision to Emergency PreparednessCivil Contingencies Act Enhancement ProgrammeOctober 2011
Chapter 10 (Scotland) of Emergency Preparedness,Revised Version WHAT THE ACT AND THE REGULATIONS REQUIRE 10.1. The Act applies to a range of bodies in Scotland. However, responsibility for making Regulations and guidance on how responders in Scotland perform their duties under the Act is split between the Scottish Ministers and Ministers of the Crown. While the majority of responders exercise functions which fall within devolved competence (and so are subject to Regulations and guidance made by the Scottish Ministers), there are three responders which exercise functions that are largely reserved on a UK-wide basis. These bodies are subject to this guidance and to the Regulations made by a Minister of the Crown. These bodies are:o the Maritime and Coastguard Agency (included as a Category 1 responder);o the British Transport Police (included as a Category 1 responder); ando the Health and Safety Executive (included as a Category 2 responder).o 
Additionally,	three	industries	among	the	Category	2	responders	are reserved matters:o gas distributors;o electricity distributors; ando telecommunications companies.It is for Ministers of the Crown to issue guidance and Regulations to the companies concerned.10.2. The Regulations and this guidance apply to these Category 1 and 2 responders in much the same way as they apply to Category 1 and 2 responders elsewhere in the UK. The Regulations require these Category 1 and 2 responders to co-operate with other Category 1 and 2 responders in Scotland in the performance of their duties under the Act in much the same way as they are required to co-operate with other Category 1 and 2 responders in England and Wales. In particular, the Regulations require these Category 1 and 2 responders in Scotland to participate in Strategic Co-ordinating Groups (the equivalent of English and Welsh Local Resilience Forums (LRFs) and related activities, including compilation of a Community Risk Register.10.3. Chapters 2 to 8 explain in more detail how each duty under the Act is to be performed by Category 1 and 2 responders in Scotland that fall outside devolved competence.10.4. Regulations and guidance made by the Scottish Ministers detail how Scottish Category 1 and 2 responders, exercising functions within the devolved competence in Scotland, should perform their duties under the Act.10.1. 
10.5. In an emergency affecting Scotland, the lead Government department will be a UK Government department or the Scottish Government depending upon whether it primarily relates to a reserved or devolved matter. Where the emergency involves reserved functions the Scottish Government is very likely to be involved as well since there will almost certainly be consequences in devolved matters.10.6. The Scottish Government or Scotland Office, depending on the subject matter, are represented on the key committees and forums within central government relating to civil protection at both official and Ministerial levels. They work closely with relevant UK departments to ensure Scottish needs are catered for in UK planning and in policy development.10.7. The Scottish Government and UK departments act to ensure that they are aware of, and can play a complementary part in, the response to emergencies that affect Scotland.10.8. Preparing Scotland brings together, in one place, statutory guidance on the implementation of the Regulations, non-statutory guidance on good practice, and the integration of national and local planning for emergencies in respect of devolved functions. It is published at www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2007/06/12094636/1 10.1. 
Scottish bodies over which Scottish Ministers have regulation-making powers in relation to devolved matters:Category 1o local authoritieso police authorities (excluding the British Transport Police)o fire authoritieso Scottish Ambulance Serviceo Scottish health boardso Scottish Environmental Protection AgencyCategory 2o Scottish Watero Common Services Agency of the NHS Scotlando railway companieso airport operatorso harbour authoritiesThe following Category 1 and 2 responders exercise reserved functions in Scotland and regulations are therefore made by UK Ministerso Health and Safety Executiveo Maritime and Coastguard Agencyo British Transport Policeo 
The following Category 2 companies operate in reserved areas and regulations are therefore made by UK Ministerso gas distributorso electricity distributorso telecommunications companieso 
 Chapter 11 WalesRevision to Emergency PreparednessCivil Contingencies Act Enhancement ProgrammeOctober 2011
Chapter 11 (Wales) of Emergency Preparedness, Revised VersionSummaryï The arrangements set out in Part 1 of the Act apply in Wales. However, there are some differences in the requirements which the Regulations place on Category 1 and 2 responders in Wales because of the unique administrative arrangements in Wales (paragraphs 11.1–11.5).ï While functions under Part 1 of the Act have not been transferred to the Welsh Ministers, the Welsh Government has significant interest in this area and is primarily responsible for a number of Category 1 and 2 responders (paragraphs 11.6–11.14).ï Category 1 and 2 responders and other organisations are engaged in response work together with the Welsh Government to address large-scale civil protection issues in Wales. The Wales Resilience Forum (WRF) promotes good communication and the enhancement of emergency planning across agencies and services in Wales by pro- viding a forum for Chief Officers to discuss with Welsh Ministers strategic issues of emergency preparedness. The WRF is not a statutory body nor does it have powers to direct its members, Local Resilience Forums or individual Category 1 or 2 responders as defined under the Act. The WRF provides collective strategic direction to the Wales Capabilities Programme and individual member leadership to the various capabilities sub-groups co-ordinated through a Wales Resilience Partnership Team (paragraphs 11.20–11.32).ï 
 WHAT THE ACT AND THE REGULATIONS REQUIRE 11.1. The duties in Part 1 of the Act apply in the same way in Wales as they do in England.Category 1 and 2 responders in Wales are subject to the Regulations and guidance made by a Minister of the Crown after liaison with the Welsh Ministers. The Welsh Government has a statutory role to play in the introduction of regulations and guidance which relate wholly or partly to Wales. When a Minister of the Crown issues a risk assessment to a Category 1 responder exercising functions in Wales, the Regulations require the Minister of the Crown to consult Welsh Ministers.11.2. In addition, there are some differences in the requirements which the Regulations place on Category 1 and 2 responders in Wales because of the unique administrative arrangements in Wales.Co-operation11.3. As in England, the principal mechanism for co-operation between Category 1 and 2 responders under the Act is the Local Resilience Forums (LRFs). Each LRF considers its own membership and subgroup structures.Risk assessment11.4. In Wales, the detailed risk assessment process is undertaken at the LRF level where Community Risk Registers (CRR) are produced and maintained in the same way as in England. To support this work the Wales Risk Assessment Group (WRAG) brings together the Chairs of the LRF Risk Assessment Groups to facilitate the sharing of best practice and consistency of approach across the four Groups. The WRAG produces a Wales Risk Register on an annual basis which provides a summary of11.1. 
the risks in Wales and which is based on information from the Community Risk Registers and the National Risk Register. 111.5. The Regulations under the Act allow the UK Government to issue risk assessments to Category 1 responders. This information is disseminated, via the Welsh Government to Category 1 responders in Wales. The Welsh Government is then able to issue risk assessments in Wales where it is appropriate for it to do so, subject to the consent of the UK Government.2The role of the Welsh Government11.6. The UK Government and the Welsh Government work together on the development of civil protection policy. Both parties consult with each other and exchange information on civil protection planning and response in a timely and constructive manner. The UK Government consults the Welsh Government as early as possible on any policy proposals (eg. strategic guidance and national frameworks) relating to emergencies which affect, or may affect, Wales.3Devolved responsibility under the Act11.7. Responsibility for local civil protection arrangements under Part 1 of the Act in England and Wales remains, in general, the responsibility of the UK Government. However, functional responsibilities in relation to health, the environment, animal health and welfare, local government, economic development, the fire and rescue authorities, road networks and rail services enable the Welsh Government to engage in aspects of civil protection work and, as a consequence, play an important co-ordinating role. This points to the importance of ensuring good communications between the UK Government and the Welsh Government.1 regulation 14(5)2 regulation 14(3)3 s.16(1-4)
11.8. Part 1 of the Act confers a number of delegated powers on Ministers of the Crown.In particular, the content of the Regulations, orders, directions and guidance made by them under Part 1 of the Act have a significant impact on the preparation for, and handling of, emergencies. The Welsh Government will be involved as soon as possible in the development of Regulations, orders, directions and guidance under Part 1 of the Act where this action directly affects Welsh Category 1 and 2 responders, or where there are significant cross border implications.411.9. Where action is taken by the UK Government under Part 1 of the Act i.e (making regulations or orders, giving directions, issuing guidance or taking enforcement action), which applies to bodies in relation to which the Welsh Government has functions, the UK Government must seek the consent of the Welsh Ministers. In other cases where such action applies to Wales, the UK Government must consult the Welsh Ministers.511.10. Should further functions be devolved to Welsh Ministers, agreement to ‘consult’ will be adjusted to a ‘consent’ agreement where appropriate. The consent of Welsh Ministers is required for the addition, removal and movement of local responders in Wales listed under the Act for which the Welsh Government has responsibility. In cases where local responders in Wales are not within devolved competence, Welsh Ministers will be consulted.11.11. When requesting information from Category 1 and 2 responders in Wales under Section 9(1) of the Act, the UK Government will consider the case for using the Welsh Government to co-ordinate the process of gathering information on a pan-Wales basis. In other cases the UK Government will consider on a case-by-case basis the need to inform the Welsh Government of any request by it for information from:4 s.16(1-4)5 s.16(1-4)
o individual Category 1 and 2 responders in Wales which fall within devolved responsibility (eg. the Welsh Ambulance Services NHS Trust); ando Category 1 and 2 responders in Wales which fall outside devolved responsibility (eg. the police).11.12. Where appropriate, the Welsh Government will work with Category 1 and2 responders in developing pan-Wales plans. In developing plans, the Welsh Government will be able to offer advice to Category 1 and 2 responders in Wales in terms of consistency with pan-Wales and pan-UK plans.Communication with the UK Government11.13. The Welsh Government or Wales Office, depending on the subject matter, is represented on the key committees and forums within UK government relating to civil protection at both official and ministerial levels. They work closely with UK government departments to ensure that UK civil protection policy and planning is tailored to Welsh needs. The UK Government works with the Welsh Government to ensure that it is kept informed and copied in to all information which will assist it in carrying out its responsibilities under the Act.Concordat between the Welsh Government and the UK Government11.14. A Concordat between the Welsh Government and the UK Government provides clarification as to how both sides see the role of the Welsh Government being delivered in practice under the Act. This guidance addresses this issue exhaustively in relation to Part 1 of the Act (“local arrangements for civil protection”) and therefore the Concordat focuses exclusively on Part 2 (“emergency powers”) issues. The Concordat is published on UK Resilience website: www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/ukresilience11.1. 
Co-operation11.15. Generally, the models of operation and representation as set out in Chapter 2 will apply in Wales. But there are differences because Wales has a devolved administration and because of different NHS structures.11.16. The Welsh Government is represented on all four LRFs in Wales in an observer capacity. Local responders should also seek to engage the Welsh Government on wider issues, including notifying the Welsh Government of the appointment of a lead responder in any of the four LRFs.11.17. Welsh NHS organisations are engaged in civil protection at every level. Health Boards and Trusts progress this work individually and collectively through local health emergency planning co-ordinating groups and through the all-Wales Health Emergency Planning Advisory Group. The NHS is also appropriately represented on multi-agency groups including the strategic LRFs. The Health Protection Agency is linked into health emergency planning arrangements in Wales and provides specialist advice during both the planning and response stages. The Welsh Government’s Health and Social Care Department provides health emergency planning policy guidance to the NHS and works with the Department of Health in reviewing and developing health resilience.11.1. 
Information sharing11.18. Where appropriate, the WRF will play a part, in co-ordinating the request for information between Category 1 and 2 responders in Wales. In this way, the WRF can be used as a vehicle for consideration of information sharing issues which affect a range of responders across Wales.Business continuity management11.19. As in England, Category 1 responders in Wales will maintain plans to ensure that they can continue to exercise their functions in the event of an emergency, so far as is reasonably practicable.Welsh civil contingencies frameworkPan-Wales planning11.20. Two discrete types of planning are undertaken at the pan-Wales level. The first type of planning supports emergency preparedness through capability development; the second supports response arrangements at the Wales level.Wales Resilience Forum (WRF)11.21. The principal mechanism for multi-agency co-operation at the Wales level is the WRF.11.22. The WRF has senior representation from the Welsh Government, Cabinet Office, local authorities, the emergency services, the armed forces, the Environment Agency Wales, NHS Wales, the Maritime and Coastguard Agency and the Health and Safety Executive. The forum considers planning and preparation matters and it functions in11.1. 
a similar way to multi - LRF groupings in England but with a higher level of political involvement as a consequence of devolved responsibilities.11.23. The WRF works alongside other elements of the multi-agency civil protection framework at the local and UK government levels. However, this framework is not a hierarchy. LRFs in Wales are not subordinate to the WRF. Communication and co-ordination flow in both directions. The LRFs operate in a similar way to their counterparts in England.Wales Resilience Forum business plan11.24. The strategic framework for capability development in Wales is set out in the Wales Resilience Forum Business Plan which is produced on an annual basis. The primary objective of the Business Plan is to clearly identify the relationship between planning for emergencies at the local, Wales and UK levels and to co-ordinate this work. The Business Plan ensures that co-ordination work at the pan-Wales level adds value to work being undertaken at other levels. At the core of the plan is a Wales Resilience Partnership Team, established to co-ordinate civil protection work in Wales.Local Resilience Forums11.25. As in England, the Act necessitated a restructuring of joint-agency planning in Wales resulting in the creation of LRFs in South Wales, Gwent, North Wales and Dyfed-Powys Police Force areas. The LRFs are supported by co-ordinating groups, sub-groups or task and finish groups established to develop various capabilities or set specific targets in strengthening local resilience through multi-agency collaboration.11.1. 
Joint Emergency Services Group11.26. The Joint Emergency Services Group brings together all the emergency services and armed forces in Wales to consider how to meet their duties collectively under the Act, and how to take forward their contribution to civil protection in Wales. The group has jointly funded the post of an Emergency Services Civil Contingencies Co-ordinator for Wales, to co-ordinate the work of the emergency services in all aspects of civil protection.Welsh Borders Resilience Group11.27. To facilitate co-operation and information sharing between Wales and the border areas of England, a group has been formed which brings together the Welsh Government with the Department for Communities and Local Government, Resilience Emergency Division (DCLG (RED)). The group meets on a regular basis to discuss issues of mutual interest in civil contingencies and to help foster links at both the regional and local levels.Welsh Government Civil Contingencies Group11.28. In recognition of its functional responsibilities and its territorial role, the Welsh Government has adopted a collegiate approach to civil protection in Wales. The Welsh Government has established a Civil Contingencies Group (CCG), led by a Director-General, dedicated to supporting multi-agency co-operation in Wales and engaging with the UK Government on all issues relating to civil protection and emergency preparedness. This CCG is supplemented by a wide variety of subject matter experts, based on the Welsh Government’s functional responsibilities, who support planning and response arrangements in Wales. For example, such support is provided by the Health Emergency Planning Unit and specialists in environmental11.1. 
health, health, environmental science, animal health, and flood and coastal erosion risk management. This approach ensures that the Welsh Government is well placed to support Category 1 responders on civil protection matters and on specific resilience issues.Welsh Government Emergencies Branch11.29. The Welsh Government’s Emergencies Branch works in partnership with Category 1 and 2 responders and other organisations engaged in civil protection in Wales. The Branch fosters and maintains links with emergency planners in local authorities, emergency services and utilities companies, in order to co-ordinate civil protection planning in Wales. It also maintains links with UK Government Departments and other devolved administrations to share best practice and undertake joint-working.11.30. To maintain the Welsh Government’s co-ordination role the Branch provides the secretariat support to the Wales Resilience Forum, the Wales Resilience Partnership Team and various pan-Wales sub-groups.11.1. 
 Chapter 12 Northern IrelandRevision to Emergency PreparednessCivil Contingencies Act Enhancement ProgrammeOctober 2011
Chapter 12 (Northern Ireland) of Emergency Preparedness, Revised Version
 WHAT THE ACT AND THE REGULATIONS REQUIRE 12.1. The duties in the Act apply only to a limited number of organisations which deliver functions that are not transferred or which were not transferred at the time the Civil Contingencies Act 2004 was made. These organisations are:o the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) (included as a Category 1 responder);o the Maritime and Coastguard Agency (MCA) (included as a Category 1 responder); ando telecommunications operators (included as Category 2 responders).o 
12.2. As these organisations do not represent the full spectrum of response agencies in Northern Ireland, the Regulations treat these organisations in a slightly different way. The following principles apply to those Category 1 and 2 responders which operate in Northern Ireland:o The Regulations which relate to how individual Category 1 and2 responders should perform their duties apply to Category 1 and 2 responders in Northern Ireland in the usual way, but with some adjustments for the Northern Ireland situation.o The provisions which rely on bilateral co-operation between Category 1 and 2 responders apply to Northern Ireland.o The provisions in the Regulations relating to the Local Resilience Forum and its activities, including the production of a Community Risk Register, do not apply to Northern Ireland.o Category 1 responders in Northern Ireland should have regardto the activities of other bodies in Northern Ireland that are engaged in civil protection (including Northern Ireland departments, the Northern Ireland Office, the Northern Ireland Ambulance Serviceand relevant utilities) and, where appropriate, may rely on or adopt those activities.2o Category 1 responders in Northern Ireland may delegate their functions to, or exercise their functions jointly with, other bodies in Northern Ireland who are engaged in civil protection.1 regulation 62 regulation 57, 58
o	The Northern Ireland Department of Justice has the full rangeof Ministerial responsibilities in relation to the police’s delivery of its duties under the CCA in relation to events or situations which threaten serious damage to human welfare and/or which threaten3serious damage to the environment.  This Guidance therefore appliesto the PSNI only in relation to emergencies arising from war or terrorism threatening serious damage to the United Kingdom. The Department of Justice in Northern Ireland may issue separate guidance for the PSNI in respect of other emergencies to which the Act applies.12.3. In practice, the PSNI, MCA and telecommunications operators in Northern Ireland undertake their individual and co-operative duties under the Act, but relate to the other public service bodies listed in the Regulations 4 in line with the arrangements in the Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Framework, and by participating in Northern Ireland co-operation, co-ordination and crisis management machinery.12.4. The Northern Ireland organisations have a reciprocal requirement under the Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Framework to co-operate with the PSNI, MCA and telecommunications operators in the discharge of their duties under the Act.12.5. Chapters 2 to 8 explain in more detail how each duty under the Act is to be performed by Category 1 and 2 responders in Northern Ireland.3 See sections 1(4A), 2(6) to (9) and 3(6) CCA as amended by the Northern Ireland Act 1998 (Devolution of Policing and Justice Functions) Order 2010, Schedule 3, paragraphs 94 to 977.4 regulation 57
Civil contingencies in Northern Ireland12.6. Civil contingencies are largely a devolved matter with responsibilities lying with Northern Ireland government departments. Overall policy and strategy co-ordination falls to the Office of the First Minister and Deputy First Minister (OFMDFM). The Northern Ireland Executive has oversight of civil contingencies arrangements for transferred functions.12.7. The Northern Ireland Office has responsibility for national security matters. It maintains crisis management arrangements to govern the strategic response to such emergencies.12.8. The lead government department principle applies in Northern Ireland where the lead Northern Ireland department is the department with day-to-day policy responsibility for the subject in question.12.9. In Northern Ireland many functions which are delivered elsewhere in the UK by local authorities are delivered directly by Northern Ireland departments, or by their agencies or non-departmental public bodies (NDPBs). This means that some activities which in Great Britain are covered by duties under the Act are in Northern Ireland carried out under lead department arrangements.12.10. Lead departments in Northern Ireland are broadly similar to those at the UK level in terms of roles and responsibilities. Details of lead departments can be found www. cabinetoffice.gov.uk/ukresilience. Information on Northern Ireland arrangements can be found in A Guide to Emergency Planning Arrangements in Northern Ireland www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/aguidetoemergencyplanningarrangements.pdf12.1. 
12.11. The Northern Ireland devolved administration or Northern Ireland Office (NIO), depending on the subject matter, is represented on the key committees and forums within UK central government relating to civil protection at both official and Ministerial levels. They work closely with UK departments to ensure Northern Ireland needs are catered for in UK planning and policy development.12.12. In an emergency affecting Northern Ireland, the devolved administration will be involved because of its territorial role and its responsibilities for impact management, although lead responsibility will depend on the nature of the emergency and the devolution settlement.The Civil Contingencies Policy Branch12.13. The Civil Contingencies Policy Branch (CCPB) is located within the OFMDFM. Its role is to:o co-ordinate information and advice to the First Minister and Deputy First Minister and the Executive on civil contingencies planningand policy;o promote civil contingencies preparedness across NI departments through provision of information and guidance and maintenance of effective civil contingencies policies;o facilitate co-ordination of contingencies preparedness across NI departments and the wider public sector when issues are cross-cutting;o maintain the NI Central Crisis Management Arrangements (see Chapter 12 in Emergency Response and Recovery).12.14. The CCPB provides information and expertise to planners within organisations and facilitates co-ordination of planning between organisations through formal and informal structures and dialogue. Its customers are primarily government12.1. 
departments and agencies but the emergency services and other public service bodies are also engaged. The CCPB also represents Northern Ireland interests in policy discussions at UK and international levels.Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Framework12.15. The Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Framework sets out the principles of policy and practice which will be adhered to by Northern Ireland public service organisations in their civil contingencies activities. The principles in the Framework are derived from existing Northern Ireland arrangements and structures and from the underlying principles of the Act and other UK policies. The Framework is supported by guidance documents, including A Guide to Emergency Planning Arrangements in Northern Ireland www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/aguidetoemergencyplanningarrangements.pdf  and A Guide to Risk Assessment in Northern Ireland www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/guide_to_ risk_assessment_in_northern_ireland_-_january_2010-2.pdf12.16. The Framework requires Northern Ireland public service organisations to co-operate with those organisations in Northern Ireland which have duties under Part 1 of the Act.The Civil Contingencies Group, Northern Ireland12.17. The Civil Contingencies Group, Northern Ireland (CCG(NI)) is a pan-Northern Ireland multi-agency forum for the development, discussion and agreement of civil protection policy for the Northern Ireland public services. In addition to its policy role, the CCG(NI) supports strategic co-ordination of emergencies as part of the Northern Ireland Central Crisis Management Arrangements in a serious or catastrophic emergency.12.1. 
12.18. The CCG(NI) meets on a regular basis (at least two to three times per year) to review strategic issues. The CCG(NI) may also establish subgroups or working groups to deal with development of policy and good practice guidance on particular topics or areas of concern.12.19. The specific functions of the CCG(NI) are to:o undertake periodic review of civil protection policy in government departments and public bodies in Northern Irelandas appropriate, and will seek and gain agreement on policy principles and standards;o maintain liaison among government departments, theemergency services, other key public service bodies and District Councils;o disseminate information to and within member organisations on civil protection policy, current issues and risks and the response to emergencies; and will provide briefing on particular issuesor emergencies;o collect and collate the information necessary to inform policy development or the response to emergencies and provide briefing on particular issues or emergencies;o establish standing or ad hoc sub-groups or working groups to develop policy for, or report on, particular issues or functions; ando discuss and co-ordinate the non-emergency service responses to emergencies which require a multi-agency strategic approach but which do not require the attention of Permanent Secretaries or Ministers.o 
12.20. The group is chaired by a senior official from the OFMDFM. Its membership includes senior representatives from the bodies listed in Box 12.1.Box 12.1: membership of the CCG(NI)CCG(NI)ï Civil Contingencies Policy Branch(CCPB)ï Northern Ireland Fire and RescueServiceï 12 Northern Ireland departmentsï Local Government EmergencyManagement Group (LGEMG)ï Northern Ireland Office (NIO)ï Maritime and CoastguardAgency (MCA)ï Executive Information Serviceï Police Service of NorthernIreland (PSNI)ï Food Standards AgencyNorthern Irelandï Northern Ireland Ambulance Service12.21. As well as representing their immediate organisations, members also represent the interests of associated regional, sub-regional and local public service organisations.12.22. Various other co-ordination arrangements exist for planning and responding to specific situations. These are set up as needed by the key organisations involved. There are, for example, groups for flooding, overseas nuclear accidents and chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear issues.Local arrangements12.23. Co-ordination at the local level may be facilitated by a range of organisations, depending on the nature and outcome of particular emergencies. The PSNI and the district councils have key roles to play in co-ordination at local level.12.1. 
Cross-border arrangements12.24. At local level, the emergency services have arrangements for co-ordinating the response to incidents at, or near, the border. Other arrangements are in place for co-ordinating information and efforts in areas such as public health emergencies and the response to nuclear accidents. These arrangements supplement national- level arrangements for co-ordination and co-operation through agencies such as the European Union.Further information12.25. Further information can be found in the CCPB document A Guide to Emergency Planning Arrangements in Northern Ireland. This, and other documents on civil contingencies arrangements mentioned in this chapter, are available from the CCPB website.www. ofmdfmni.gov.uk/index/making-government-work/civilcontingencies.htm12.1. 
 Chapter 13 Support and challengeRevision to Emergency PreparednessCivil Contingencies Act Enhancement ProgrammeMarch 2012
Chapter 13 (Support and challenge) of Emergency Preparedness, Revised VersionPAGE 2
 WHAT THE ACT AND THE REGULATIONS REQUIRE Monitoring by the Government and by local responders13.1. The Act gives a Minister 1 powers to require:o the provision of information about actions taken by a Category 1 or 2 responder in the performance of its Part 1 duties 2; ando an explanation as to why the responder has not taken action to comply with its duties under Part 1 of the Act.3Box 13.1: How monitoring powers might be usedThe Government would be most likely to use its monitoring powers to probe perceived systemic failures in the operation of the Act. For example, if a particular class of Category 2 responder is not sharing information about its local sectoral arrangements, Category 1 responders would be likely to bring this to the attention of their representative bodies. Those representative bodies would then pass this concern on to the Government.The Government might then use these powers to request from all Category 1 and 2 responders in that particular sector details of the nature and volume of the information requests they had received under the Act, and how they had responded. The material provided would allow the Government to judge whether the sector was avoiding its obligations, or whether it was being put under unreasonable pressure, or whether there was some form of blockage in the system that could be removed. The Government could then take action, from adjusting the guidance so as to change expectations through to taking action in the courts
1 ‘Minister of the Crown’ or ‘Minister’ refers to the most appropriate Minister in the given situation.2 S 9(1)(a)3 S 9(1)(b)
PAGE 3
13.2. The Government relies on current good practice in performance management and on established audit and regulatory bodies across the Category 1 and 2 organisations to assess performance.13.3. However, where the Government has reason in a particular case to require more information about responder compliance with the duties, and to seek an explanation for non-compliance, these monitoring powers may be used.13.4. The powers will usually be exercised by the Minister with lead responsibility for civil contingencies. However, all proposals to exercise these powers would be developed in close collaboration with relevant lead government departments, and the Devolved Administrations, and agreed between departments and administrations with an interest.The role of Ministers in Scotland and Northern Ireland13.5. The Act 4 gives Scottish Ministers powers to require:o the provision of information about actions taken by Scottish Category 1 or 2 responders 5 in the performance of its Part 1 duties; ando an explanation as to why the responder has not taken action to comply with its duties under Part 1 of the Act.13.6. The Act 6 gives the Northern Ireland Department of Justice powers to require:o the provision of information about actions taken by the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) 7 in the performance of its Part 1 duties in relation to its devolved functions ; and4 S 115 Sch1 p 2 & 46 S 9 as amended by the Northern Ireland Act 1998 (Devolution of Policing and Justice Functions) Order 2010.7 The Act assigns responder status to the Chief Constable.
o an explanation as to why the responder has not taken action to comply with its duties under Part 1 of the Act in relation to its devolved functions.13.7. Powers in relation to non-devolved functions of the PSNI would be exercised by a Minister of the Crown.Local arrangements for assurance and accountability13.8. Regulations require that specific and generic emergency plans drawn up by Category 1 organisations include provisions to test and exercise those plans.813.9. The government relies on:o all Category 1 responders, as members of the Local Resilience Forum (LRF), taking ownership and responsibility for their performance and supporting their members and partners. By ensuring that:ï responders fulfil their roles within this framework and, where appropriate, issues are escalated or de-escalated; andï members are committed to ensuring the partnership is strong and they can promote high consistent standards and make effective, efficient use of resources.o current good practice in performance management within responders and forums;o locally driven reviews of plans and risk assessments to provide assurance as part of the Big Society agenda and Localism Bill 9 ; ando established audit and regulatory bodies across the Category 1 and 2 organisations to assess performance.8 Reg 259 Regulations also require Category 1 responders to publish community risk registers. It is likely that many responders will be subject to locally driven accountability through the localism agenda, which empowers communities to take decisions about their area and the delivery of public services
13.10. A forum could become aware of its collective, corporate strengths and weaknesses, or those of an organisation, through communication from organisations, whistle-blowers, regulators, government departments and agencies, the media, inquiries, de-briefs, or complaints from members of the public.13.11. Category 1 and 2 responders need to assure themselves that their arrangements and plans are robust. Those that have legal responsibilities (under the Civil Contingencies Act and other legislation) need to be constantly vigilant to ensure that they are meeting their responsibilities.13.12. Responders should ensure their systems, plans and processes in relation to emergency preparedness are fit for purpose. Periodic reviews of these, using the suggested methods and guidance in paragraphs 13.13 - 13.14 will help them identify their strengths and weaknesses and provide external assurance, where required, to such bodies as:o Partners in the wider resilience community ;o Peer groups;o Local resilience forums;o Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG) Resilience and Emergencies Division (DCLG RED);o Scottish Government;o Welsh Government ;o Northern Ireland Executive;o Regulators and inspectorates;o Cabinet Office Civil Contingencies Secretariat; ando The local community.o 
13.13. Responders work together identifying strengths and weaknesses to support and challenge each other within local resilience forums or the wider resilience community to:o develop knowledge, skills, attributes and capacity;o identify capability gaps or emerging issues; ando resolve issues by sharing lessons, focusing on improvements and improving transparency to demonstrate improvements in relation to local assessments. ASSESSMENT TOOLS	13.14. Public and private sector organisations have a clear understanding of their business, what they want to achieve, how to achieve it and whether they are achieving it. The organisation, its managers and its staff must understand what is expected of them and what they can expect of others in all areas of their work. Systems and processes which help achieve this, and external validation and assurance, include:o business plans;o risk assessment assurance processes;o internal audit and quality assurance systems;o performance and line management activities;o periodic testing and exercising;o peer review;o plan validation;o joint exercising of plans (including debriefing);PAGE 7
o local authority scrutiny powers (LA scrutiny powers enable local councillors to represent the views of citizens on local services).o learning lessons from exercises and incidents;o Civil Protection Self Assessment Tools (CPSAT), a voluntary online tool designed to help responders monitor and assess how they deliver their responsibilities for civil contingencies in their areas;o Expectation Set and Indicators of Good Practice for Category 1and 2 responders aims to clarify what is expected of Category 1 and 2 responders in England and Wales in relation to:ï the duties within the Civil Contingencies Act 2004; 10ï the associated Contingency Planning Regulations 2005 (Regulations) and guidance; 11ï the National Resilience Capabilities Programme (which is the core framework through which the government is seeking to build resilience across all parts of the United Kingdom; andï Emergency Response and Recovery http://www.cabinetoffice. gov.uk/content/emergency-response-and-recovery, which aims to establish good practice based on lessons identified from responding to and recovering from emergencies, both in the UK and internationally. It accompanies Emergency Preparedness which provides guidance on how to implement the CCA regime; and
10 www.statutelaw.gov.uk provides details.11 See above
PAGE 8
o The Role of LRFs: A Reference Document highlights some of the key aspects that demonstrate robust compliance with the duties under the CCA and Regulations. The principal aim of this document is to encourage and support LRFs in learning and continuous development, taking forward their capabilities in civil contingencies, emergency preparedness and elements of response and recovery. It is for use individually and collectively by organisations that constitute an LRF orcontribute to its work. Assurance agencies may also use this document in guiding their assessments of engagement among local agencies in their collective LRF responsibilities and in supporting the agencies’ effortsto manage and develop their individual and collective effectiveness.13.15. Different arrangements apply in Northern Ireland and Scotland; details on the Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Framework can be found on: http://www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/ ni_civil_contingencies_framework_-_refreshed_september_2011-2.pdf and for Scotland at http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2007/06/12094636/3Sharing the load13.16. The Civil Contingencies Act also empowers responders to:o jointly discharge duties;o identify a lead responder; and/oro delegate delivery of their responsibilities to another organisation.o 
13.17. However, when discharging or delegating duties, the partners involved must determine the arrangements that are best suited to their local circumstances and service users needs. Those that opt for these approaches still retain overall responsibility for their duties under the Act. They can delegate but not abdicate (Chapter 2 of Emergency Preparedness: Co-operation explains this in further detail). They must ensure they are effectively represented at LRFs. It is, therefore, vital that when jointly discharging or delegating functions, organisations:o actively engage in resilience worko actively support and challenge each othero ensure high performance standardsSupport from Local Resilience Forums13.18. Local Resilience Forums are not legal entities and the duties rest with responders.This does not mean that a forum and its members are powerless to intervene to develop its members’ performance. A forum’s strength rests in the co-operative and team working nature of the relationships between organisations and the trust that the members have built between them. Collectively, forums can give leadership and bring considerable peer pressure and support to bear.13.19. The forums can help their member organisations to:o develop knowledge, skills, attributes and capacity;o share best practice;o identify issues;o resolve issues;o support the compilation of the community risk register;o plan for emergencies;o 
o develop systematic, planned and co-ordinated approaches to delivering resilience functions;o work beyond the LRF boundary; ando support the preparation of multi-agency plans.13.20. They can support their members by encouraging and fostering team-working, co-operation, and bi-lateral arrangements between the member organisations. Forums can also help to broker bi-lateral arrangements.Peer challenge13.21. Peer review involves the evaluation of an organisation or individual’s work by others working in the same field. Peer challenge takes this a step further. Formally challenging an individual or organisation, can damage relationships, impede co-operation and/or result in those who are challenged becoming defensive or disengaged. Handling of the approach should be proportionate and diplomatic.13.22. It is important to identify whether the difficulty lies with the organisation or with the individual. For example, an organisation’s representative may not have the seniority, or the support from the organisation’s senior management, to commit resources or direct strategy. (Chapter 5, Emergency Preparedness, provides guidance on senior management engagement). Some responders may need help in engaging their senior managers.13.1. 

13.23. 13.2413.25.13.26.
When earlier attempts to support an organisation have been rebuffed, a Local Resilience Forum may need to challenge rather than support that organisation. However, representatives of the LRF must take care to ensure that their approach is not counter-productive; an approach based on influencing and persuading is likely to be more effective than one based on a command and control approach as the relationship is essentially one of co-operation. See paragraphs 13.24 and13.25 for information about escalating issues.Formally requesting action on behalf of the LRFSometimes a more formal approach is needed, particularly when urgent action is needed to resolve issues and when less formal support and challenge has failed. The members of the LRF can do this collectively through the chair or secretariat.If a formal approach, usually in written form outlining what action is required and by when, proves necessary, the LRF members will set a deadline for action to be taken and monitor the response to the request and the response’s impact. This will inform the next steps and the decision on whether it needs to de-escalate the issue, intervene further, or escalate the issue.Triggers for escalating and de-escalating issuesIt is important that issues are addressed at the most appropriate level. All members of the resilience community must take responsibility for ensuring that an issue is referred to the appropriate person, team or organisation in a timely proportionate manner.
Support from Department of Communities and Local Government Resilience and Emergencies Division (DCLG RED) in England13.27. The Resilience and Emergencies Division helps responders identify for themselves the risks they face, mitigate those risks, and manage the impact of risks that materialise, including through liaison with central government departments. See Chapter 16: Collaboration and Cooperation between Local Resilience Forums in England13.28. The Resilience and Emergencies Division will:o act as a critical friend, question rationales, suggest alternatives, share good practice and support local planning activities;o provide a support mechanism – helping local partners develop an appropriate response capability, brokering advance mutual aid agreements between areas;o make links between local responders and the lead government departments;o supporting cross boundary strategies, protocols and procedures whilst ensuring a close fit with both the needs of Government in a national emergency and the needs of the local responders; ando support local and national exercising - helping to ensure lessons learnt are effectively shared across the relevant partnership.o 
Support from Welsh Government Resilience Team in Wales13.29. The Welsh Government Resilience Team fulfils a similar role in Wales to that undertaken by DCLG RED in England. Additionally, the team:o supports local and cross-LRF activities and leads on all-Wales co-ordination;o acts as a link between LRFs through representation on the forums and their supporting co-ordinating groups;o facilitates all-Wales capabilities groups which bring together the relevant LRF sub-group Chairs;o works in conjunction with the joint emergencies services groups and LRFs to delivery pan-Wales training and exercising; ando acts as a link with Cabinet Office, other Whitehall departments and other devolved administrations.Role of the regulators and inspectorates13.30. In addition to the self monitoring processes outlined within this guidance, the Government relies upon regulatory and inspectorate bodies across the range of responder organisations to support self assessment in relation to responders meeting their responsibilities under the Act. Regulators have an important role to play and can help responders in a number of ways through:o undertaking governance or diagnostic interventions to highlight organisational strengths and weaknesses and follow up as necessary;o reducing the bureaucratic burden on responders by accepting evidence from self assessment and peer reviews as part of their inspection regimes;o 
o highlighting and validating good practice for organisations to build upon;o sharing knowledge and good practice within and between organisations;o contribute to Government work in producing self assessment tools and guidance.13.31. Outputs from regulatory reviews or inspections can provide responders with a rich source of information upon which to produce and implement plans to improve and fill identified capability gaps.13.32. Bodies which oversee performance of public service provision by Category 2 responders operating under license arrangements such as Ofcom for the telecommunications industry or Ofwat for the water industry, impose sector specific standards relating to the provision of services and are responsible for monitoring performance and taking remedial action when standards fall below expectations.Role of the national tier13.33. The Government has established a framework to support national emergency planning in a linked and structured way. This is now well established and embedded. Parliamentary scrutiny of the activities of the Government is ongoing and the National Audit Office audits departmental accounts and reports to Parliament. The Cabinet Office Civil Contingencies Secretariat provides cross-cutting oversight and co-ordination of resilience activity at the national level. All the current duties of Category 1 and 2 responders are reflected and shadowed by activity co-ordinated by the Cabinet Office Civil Contingencies Secretariat (CCS) at the national level. Similar activity is undertaken in lead government departments. This activity and attendant responsibilities are driven and/or monitored via:13.27. 
o the National Resilience Capabilities Programme (NRCP) (see paragraph 13.34);o the Lead Government Departments Expected Capabilities, this amplifies guidance in CONOPs and The Lead Government Departmentand its role – Guidance and Best Practice – https://update.cabinetoffice.gov. uk/sites/default/files/resources/lead-government-departments-role.pdfo Central Government’s Concept of Operations (CONOPs);o National Capabilities Survey;o the Resilience sub-committee of the National Security Council.NSC oversees all aspects of the UK’s security. Government departments with key security related functions are all represented on the National Security Council. NSC (THRC) is a Ministerial sub-committee of NSC. Its remit is to consider threats, hazards, resilience and contingencies strategy; ando Ministerial departments are required to develop and publish business plans, which show how they will deliver their services and objectives. They are judged against their delivery of these and ministers are required to report publicly on them.13.34. The cross-Government National Resilience Capabilities Programme is co-ordinated by the Cabinet Office. It brings together work stream lead departments. Each of these departments has particular responsibility for one or more aspects of emergency response at the national level, for example the Department of Health has responsibility for the national tier of emergency response in the event of pandemic flu. To assess the level of preparedness and capability nationally, the programme uses the National Resilience Planning Assumptions (NRPAs) which set out the baseline capability necessary to respond to, and recover from, specific risks as set out in the annually updated National Risk Assessment (NRA).13.27. 
 MINISTERIAL POWERS AND ACCOUNTABILITY	13.35. All Secretaries of State are accountable to Parliament for the performance of their department and may be called to account by the relevant Select Committees. There is a constitutional expectation that ministers will co-operate across government. Resilience activity is co-ordinated across Government by NSC (THRC)(R). This is shadowed by an officials committee NSC (THRC)(R)(O).13.36. The aim of NSC (THRC)(R) is to develop the resilience of the UK to withstand disruptive events (both malicious threats and non-malicious hazards), ensuring that (inter alia):o government at all levels identifies and assesses emerging short/medium term risks and vulnerabilities;o specific contingency capabilities are in place where specific risks are in sight; ando there is rigorous evaluation of UK resilience. ENFORCEMENT	Enforcement under the Civil Contingencies Act 2004 via Category 1 and 2 responders13.37. A Category 1 or 2 responder may itself take court action, in respect of a failure by another responder body to comply with its main duties under the Act.12 Examples of the cause for such an action might be where one responder is unreasonably:o withholding information from another; oro failing to be represented at an LRF meeting.
12 S 10(1)(b)–(c) and S 11(1)(b)-(c)
PAGE 17
13.38. It is not anticipated that these powers will be used frequently. Where they are used, the Act also gives the High Court or the Court of Session powers to grant any relief or make any order as it thinks appropriate.13Enforcement by Ministers13.39. In a particular case, the Government may not be satisfied with the information received from a Category 1 or 2 responder, about the performance of its duties, or with the explanation given for non compliance. In these circumstances, the Minister may choose to take enforcement proceedings in the High Court or Court of Session.1413.40. As with the powers to monitor performance, court proceedings will usually be taken by the Minister with lead responsibility for civil contingencies. However, all proposals to do so would be developed in close collaboration with relevant lead government departments and the Devolved Administrations and agreed between departments and administrations with an interest.Enforcement under other legislation13.41. Other resilience legislation is monitored and enforced under the terms of that legislation. See Chapter 19 on The Fit with Other Legislation.Liaison with the Devolved Administrations13.42. The Act requires a Minister of the Crown to consult Welsh Ministers before making any legislation, issuing any guidance, issuing any direction or bringingany proceedings in relation to a Category 1 or 2 responder in Wales.15 The Actalso requires a Minister of the Crown to obtain the consent of Welsh Ministers
13 S 10(2) and S 11(2)14 S 10(1)(a) and S 11 (1)(a)15 S 16(1)
PAGE 18
before undertaking such action in relation to a Category 1 or 2 responder which has functions that are devolved.16
13.4313.44.13.45.
The Act requires a Minister of the Crown to consult the Scottish Ministers when making legislation in relation to Category 1 or 2 responders in Scotland.The Act requires a Minister of the Crown to consult the Northern Ireland Department of Justice when making regulations or an order in relation to the PSNI. A Minister of the Crown may only make regulations in relation to the non-devolved functions of the PSNI. Where the Department of Justice in Northern Ireland proposes to make regulations or an order in relation to the devolved functions of the PSNI, the Act requires that it consult a Minister of the Crown.Ministers of the Crown will consult the Devolved Administrations when considering monitoring and enforcement action.

16 S 16(2)-(4)
PAGE 19
 Chapter 14The Role of the Voluntary SectorRevision to Emergency PreparednessCivil Contingencies Act Enhancement ProgrammeOctober 2011
Chapter 14 (The Role of the Voluntary Sector) ofEmergency Preparedness, Revised VersionSummaryï The voluntary sector has an important role to play in supporting the statutory services in the planning, response and recovery phases of most emergencies (paragraph 14.1).ï Category 1 responders who include the voluntary sector in their local planning arrangements will make the overall response more accessible and effective throughout the community. This is not just good practice: the Regulations require Category 1 responders to have regard to the contribution of the voluntary sector. This includes considering how the voluntary sector can be involved at every stage, including training and exercising to respond to emergencies (paragraphs 14.4-14.8).ï There are four models suggested for Category 1 responders to follow when engaging the voluntary sector effectively in order to discharge their duties at the local level (paragraphs 14.11-14.15).ï Responders should be aware of the extent and range of services the voluntary sector can offer before making plans to involve them (paragraphs 14.16-14.18).ï It is essential that volunteers from the voluntary sector are trained and that they are supported by the responding organisations they are helping (paragraphs 14.24-14.26).ï The way Category 1 and 2 responders work with the voluntary sector at the local level is supported by consistent arrangements at other levels (paragraphs 14.27-14.30).PAGE 2
 WHAT THE ACT AND THE REGULATIONS REQUIRE 14.1. In some circumstances, emergencies can overstretch the resources of the emergency services, local authorities and other local responders during the response and recovery phases of an emergency. The value of involving the voluntary sector at every stage in order to provide additional support has been demonstrated on many occasions. The delivery of their services, and their role as a link between communities and Category 1 responders, may also enable them to support the development of community resilience activities.14.2. The voluntary sector in the United Kingdom is very large and diverse. The skills and expertise available from the voluntary sector vary from place to place. Experience shows that advance planning enables voluntary sector activity to be more integrated and effective.14.3. The Regulations require Category 1 responders to have regard to the activities of certain voluntary organisations in the course of carrying out their emergencyand business continuity planning duties.1  Category 1 responders must haveregard to those voluntary sector bodies which carry out activities in the geographical area 2 for which the responder is responsible. Further explanation of the term ‘have regard to’ can be found in paragraphs 14.5 and 14.6.14.4. Voluntary sector organisations are those bodies whose activities are carried out not for profit and which are not public authorities or local authorities. Under the Regulations, they become relevant voluntary organisations if they carry on any activities for the purpose of preventing emergencies, reducing, controlling or mitigating the effects of emergencies, or taking other action in connection with emergencies.3 This is a broad definition that will capture charities and other voluntary organisations.14.1. 
1 regulation 23(1)2 Details of the devolved areas and England can be found in Chapter 2 Cooperation.3 regulation 23(2)
PAGE 3
14.5. This does not mean that Category 1 responders should work only with those voluntary sector organisations established solely for the purpose of working in the field of civil protection. Few voluntary sector bodies are established for the sole purpose of responding to emergencies. Most will have a partial interest tangential to their main business, for example, this may include faith organisations. Nevertheless, these voluntary sector organisations must be factored into local civil protection arrangements where they may have a contribution to make or a role to play in planning for, or responding to, or recovery from, an emergency.14.6. This obligation is intended to ensure that Category 1 responders actively consider and engage the voluntary sector during the planning process, rather than at the end or not at all. As such, simply sending copies of plans to voluntary organisations is not sufficient, nor is including voluntary organisations in plans without consulting them. Instead, Category 1 responders must consider and discuss with relevant voluntary organisations, the capabilities that those organisations within their area have to offer, and whether those capabilities should be built into response and recovery plans. Agreements reached should be captured in plans and signed off by all affected parties.14.7. The requirement to have regard to the activities of relevant voluntary sector organisations covers both emergency plans and business continuity plans (BCPs). In the case of the former, voluntary sector capabilities such as search and rescue or humanitarian support may be built into the response arrangements agreed between the statutory services. In the case of the latter, the voluntary sector may, in the course of everyday business, already deliver certain services on behalf of a statutory provider that would need to be maintained (such as ‘meals on wheels’). In addition, certain BCPs may use voluntary organisations to backfill functions that would be undermined by the diversion of resources to deal with the direct consequences of an emergency or major incident. For example, with14.1. 
ambulances diverted to the scene of a large emergency, an ambulance trust might have an agreement with the local St John Ambulance (paragraph 14.17) for the organisation to carry out routine patient collection. However, responders should be aware that the voluntary sector may need more support during a sustained response. This should be considered when planning for longer term responses such as swine flu.
14.8. 14.9. 4 s. 4
The Act also requires local authorities to provide business continuity advice to those voluntary sector bodies which it considers to be appropriate.4 Advice on how to discharge this requirement is set out in Chapter 8. Nevertheless, local authorities may find it useful to consider how their engagement of the voluntary sector in the planning process might dovetail with work to meet that specific requirement.Engaging the voluntary sector at the local levelBy establishing the appropriate organisational framework, the voluntary sector can be properly factored into the planning process. This will ensure that the voluntary sector have the capability to carry out duties and are not used to replace statutory authorities and statutorily funded capabilities. Sound co-operation through
the Local Resilience Forum (LRF) processes and directly with individual Category 1 responders should be based on an agreed framework. This structure needs to suit local circumstances, be understood by all concerned and have clearly identified points of contact. These contact arrangements must be kept up to date by regular formal and informal dialogue between each of the participants at local level.14.10. There are several different models that can be applied at the local level. None is mandatory, but these models, either individually or in combination, can help Category 1 responders to discharge their duties under the Act.Model 1: Engagement through the LRF14.11. At the local level, each LRF should consider including a voluntary sector representative. The representative should be able to speak on behalf of all the major voluntary organisations operating in the area, as well as any smaller, local voluntary organisations.Model 2: Establishing a voluntary sector subgroup of the LRF14.12. Setting up a voluntary sector co-ordinating group at local level can help co- operation between the statutory services and local voluntary organisations. A representative from the local authority civil contingencies team will normally chair such a group. The group can bring together representatives from the voluntary sector organisations with an interest in civil protection which are active in the LRF area. The principal advantage of such a group is that it should enable all Category 1 responders to have a good understanding of the strengths and limitations of local voluntary sector organisations, and to consider including them in their planning to an extent that is realistic.14.1. 
Model 3: Bilateral links on the basis of functions14.13. One method of involving voluntary organisations in civil contingency planning is to group them where appropriate on the basis of their functions, and link them with the Category 1 responder responsible for those functions. This functional grouping can clarify the contributions which individual voluntary organisations can make. It can prevent duplicated demands on their services and enable Category 1 responders and voluntary organisations to make the best use of the voluntary contribution. Voluntary organisations can also be involved in functional planning and response matters by giving them representation at working groups associated with LRFs and wider groupings.14.14. In some cases, there will be one Category 1 responder and one voluntary organisation linked to a specific function, for example, the Maritime and Coastguard Agency (MCA) and the Royal National Lifeboat Institution (RNLI). In other cases, where a voluntary organisation performs a range of functions, it would need to be associated with more than one Category 1 responder and represented on all the relevant functional groups. In all cases, local civil protection personnel should be fully aware of the level of voluntary sector support available and the arrangements for its provision in a co-ordinated manner.Model 4: Bilateral links on the basis of capabilities14.15. A related method is to distinguish between the operational role of voluntary organisations when they directly help in the response to an emergency, and their support role, for example when they provide refreshments for the emergency services. An LRF-level multi-agency plan should list which services are offered across the range of voluntary organisations. A key principle of the plan is to avoid double-counting by indicating which Category 1 responder has first call on (or priority need for) any particular voluntary contribution and to define a co-ordinated call-out system.14.1. 
Box 14.1 Lincolnshire case study on co-ordinating the voluntary response (including ‘convergent volunteers’) during emergenciesToplan forthepotentialresource challenges ofcoastal flooding, emergency planners needed a clear understanding of the capability and capacity of the voluntary sector to help statutory agencies respond and recover during a large scale, wide area and prolonged emergency.A two-day conference was held for the voluntary sector, which included discussions around a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) and its implications. The conference also provided an opportunity to invite larger voluntary sector organisations to assist with joint training initiatives and, for example, assure the ability of the British Red Cross (BRC) to operate at the levels required.The voluntary sector was promoted in a positive and helpful way, increasing senior managers’ and emergency responders’ awareness and understanding of their capability. Voluntary sector organisations appreciated the fact that their contributions were valued and respected. The conference led to the formal development of a collectively agreed MOU in Lincolnshire, allowing:ï co-ordination of the voluntary sector response in the county on behalfof the LRF (including convergent volunteers) by British Red Cross;ï voluntary sector representatives to work alongside the unified rescue cell as part of the command support functions that are established during an emergency response;ï assessment of volunteer and convergent volunteer capabilities;ï identification of a focal point for LRF requests for deployment; andï 

Individual voluntary sector organisations are then brought into the detail of planning through bilateral relationships with Category 1 responders on the basis of their capabilities and functions, ensuring full interconnectedness between the voluntary and statutory sectors. Voluntary sector organisations also take part in some other LRF subgroups, are offered training and take part in exercises.“By establishing a voluntary sector subgroup of the LRF, we ensure that the statutory responders have access to a clear picture of the voluntary sector’s capabilities in Derbyshire.”Ian Shuttleworth, Chief Emergency Planning Officer, Derbyshire.“The statutory services in Derbyshire have adopted a flexible but well-organised approach to our voluntary sector involvement. This careful engagement at the planning phase has proven its worth in the response phase, and we have successfully supported the statutory services when emergencies have stretched their resources.” Moya Wood-Heath, Chair - Voluntary Sector Civil Protection Forum14.16. Capabilities of the voluntary sectorThose preparing emergency plans should be aware of the extent and range of operational and support activities and services provided by the voluntary sector at all stages, from planning through to the response and recovery phases of emergencies in the United Kingdom.o There are established organisations such as the British Red Cross, WRVS, Salvation Army, St John Ambulance (or St Andrew’sFirst Aid in Scotland) that provide a range of services and activities;
o Many individual volunteers have particular skills, but arenot necessarily members of recognised voluntary organisations: for example interpreters or representatives from the faith communities.o Certain organisations contribute specialist skills in various types of activity:ï search and rescue organisations, such as the British Cave Rescue Council (BCRC), coastguard response teams (HM Coastguard’s Auxiliary branch), the Mountain Rescue Council (MRC), the RNLI, the International Rescue Corps (IRC),Sky Watch, search and rescue dog teams;ï groups of doctors, such as the British Association forImmediate Care Schemes (BASICS);ï in London, the London Air Ambulance provides an emergency service;ï voluntary radio operators, such as the RadioAmateurs’ Emergency Network (RAYNET);ï Organisations which specialise in providing emotional support and counselling, such as Cruse Bereavement Care, the Samaritans and Victim Support; andï other non-governmental organisations (NGOs).14.17. The voluntary sector can provide support at every stage of emergency planning, response and recovery in a number of generic areas:o practical support and welfare;o social and psychological aftercare;o medical support, properties and essential supplies;o search and rescue;o transport;o communications;o documentation;o 
o training and exercising; ando signposting to other organisations.
14.18. 14.19. 14.20. 14.21. 
Annex 14A sets out examples of the extent and range of support activities and services that volunteers can provide and of the statutory organisations with which they frequently work.It is important to be precise on the accountability of volunteers to a professional agency because of issues of legal liability, including statutory requirements under the Children Act 2004, and because of insurance indemnity issues. Agencies working with voluntary sector organisations will need to consider the health and safety of volunteers. They may wish to use a Service Level Agreement, Memorandum of Understanding or some other form of protocol to establish arrangements to identify the level of insurance cover provided by the voluntary organisations, the training provided to voluntary sector personnel, or the use of Personal Protective Equipment. Further information on establishing these protocols can be found in the Voluntary Sector Engagement Guidance Note at www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/ sites/default/files/resources/engaging_voluntarysector.pdf It is of vital importance that, if an emergency occurs, the voluntary sector should be able to contribute what has been mutually agreed and written into local plans. Voluntary agencies have therefore to be able to demonstrate their capabilities and that their support is reliable, consistent and sustainable to the required standard. A record of available local voluntary resources should be maintained, where appropriate, as part of an LRF-level multi-agency plan.The statutory and voluntary sectors should be clear about their respective roles in an emergency. They each have their own structures and constraints. Voluntary
organisations must appreciate that the Category 1 responders bear the responsibility for the overall emergency response. Equally, the statutory services must develop an understanding of the voluntary sector as a rich resource for personnel, professional skills and equipment. They should also recognise that the voluntary sector may have the capability to work with local individuals who are not members of a voluntary organisation and wish to contribute to the response or recovery phases as convergent volunteers, building capacity, individual and community resilience. Individuals are likely to come forward irrespective of whether they are needed. Responders should work with voluntary agencies to formalise a process and procedure for the use of convergent volunteers.14.22. Plans should include effective procedures for alerting or calling out voluntary organisations, or putting volunteers and organisations on standby (and ensuring stand down) to ensure the optimum response. Early alert is desirable because of the lead time needed for contacting and assembling teams in organisations other than the emergency services. Contingency arrangements should reflect this. It is usually the responsibility of the voluntary sector to organise the initial call-out and briefing of volunteers such as setting out points of contact and how voluntary agency staff might liaise with volunteers and Category 1 or 2 responders. These roles should be reflected in the plans.14.23. A Memorandum of Understanding should be in place describing any bilateral or multilateral agreement between responders, including financial arrangements. For example, consideration should be given to arrangements for payment of petrol costs to 4x4 drivers in emergency situations such as heavy snow fall. There should be agreement and effective plans on the use of volunteers, the decision-making process leading to their call-out and the method of call-out. Plans should determine who will organise, manage and brief volunteers. Debriefing should be included as part of plan maintenance procedures. Planners also need to establish that volunteers receive refreshment and are appropriately clothed, identified and equipped.14.1. 
Training and exercising14.24. When considering the particular contribution that the voluntary sector can make, it should be noted that established voluntary organisations and volunteer groups will usually have their own training arrangements. They should be able to demonstrate their effectiveness to the Category 1 responders.14.25. Additionally, the Category 1 responders and voluntary agencies should aim for joint training and exercising (including involving the community/volunteers where possible). It is very important that voluntary organisations understand the management framework of the response and how they should be positioned and integrated into the response as a whole. There will be some overlap between the functions and capabilities of different voluntary organisations. Joint exercising will identify any problems, ensure plans and procedures are up to date and foster working relationships.14.26. Effective communication, planning and training between responders and the voluntary sector should aim to identify opportunities for sharing heavy workloads and providing mutual support. General issues of training and exercising are further discussed in Chapters 5 and 6.The voluntary sector at national level14.27. At the national level, the voluntary sector has developed a co-ordinated approach to planning its contribution to civil protection, and all responders should aim to fit into this framework.14.1. 
14.28. A Voluntary Sector Civil Protection Working Party and Forum have been convened by the Civil Contingencies Secretariat and the British Red Cross. The aim of the Working Party and Forum is to identify and maximise the voluntary sector contribution to UK civil protection arrangements. This includes informing and influencing policy, testing and challenging strategic and practical guidance and facilitating the exchange of information. There are currently 20 voluntary organisations with a national or UK-wide civil protection role that are members of the Forum. The Forum provides links between the voluntary sector, central government and statutory authorities. The Working Party supports the Forum.14.29. There is a further national level standing committee, the National Voluntary Aid Societies’ Emergency Committee (NVASEC). NVASEC may be used to co-ordinate the auxiliary role of the three Voluntary Aid Societies (VASs): the British Red Cross, St John Ambulance and St Andrew’s First Aid, to support military medical services in times of conflict and war.14.1. 
Annex 14AEXAMPLES OF VOLUNTARY SECTOR ACTIVITIES AND SERVICES IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDING ORGANISATIONS.The voluntary sector has the capacity and capability to undertake the following activities and services. The volunteers should receive appropriate training that is recognised by the responding organisation seeking their support for every stage of an emergency, from planning, through response and recovery, to resilience building.Welfareo Staffing rest centres, family and friends reception centres, survivor reception centres and humanitarian assistance centreso Feedingo Provision of clothing and other essential itemso Advice on entitlements, grants, loans, claimso Resettlement of victims, evacuees, etco Support and comfortingo Providing information and adviceï Support Linesï Drop in centresin support of:o Local authority social serviceso Children Services Departmentso Local authority housing departmento Police family liaison officerso Emergency serviceso 
Social and psychological aftercareo Listening skills, welfare support and comfortingo Befriendingo Providing longer-term supportin support of:o Local authority social serviceso Local authority educational psychologistso National Health Service (NHS)Medical supporto Support to Ambulance Service (including provision of air ambulances)o First aid and medical aid postso First aid and medical aid support in casualty clearing stations, reception and rest centreso Emergency feedingo Auxiliary roles in hospitalso Welfarein support of:o NHS Ambulance Serviceo NHS hospital trustso 
Search and rescueo Mountain, cave, tunnels and shafts, cliff, moor, inland waterways, coastal rescue, coastal or inland flooding, etc.o Supervision of other searchers (e.g. youth organisations)o Loan of equipmentin support of:o Emergency serviceso Lowland and urban search and rescueTransporto Transport and escort of homeless, outpatients, next-of-kin, etc, to and from airports, railway stations, hospitals, mortuaries, rest centres, hostels, etc.o Assistance with evacuation to places of safetyo Transport by 4x4 vehicleso Disabled passenger vehiclesin support of:o Local authority social services or housing departmentso Emergency serviceso NHSo 
Communicationso Providing radio and telephone communications and operatorso Vehicleso Messengerso Interpreters and translatorso Use of voluntary agencies to distribute resilience informationin support of:o Emergency serviceso Local authoritieso Utilitieso Voluntary organisationsDocumentationo Tracing people nationally and internationallyo Assistance at Casualty Bureau in some local areaso Logging/diary procedureso Computer supportin support of:o Emergency services (especially police)o Local authority social services or housing departmentso NHSo 
Financial aido Advice and provision of appeals, disaster fundsin support of:o Local authoritiesTraining and exercisingo Analysis of training needs and capabilitieso Devising instructional programmeso Joint planning and conduct of multi-agency exercises, including call-out arrangements and debriefo Formulation and dissemination of good practicein support of:o Emergency serviceso Local authority departmentso National utilitieso NHSo 
Building individual and community resilienceo Promoting resilience messages and materialso Individual and community resilience buildingo Encouraging local participation in resilience activitieso Developing individual resilience through duty service deliveryin support of:o local authority departments; ando emergency servicesNote: The emergency services may call on assistance from the armed forces, particularly military search and rescue resources. Voluntary organisations may therefore sometimes find themselves working with the armed forces.The above is not an exhaustive list of examples. Regular engagement with the sector/organisation is needed to build up the necessary relationships to determine if other activities could be offered.
 Chapter 15Other sectors that should be involved in Emergency PlanningRevision to Emergency PreparednessCivil Contingencies Act Enhancement ProgrammeOctober 2011
Chapter 15 (Other sectors that should be involved in Emergency Planning) of Emergency Preparedness, Revised Version15.1. A principal aim of the Act is to bring into a single statutory framework those organisations which are most likely to be involved in most emergencies (Category 1) and those likely to be heavily involved in some emergencies (Category 2). Further advice and useful information about the voluntary sector can be found in Chapter 14 of Emergency Preparedness.15.2. However, it was not appropriate to capture in the Act every organisation that may have some involvement in emergencies. For a variety of reasons, particular organisations with an important role to play - such as the armed forces, the broadcasting media and the insurance industry - have not been included in Schedule 1.15.1. 
15.3. Even so, organisations which are not required to participate under the Act should be encouraged to take part in forums and co-operate in planning arrangements wherever this is appropriate. The statutory nature of the framework is not a consideration which in itself should imply their exclusion.15.4. There are many organisations which fall into this category, including:o the armed forceso retail companies, including supermarketso the Food Standards Agencyo insurance companieso bus and road haulage companieso taxi firmso airlineso shipping companies and ferrieso media companieso private communications networks dedicated to public safety userso offshore oil and gas industryo security firmso internal drainage boardso general practitioners and chemistso the operators of other services or infrastructure that are critical to your areaThis list is not exhaustive, and organisations that are relevant to particular emergency plans but have not been referenced within this chapter, should still be included within the preparation process where appropriate.
15.5. The armed forces: Military Aid to the Civil Authorities (MACA) can be sought to support the civil authorities when they have an urgent need for help to deal with an emergency arising from a natural disaster or a major incident. However, assistance is provided on an availability basis and the armed forces cannot make a commitment that guarantees assistance to meet specific emergencies. It is therefore essential that Category 1 and 2 responders do not base plans and organise exercises on the assumption of military assistance. The Joint Regional Liaison Officer from the local Regional Brigade Headquarters will be able to give advice and should be contacted in the first instance.15.6. Retail companies, including supermarkets: Food stocks and other goods held by private retail companies are sometimes not seen as resources likely to be called upon in emergencies. However, in widespread and prolonged emergencies where shortages of foodstuffs occur, or where individuals are unable to access food supplies due to transport disruption, localised flooding, etc., Category 1 responders may turn to the private sector, such as supermarkets, for practical and logistical assistance, and some will build this into their planning arrangements. Such arrangements already exist in some cases between local authorities, supermarkets and other organisations to assist the local community if a major incident were to occur, but it is important that new links and arrangements with other Category 1 responders are established and in place before any emergency occurs to avoid further disruptions at the time. This should be arranged locally, regionally or nationally with the relevant retailers/wholesalers.  More common are agreements with wholesale firms for the provision of, for example, building materials, and the identification of suitable private sector buildings as rest centres.15.1. 
15.7. The Food Standards Agency: The (FSA) has statutory objectives ‘to protect public health from risk which may arise in connection with the consumption of food’ and ‘to otherwise protect the interests of consumers in relation to food’.  The FSA therefore has a role to play during any emergency that has the potential to affect food safety. The FSA is a UK-wide body, with its main office in London, and offices in York, Aberdeen, Cardiff and Belfast. The response to food incidents is managed by the Agency’s Incident Unit, based in London, with smaller equivalent Incident Teams based in the devolved administrations. The FSA does not have representatives at the local level; however, it will provide information and support to LRFs and may attend meetings if input to specific food safety issues is required which cannot be dealt with through correspondence.15.8. Insurance: There is a strong case for building the insurance industry into planning arrangements. Often insurance staff, such as loss adjusters, will attend at the scene of an emergency as quickly as journalists. The Association of British Insurers provides insurance information and advice to members of the public who have suffered loss or damage as a result of an emergency. They have the capability to set up an advice service close to the scene of an emergency and can provide contacts to act as liaison points with local responders.15.9. Bus companies and road haulage: Bus companies may be included in plans to assist with evacuations. Arrangements for diverting and maintaining bus services in the event of a major central area evacuation may also require planning. Accidents involving the movement of chemicals by road are a key hazard which requires specialist knowledge and equipment. The Fire and Rescue Service is greatly assisted in response to such incidents by the Chemical Industries Association.15.1. 
15.10. Taxi firms and coach companies: In some areas, and where local authority social services and NHS ambulances are unable to manage the movement of all people who may need transport in an emergency, agreements have been reached with local taxi firms to assist in the transportation of these people. It may be possible to reach similar agreements with local coach companies.15.11. Airlines: The Act brings airports into a formal arrangement as Category 2 responders 1 to co-operate with the emergency services and other Category 1 responders in preparing for emergencies. But plans for responding effectively to the needs of distressed friends and relatives at the terminal building require the co-operation, too, of airline companies. It is usual to invite their representatives to play a part in these arrangements.15.12. Shipping companies and ferries: As with airports, harbour authorities are included as Category 2 responders under the Act.2 Planning for emergencies at sea and in ports is likely to include the main shipping and ferry companies, which are not covered by the Act.15.13. Media companies: Media companies are not included in the Act, partly because it is accepted that their independence as reporting organisations should not be compromised. However, they have a key role in providing information to the public and are likely to be heavily involved in communications planning, which is dealt with in Chapter 7.1 Schedule 1 paragraph 26.2 Schedule 1 paragraph 27.
15.14. Private communications networks dedicated to public safety users: The emergency services and other public safety agencies may rely upon private communications networks that are not listed as Category 2 responders in order to carry out their duties. These organisations will want to ensure that the relevant communications providers are included in multi-agency planning for incidents.15.15. Offshore oil and gas industry: The Maritime and Coastguard Agency and the Health and Safety Executive work closely with these companies and will want to ensure that they are included in multi-agency planning for incidents at sea or at oil and gas terminals. They will also be involved in planning for fuel shortages.15.16. Security firms: Security firms have staff protecting premises of all types who are contactable by the police and may be useful during emergencies. They have a particular role in evacuations from shopping centres and sports grounds.15.17. Internal drainage boards: Internal drainage boards have powers to undertake works on defined watercourses within their geographical area. These may include operating pumps and other structures to alleviate the effects of flooding. They may be involved in the response to an emergency and should be included, where relevant, in emergency plans.15.18. General practitioners 3 and chemists: General practitioners may be called to the scene of an emergency to provide direct medical assistance or to certify deaths. Access to medication and medical services may be required for people displaced by an incident. In addition, during periods of disruption, such as severe weather, access for the public to general practitioners and chemists may be required. Considerations such as these need to be included in Category 1 responders’ planning arrangements.3 The role of General Practitioners may change with NHS Reforms
15.19. Private sector representative bodies: In addition to central and local Government, private sector representative bodies such as Confederation of British Industry, Federation of Small Businesses, British Chambers of Commerce, Business Continuity Institute, Emergency Planning Society as well as sector-specific representative bodies such as the Association of Train Operating Companies, British Retail Consortium, Food and Drink Federation, Food Storage and Distribution Federation, British Hospitality Association, Institute of Grocery Distribution and the Federation of Wholesale Distributors, Water UK and energy sector equivalent, can be helpful in providing information and advice to members of the business community on economic recovery, following loss or damage as the result of an emergency. They can also provide advice on business continuity planning, further details of which can be found on their websites, and also in chapters 6 and 8 of Emergency Preparedness.15.20. Private Veterinary Surgeons: Private vets may be called to the scene of an accident or emergency to provide emergency veterinary assistance to relieve pain and suffering and to protect animal welfare. Access to veterinary care may also be required for companion animals displaced, along with their owners, by an incident. Considerations such as these, including any necessary contractual arrangements, need to be included in Category 1 responders’ planning arrangements. Private vets, appointed as Official Veterinarians, may also be called on to assist Government vets in responding to large-scale exotic disease outbreaks. Category 1 responders should also consider the need for training for veterinarians who may be called upon to assist in large animal rescues. This would enhance the effectiveness of joint working as illustrated in the national Incident Command protocols and national animal rescue guidelines. Details of the training, which is available from providers recognised by the Chief Fire Officers Association National Animal Rescue Practitioners Forum (CFOA ARPF), can be obtained from, and in some cases through, the Fire and Rescue Service. This training is endorsed by the RSPCA and veterinary associations, namely the British Equine Veterinary Association and British Cattle Veterinary Association.15.1. 
15.21. Other sectors that may be considered within the emergency planning process are:o accommodation facilities, such as hotels, bed and breakfast services and student residenceso motor assistance companieso conference/leisure centre facilities which could provide short term sheltero 
 Chapter 16 Collaboration and Co-operation between Local Resilience Forums in EnglandRevision to Emergency PreparednessCivil Contingencies Act Enhancement ProgrammeMarch 2012
Chapter 16 (Collaboration and Co-operation between Local Resilience Forums in England) of Emergency Preparedness
16.1. The United Kingdom’s approach to civil contingencies is based on the principle of subsidiarity; the principle by which decisions should be taken at the lowest appropriate level with co-ordination at the highest necessary level.16.2. Local Resilience Forums are the building block for emergency planning activities with Strategic and Recovery Co-ordinating Groups acting as the local mechanisms which are engaged during the response and recovery phases of emergencies.Opportunities to collaborate and co-operate at a multi- LRF Level16.3. Planning for, and responding to, large-scale emergencies cannot be done in isolation in each LRF. Mechanisms for cross-boundary working and relationship building are essential as some emergencies will overwhelm localities’ resources and/or boundaries.16.4. Collaboration and co-operation between localities in England is a well-established and critical way of working in civil contingencies. It is a mechanism:o for enabling pooling of resources to achieve agreed mutual aims and outcomes;o for avoiding duplication of work between neighbouring LRFs or avoiding activity by an LRF that may be counter-productive to a neighbouring LRF;o to support planning and exercising for emergencies that cross local resilience areas or which could overwhelm a locality; ando that enables individual responders, local forums and centralgovernment to work together to address large-scale civil protection issues.
16.5. Cross locality working is undertaken on a permissive basis and neither civil protection legislation nor guidance seeks to impose structures on local areas or limit how they choose to collaborate and co-operate. LRFs are free to create flexible multi-LRF mechanisms and processes to best suit their risks and needs.16.6. In some circumstances, it might be more efficient for national organisations and those organisations which operate across local boundaries (such as utilities companies, transport operators, and government agencies) to share information using multi-LRF groupings. Indeed, some of these organisations will struggle to find the resources to duplicate work at the single LRF level. For further guidance Chapter 2: Co-operation and Chapter 3: Formal information sharing are available at: http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/resource-library/emergency-preparedness16.7. Regional Resilience Forums formerly provided a uniform system for LRF collaboration within that region. There is no continuing requirement to work on regional boundaries, and responders may now replace these regional forums with more flexible structures for multi-LRF working.16.8. A range of different geographically based multi-forum groupings are possible. These include Civil Protection Forums, LRF Secretariat /LRF Chair Forums and multi-responder strategic alliances incorporating health and local authority partners. These forums may cover varying geographical areas and may encompass, for example, working with the Devolved Administrations. Responders may also retain existing groups on previous geographical boundaries such as the Media Emergency Forum, Mass Fatalities Groups, Capabilities, Risk and Working Groups, or establish other suitable mechanisms to enable cross-locality collaboration and co-operation. Other theme based multi-LRF groupings have been established to allow joint planning around shared risks such as East Coast and Reservoir Flood Planning groups. The national resilience extranet (NRE) is a source of information and case studies about multi-LRF groups.16.1. 
16.9. Local responders should decide whether to maintain any former regional plans such as a generic response plan. Responders and LRFs are encouraged to put in place arrangements and plans that suit local needs, and to conserve, utilise and build on the good practice that is contained in any existing plans.Government support for multi-LRF collaboration and co-operation16.10. The DCLG Resilience and Emergencies Division (RED) works directly with LRFs, supporting collaboration and co-operation in planning for wide-area high- impact events affecting more than one locality. RED has allocated Resilience Advisers to each LRF so that LRFs have named contacts with which to build working relationships. Resilience Advisers support and challenge the LRF in a constructive, proportionate manner through:o simplifying and reducing duplication of central government interaction with local responders;o facilitating the co-operation and sharing of information between responders and LRFs to ensure risks are fully understood (e.g. implementation of the National Emergency Plan for Fuel);o identifying good practice and facilitating its sharing;o facilitating opportunities for peer reviews;o actively participating in training and exercising alongside LRFs, when appropriate, i.e. for wide area or high impact incidents where Government is part of the response machinery; ando facilitating discussions around mutual aid arrangementso 
More information on RED’s role and the contact details for resilience advisors are available on the national resilience extranet (NRE).16.11. Support for LRF collaboration is a key part of the RED adviser role. Successful cross locality working enables responders and local resilience forums to manage large-scale emergencies, and partners involved must have effective working relationships based on good communication, and effective, efficient information sharing. This will enable them to assess and agree who is best placed to address an issue. (see para 2.3)16.12. DCLG RED plays an active part in increasing resilience: supporting preparedness enhancement and providing assurance to central government that the necessary capabilities are in place at the local level to meet national planning requirements.16.13. Resilience Advisers within DCLG RED have been allocated liaison roles for each of the work streams in the National Resilience Capabilities Programme. RED will liaise with Lead Government Departments; LRFs and other relevant emergency responder organisations on current and planned LRF and multi-LRF capabilities.16.14. RED’s ability to engage with LRFs and, in particular, hold dialogue with multiple- LRFs, complements the existing governance and information sharing arrangements in place between work stream lead Departments and local responders. This is achieved by:o access and insights into the national capability requirements;o the ability to provide a richer picture of capabilities on the ground; ando facilitation and promotion of cross-boundary working between LRFs.For further details on the National Resilience Capabilities Programme, see Chapters 4 and 13 and http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/content/capabilities-programme
Template v8WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE PROCEDUREEquality, Diversity and Inclusion Incident Reporting and ManagementDate of Publication: December 2021 Version:	1.0Next Review Date:	June 2022
TABLE OF CONTENTSPROCEDURE OVERVIEW	3GLOSSARY OF TERMS	Error! Bookmark not defined.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	3DATA PROTECTION	3FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	3MONITORING and REVIEW	3WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDURE	3INTRODUCTION	Error! Bookmark not defined.PURPOSE	4SCOPE	5REPORTING INCIDENTS	5INITIAL MANAGEMENT OF THE INCIDENT	5DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	7
PROCEDURE OVERVIEWPolicing requires regulations and legislation. Equality, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI) can be impacted through several areas under Regulation and Legislation, and there are defined investigatory and recording requirements contained within those regulations and legislation.Where an incident is reported or recorded and starts the investigative process there can be a delay before any outcomes are known or lessons learnt being implemented. This can leave a residual risk for the team, department, or Wiltshire Police where other incidents that could have been prevented by the application of control measures can occur.The Equality, Diversity and Inclusion Incident Reporting and Management Procedure aims to receive and monitor Equality, Diversity and Inclusion incidents in order to understand the continuing risk, and provide recommendations and considerations as to how this can be mitigated in order to ensure Wiltshire Police meets its obligations.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSEquality Act 2010Police Conduct Regulations 2012 National Crime Recording Standard. National Incident Recording standard Wiltshire Police Hate Crime ProcedureWiltshire Police Informal Resolution/Grievance Procedure Wiltshire Police Critical Incident PolicyPSD/IOPC investigation standards Victim’s codes and Witness Charter EDI Incident Assessment TemplateAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE AREAS ASSOCIATED WITH THIS PROCEDURECollege of Policing APP Professional StandardsDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this procedure will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING and REVIEWThis procedure will be reviewed in light of reported incidents, lessons learned or changes to changes to law, Force strategy or at such other times as may become necessary.This document will be reviewed June 2022 and thereafter at the end of the Police and Crime Commissioners term.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDURE?The Head of People Strategy & Policy and the Inspector Equality Diversity and Inclusion are responsible for this procedure. All queries relating to this procedure should be directed to the Equality Diversity and Inclusion Department or the Force Policy Officer.
INTRODUCTIONThe Public Sector Equality Duty came into force in April 2011 (s.149 of the Equality Act 2010). Public authorities like Wiltshire Police are now required, in carrying out their functions, to have due regard to the need to achieve the objectives set out under s149 of the Equality Act 2010 to:a. eliminate discrimination, harassment, victimisation and any other conduct that is prohibited by or under the Equality Act 2010;b. advance equality of opportunity between persons who share a relevant protected characteristic and persons who do not share it;c. foster good relations between persons who share a relevant protected characteristic and persons who do not share it.To ensure transparency, and to assist in the performance of this duty, the Equality Act 2010 (Specific Duties) Regulations 2011 require Wiltshire Police to publish information to demonstrate their compliance with the public sector equality duty.Wiltshire Police recognises the importance of its duty under the Act and, in support of this duty to demonstrate compliance, has instigated this procedure to capture incidents where, although no complaint was received, there was potential to improve the provision of a fair employment for all, or where an incident is under investigation through another procedure or regulation and can be considered to be related to Equality Diversity or Inclusion lessons.This document sets out the approach to the reporting, management and investigation of all corporate incidents (including actual and near misses) that occur within the organisation.EDI Incidents relate to those that could by their nature have led to a potential civil claim or Litigation through the provisions of the Equality Act 2010.This document does not seek to replace current processes where proceedings are underway, either through the Informal Resolution or Formal Resolution processes. Its intention is to capture the facts of the issue or concern, understand the implications, make recommendations, and through reflective practices retain the lessons learnt.Incident management is a cyclical process that requires the identification and reporting of incidents, followed by investigation (if necessary), as well as remedial action and learning to mitigate the risk of recurrence. The reporting of all incidents (or the potential for incidents), no matter how trivial they may appear, will enable the EDI department to build a profile of risks to staff, the public, and to the business of the organisation.PURPOSEThe purpose of this procedure is to:ï Ensure that robust incident reporting mechanisms are in place so that all EDI incidents are captured and managed in a systematic way. That mitigating action is taken, and lessons are learnt, shared and embedded.ï Ensure that any regulatory or procedural requirements in relation to incident reporting are fulfilled.ï Ensure that all staff have a clear understanding of their responsibilities.ï Ensure supervisors receive ongoing training and know who the contact with the reporting process. Early contact is key.ï PSD is a key department and must receive initial notification.ï 
ï Encourage a reporting and questioning environment within Wiltshire Police which empowers staff to have the confidence to report incidents, and openly discuss working practices.SCOPEThis procedure relates to all employees and appointees of Wiltshire Police, including others working within the organisation in a temporary capacity.Wiltshire Police are committed to learning from all incidents and ensuring a fair organisation for its staff, visitors, and anyone else who may be affected by Wiltshire Police activities. This procedure is in place to support staff in the reporting of incidents without any fear of recrimination.Wiltshire Police accepts that incidents can sometimes occur due to human error and, under this procedure, blame will not be apportioned to any individual where this may be the case. However, this does not extend to incidents that have occurred because of misconduct or gross misconduct.Incidents resulting from these circumstances will be dealt with in accordance with Wiltshire Police disciplinary policies and procedures.This procedure does not supersede any other Policies Procedures or Regulations.REPORTING INCIDENTSThis procedure deals with reporting of EDI incidents that could be classed as a near miss or lost opportunity. As such incident reporting may arrive from varied sources including, but not limited to, Police Federation, Trade Unions, Staff Support Networks, Human Resources, EDI and individual members of staff.The reporting of incidents is an important means of providing information that allows Wiltshire Police to investigate such occurrences promptly and effectively and, where possible, to quickly apply control measures. This will help with the process of identifying the causes of such incidents, from which lessons can be learned and control measures put in place to reduce the risk of recurrence.In order to facilitate the reporting of incidents Flags will be incorporated at key points:1. Issue Resolution or Grievance.2. Welfare support to officers and staff by Trade Unions and Police Federation.3. Notification of Civil action in relation to an Employment Tribunal.4. Anonymous reporting process.5. Informal process from Staff Support Networks when they become aware.6. PSD investigations and assessments.INITIAL MANAGEMENT OF THE INCIDENTAll incidents reported will be considered by the EDI Inspector who will determine a graded response.All incidents will be recorded onto the EDI Incident Assessment Template:1. Where an incident has occurred in the past, consideration will be documented as to any lessons to be learnt and guidance that can be provided.2. Where immediate remedial action can be taken in order to mitigate any ongoing risk, the EDI Inspector will inform the relevant department of their considerations and recommendations about the next part of the process.1. 
3. Should the EDI Inspector deem it necessary they will draw together an EDI Response Meeting (EDRM) where the incident can be discussed, more detailed considerations and recommendations can be formulated, and the reporting of lessons learnt can be subsequently documented and disseminated.4. At all times the EDI Inspector will consider whether the incident reported is of such nature that escalation to SLT or ELT is required.5. Recognising this is a victim or interested party focused procedure the EDI Inspector will ensure the actions contained in Regulations or legislation relating to victim contact and welfare are of core focus.6. Where appropriate EDI Inspector will update the Police Federation, Unison, and Staff Support Networks with the specifics of individual incidents.7. The EDI Inspector will hold a meeting on a monthly basis with Police Federation, Unison, and the Head of PSD. This will be to consider any concerns raised with ongoing cases, and to ensure they are deliberated for a collaborative approach to address the concerns.8. Weekly meetings to be held between PSD and the EDI lead to ensure that reported incidents are discussed in a constructive dialogue and the process have been followed correctly.9. At the closure of any incident or investigation the documentation will be compiled for any reflective practices on what happened and why; including a lessons learnt document to ensure actions are identified to prevent a recurrence. The documentation will be retained and embedded.10. The crime recording process within RMS Niche for staff complaints of a Hate Crime and Hate Incident are the same as they are for members of the public. This means that the victim code of practice must be followed and an owner assigned.1. 
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Equality Diversity and InclusionProcedure Owner/Author:	Suzie THOMPSON (Head of People Strategy & Policy) Technical Author:	Inspector Alan WEBBSenior Officer:	Director of People and ChangeRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of ChangesApprovals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionForce Policy Officer23.12.20211.0JNCC (Not required for all policies)23.12.20211.0Distribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this procedure (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionImplications of the Procedure: Training RequirementsThere are no training requirements for this Procedure.IT InfrastructureThere is no IT Infrastructure impact.
       WILTSHIRE POLICE & POLICE AND CRIME COMMISSIONERFire Safety Management ProcedureDate of Publication: September 2022 Version:	10.0Next Review Date:	September 2023
TABLE OF CONTENTSPROCEDURE OVERVIEW	3GLOSSARY OF TERMS	3RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	3DATA PROTECTION	3FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	3MONITORING and REVIEW	3WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDURE	31. Legal Requirements	42. Roles and Responsibilities	52.1 Responsible Person	52.2 Competent Person	52.3 Inspectors/managers in charge of stations/person with overall responsibility for the building	62.4 Communication Control Centre (CCC)	62.5 Custody Suites	62.6 Nominated Persons for Fire Safety – Fire Marshals and Fire Coordinators	62.7 All Employees	63. Consultation Arrangements	64. General Fire Safety Arrangements	74.1 Standard Fire Procedures	74.2 Fire Safety Management - Fire Logbooks	74.3 Fire Risk Assessment Process	84.4 Level 2. Fire Risk Assessments	94.5 Level 1 Fire Risk Assessments	94.6 Local Fire Evacuation Plan	94.7 Persons with Disabilities	104.8 Fire Evacuations	104.9 Fire Extinguishers	104.10 Testing and Maintenance	104.11 Fire Safety Signage	115. Information, Instruction and Training	115.1 Fire Safety Training	115.2 Fire Extinguisher Training	115.3 Information to Contractors and Visitors	11DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	12
PROCEDURE OVERVIEWWiltshire Police and the OPCC for Wiltshire and Swindon are committed to providing a safe working environment for their staff, volunteers, visitors and contractors. The purpose of this procedure is to outline the processes and arrangements for the joint management of Fire Safety within both organisations.GLOSSARY OF TERMSTermMeaningRRORegulatory Reform (Fire Safety) Order 2005 – (The Order)RIDDORReporting of Injuries Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences RegulationsRELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSAll other Wiltshire Police Health and Safety Policies and Procedures.DATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this procedure will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING and REVIEWThe joint Fire Safety Management Procedure Document will be regularly monitored and reviewed by the Health and Safety and Facilities Departments. The document will be formally reviewed annually or ln light of any significant change in process or legislation through the Force Occupational Health and Safety Committee.All Fire Risk Assessments will be monitored throughout the year and formally reviewed as part of the health and safety audits for all premises. The review will be undertaken by the Health and Safety Department in consultation with the Facilities Department, local management and Staff Associations. The risk assessments will also be reviewed in light of legislative change, changes in work processes, staffing levels, building use or alterations.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDUREHead of Health and Safety Head of Facilities and Supplies
1. Legal RequirementsThe Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 sets a general duty of care for safety placed on all employers, the self-employed and those in control of non-domestic premises throughout Great Britain. The Act and any regulations made under it are disapplied in relation to general fire safety measures covered by the Regulatory Reform (Fire Safety) Order 2005, other than in special circumstances, such as major hazard sites. The Act does, however, apply to process-related fire safety hazards and precautions, including the storage of dangerous substances.The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 imposes a duty of care on the employer to ensure, so far as reasonably practicable, the health, safety and welfare of all staff and others affected by our undertakings. In addition, Sections 7 and 8 of the Act states that staff must take appropriate steps to safeguard their own health and safety as well as that of others.The updated Regulatory Reform (Fire Safety) Order 2005 (known as the Order), incorporating the Fire Safety Bill and BS8629 2020/1 fcovers general fire precautions and other fire safety duties which are required to protect person in case of fire. The Order will remove current fire certification with fire safety being based upon a risk regime. The Order revokes the Fire Safety requirements which are incorporated in the Fire Precautions Act 1971, Fire Precautions (Workplace) Regulations 1997, as amended by the Fire Precautions (Workplace) (Amendment) Regulations 1999.Main requirements of the Order:ï To appoint a Responsible Person for fire safety management as detailed within the Order.ï The Responsible Person must appoint one or more “competent persons” to assist in undertaking the preventative and proactive fire safety management measures.ï Ensure appropriate fire safety arrangements are in place, having regard to the size of its undertakings and the nature of its activities, for the effective planning, organization, monitoring and control of the preventative and proactive measures.ï To carry out a suitable and sufficient fire risk assessment, in order to determine the appropriate level of fire safety measures necessary to manage and control fire risks.The Order also details specific requirements in relation to:ï Elimination and reduction of risk from dangerous substances.ï Fire fighting and detection.ï Emergency routes and exits.ï Procedures for serious and imminent danger in respect of hazardous substances.ï Provision of information, instruction, training and supervision.ï Safety assistance.ï Co-operation and co-ordination.The Fire Safety (Employees Capabilities) (England) Regulations 2010. The Regulations include a single requirement that every employer must, in entrusting tasks to employees, take into account their capabilities with regards to health and safety, so far as those capabilities relate to fire.The Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations 1996 specify escape route signs, safety signs prohibiting activities causing a fire hazard; warning signs of flammable, explosive materials, electricity; and fire-fighting information.The Dangerous Substances and Explosive Atmospheres Regulations 2002 (DSEAR) contain a duty to eliminate or reduce risks to safety from fire, explosion or other events arising from the hazardous properties of dangerous substances in connection with work.
The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999 contain a duty to make and coordinate arrangements in case of emergency with employers in neighbouring premises (as well as carry out risk assessments on work activities).The Fire Safety Act 2021 was published in April 2021 and provides a foundation for follow-up legislation to take forward recommendations from the Grenfell inquiry. The Fire Safety Act 2021 is of particular interest to building owners, leaseholders, those responsible for social housing or managers of multi-occupied residential buildings who are likely to be the responsible persons and who need to ensure that they have assessed the fire safety risks of the premises for which they are responsible, and have taken the necessary fire precautions as a result of that assessment. It also confirms that Fire and Rescue Authorities have the relevant enforcement powers to hold owners or managers to account.The Building Safety Act 2022 received royal assent on the 28th April 2022. The Building Safety Act introduces changes to building control that will affect all buildings, strengthens the Regulatory Reform (Fire Safety) Order, provides new accountability and duties and introduces competency standards and provisions to strengthen the construction products regulations.2. Roles and Responsibilities2.1 Responsible PersonThe Responsible Person(s) have been identified as the OPCC Chief Executive and Chief Constable who own a number of responsibilities including:ï Ensure general fire precautions as will ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the safety of all employees and others affected by our undertakings.ï Make a suitable and sufficient assessment of the risk to which relevant persons are exposed for the purpose of identifying the general fire precautions required to comply with the requirements and prohibitions of the Order.ï Must provide employees with comprehensive and relevant information on the risks identified by the risk assessment, including the preventative and proactive measures.ï Must ensure the employer of any persons from outside our undertakings is also provided with comprehensive and relevant information and the risks to those employee and the preventative and protective measures taken by the Force.ï Must ensure that all employees are provided with adequate safety training at the time they are first employed and on their being exposed to new or increased risks as defined by the Order.Where two or more responsible persons share or have duties in respect of premises each person must cooperate with the other responsible person to enable them to comply with the requirements and prohibitions of the Order. They must also ensure that reasonable steps are taken to inform the other responsible person concerned of any risks arising from our work activities.Refer to Regulatory Reform (Fire Safety) Order 2005 for a full list of responsibilities.2.2 Competent PersonThe Responsible Person has appointed the Head of Health and Safety and Head of Facilities and Supplies as “Competent Persons” under the Order. The competent persons are responsible for assisting the responsible person in undertaking preventative and protective measures. It is the responsibility of the competent person to ensure that they have sufficient training, knowledge and experiences and other qualities to enable them to fulfill their responsibilities.
2.3 Inspectors/managers in charge of stations/person with overall responsibility for the buildingHave the following responsibilities:ï Overall responsibility for fire safety within their station/building/department.ï To ensure the fire logbook is updated and maintained effectively.ï To ensure any requirements resulting from the fire risk assessment and building inspections are actioned by the relevant departments / persons within the stated time scales.ï To establish and maintain the Local Fire Evacuation Plan.ï Publish the local evacuation plan and ensure all staff, new starters, visitors and contractors are made aware of the local arrangements via the Station / Department local emergency plan.2.4 Communication Control Centre (CCC)In the case of Wiltshire Police Command and Control Centre, it is the responsibility of the CCC Chief Inspector to ensure a definitive fire evacuation and fall back fire evacuation plan is established, disseminated to all relevant staff and tested on an annual basis.2.5 Custody SuitesIn the case of Wiltshire Police custody suites, it is the responsibility of the Custody Inspector to ensure a definitive fire evacuation plan for each custody suite is established, disseminated to all relevant staff and tested on an annual basis. All fire actions and building design will be in accordance with the Police Custody Design Guide and Custody APP.2.6 Nominated Persons for Fire Safety – Fire Marshals and Fire CoordinatorsWiltshire Police’s fire evacuation procedure use a combination of site specific nominated Fire Marshal and/or Fire Coordinators, as determined by individual fire evacuation plans, Swindon Gablecross and Devizes HQ are the only sites which operate with trained and dedicated Fire Marshals due to their size and the high risk work activities undertaken. All other sites and building utilise nominated Fire Coordinators. The senior person present will assume the fire coordinator role and act as the primary point of contact in the event of an evacuation. In the event of no obvious supervisor. A full list of fire marshal and fire co-ordinator responsibilities checklist can be found in the fire log books.2.7 All EmployeesAll staff, including contractors and visitors has the following generic responsibilities:ï To take reasonable care of their own safety and others affected by their undertakings.ï Comply with Force and OPCC policies, procedures, risk assessments, in relation to fire safety management.ï Inform management of any fire safety risks or concerns.ï To read, understand and comply with the local fire safety arrangements and evacuation plan for their building/department. Familiarise themselves with the location of the fire assembly point, fire escape routes, fire fighting equipment and how to raise the alarm.3 Consultation ArrangementsWiltshire Police provides regular and in-depth consultation with Unison and Police Federation Safety Representatives. The Staff Associations will be formally consulted on all aspect of fire safety management through membership of the Occupational Health and Safety Committee and are invited to attend audits, inspections and review of risk assessments.
4 General Fire Safety Arrangements4.1 Standard Fire Procedures ON DISCOVERING A FIRE,ï Raise the alarm immediately, by shouting FIRE FIRE FIRE.	Actuate your nearest break glass call point and ring 999ï Do not rely on automatic fire warning systems. Summon the fire brigade without delay by the quickest available means.ï Only attempt to tackle the fire if is safe to do so and you have been appropriately trained in the use of fire extinguishersï Evacuate the area immediately closing doors and windows behind youï Do not stop to take belongings with you.ï Report to the predetermined assembly point.ON FIRE ALARM ACTIVATION (IF YOU HEAR THE ALAR,ï Immediately leave the building using the nearest fire exit warning others as you do soï Take control of any visitors/contractors in your company, ensuring they evacuate with you.ï DO NOT divert or delay your exit to collect personal belongingsï Proceed to the assembly point with any visitors/contractors to be safely accounted for by the Fire Co-ordinator /Marshalï Report to the Fire Co-ordinator at the assembly point informing them if anyone remains in the building and/or is unaccounted for. It is understood that it will not always be possible to account for everybody.ï DO NOT re-enter the building unless authorised to do so by the Fire Co-ordinator or Fire Service.SENIOR PERSON PRESENT (if not obvious assume the role yourself)ï Assume the role of Fire Co-ordinatorï Follow detailed guidance in the Fire Co-ordinator Checklist found in the fire logbookIf a fire is discovered, raise the alarm immediately. This should be the first action taken by an individual on discovery of a fire, however small. Wiltshire Police will always support the individual who operated the fire alarm in good faith, regardless of whether it is determined that a fire existed. In the majority of Wiltshire Police premises the alarm can be raised by breaking the break glass point. In the absence of break glass points, (temporary offices and smaller low risk accommodation) the alarm can also be raised by shouting “fire, fire, fire”. The individual must then contact the Fire Emergency Service immediately. It should be noted that NOT all Wiltshire Police fire alarm systems have a direct link to the Control Room. Please refer to local evacuation plans for details.4.2 Fire Safety Management - Fire LogbooksA Fire Logbook for each premises, will be maintained by the manager with overall responsibility for the building / station. The Fire Logbook must be printed off and contained within the red loose leaf A4 file, located along with a dedicated fire coordinator tabard, at the main fire panel for the building. Fire Logbook must be kept up to date. The contents may be inspected at any time by the Health and Safety Department, Facilities Department, Union Health and Safety Representatives and Fire Authorities.The Fire Logbook will be officially reviewed by the Health and Safety Department as part of the fire risk assessment for the building.The logbook will contain details on the following:ï Fire Co-Ordinator Check Sheetï 
ï Fire Risk Assessment.ï Quarterly Inspection checklist.ï Fire fighting equipment inspection record.ï Fire alarm system test record.ï Fire drill test record.ï Emergency lighting test record.ï Fire detection equipment test record.ï Fire escape routes inspection record.ï CAD drawing of site.4.3 Fire Risk Assessment ProcessThe process of carrying out a fire risk assessment is made up of several stages highlighted below. These will be adhered to as part of Wiltshire Police’s Fire Risk Assessment program.Fire Safety Risk Assessment1Identify Fire HazardsIdentify:Sources of Ignition Sources of FuelSources of Oxygen2Identify People at RiskIdentify:People in and around the premises. Vulnerable people at risk.3Evaluate, Remove, Reduce and Protect from RiskEvaluate the risk of a fire occurring. Evaluate the risk of people from fire. Remove or reduce fire hazards.Remove or reduce the risks to people.4Record, Plan, Inform, Instruct and Train Record significant findings and actions taken. Prepare an emergency plan.Inform and instruct relevant people.Provide training.5Monitor and ReviewKeep the assessment under review. Revise where necessary.Remember to keep the fire risk assessment under review
4.4 Level 2. Fire Risk AssessmentsA two-yearly Level 2 Fire Risk Assessment will be carried out for all Wiltshire Police premises by competent health and safety staff in conjunction with the Facilities Department and local line management. The fire risk assessment will ensure that the appropriate fire safety procedures, fire prevention measures and fire precautions (plans and equipment) are in place and working properly. The fire risk assessment will identify and highlight any fire issues which require attention. Higher risk premises will receive an annual fire risk assessment.The aim of the fire risk assessment is to:ï Identify fire hazards.ï To reduce the risk of those hazards causing harm to anyone to as low as is reasonably practicable.ï To decide on what physical precautions and management arrangements are required to ensure the safety of people within the building.It is the responsibility of the manager with overall responsibility for the building / premises to ensure any recommendations / actions are carried out within the defined time scales. The findings of the fire risk assessments will be recorded on Form 411 and copies of the completed fire risk assessments will be sent to the relevant manager with overall responsibility for the building/premises. Copies will also be placed in the local Fire Logbook. In the case of shared sites or joint ownership locations, the fire risk assessments will also be sent to the landlords, site sharers and other relevant persons for information /action as required.Any fire certificates issued under the Fire Precautions Act of 1971 will cease to have any effect.4.5 Level 1 Fire Risk AssessmentsIn addition to the inhouse, Level 1 Fire Risk Assessments, a comprehensive assessment of the risks of exposure to fire within and around Wiltshire Police premises will be undertaken to identify any further necessary controls or precautionary measures that should be undertaken to suitably and sufficiently assess compliance with the Regulatory Reform (Fire Safety) Order 2005, and where necessary The Dangerous Substances and Explosive Atmosphere Regulations 2002.These fire risk assessments will be undertaken by an external accredited fire risk assessor in accordance with the methodology set out in PAS:79-1:2020. This affords compliance with internationally accepted fire risk assessment techniques and allows prioritisation of risk using an objective quantified system, by evaluating fire hazards, the mechanism for fires to occur, the people placed at risk by fire, and the measures in place to remove hazards or reduce risks to a reasonably acceptable level. The prioritisation of control measures identified within the assessments will guide Wiltshire Police in both the order and timescale for implementing those controls. The assessment programme will be completed during 2022 and the schedule will incorporate High, Medium and Low priority sites.4.6 Local Fire Evacuation PlanEvery Wiltshire Police building/station must have an established local evacuation plan. The purpose of the plan is to ensure that staff and visitors to the premises know what to do if there is a fire and that the premises can be safely evacuated. The plan must be set up the by the person with overall responsibility for the building in conjunction with the Health and Safety Department. The completed plan must be displayed on the station/building health and safety notice board and a copy placed in the fire logbook. It is essential that all staff, visitors and contractors are made aware of the information contained within the emergency plan. In additional to the station/building plan a specific Fire Evacuation Plan must also be established for each Custody suite.
In the event of shared sites with other organisations, it is desirable for the site sharers to agree and work with one overall plan. If this is not possible the plans must all be compatible.4.7 Persons with DisabilitiesThe fire risk assessment, emergency plan and all other fire safety documents for the building must take into consideration the safe access/egress of persons with disabilities who may be employed or visiting the building. An individual risk assessment which considers the individual’s needs, requirements and reasonable adjustments to the workplace must form part of the overall assessment for the building. The assessment should be completed by local line management in conjunction with the individual using Form 370, Personal Emergency Evacuation Plan.4.8 Fire EvacuationsFire evacuation drills will be carried out for all premises at six monthly intervals or more frequent if the fire risk assessment requires it. Custody suites will be tested yearly. The drill will not be announced to staff beforehand, but specific departments may need to be informed e.g. custody. The manager with overall responsibility for the building will keep a record of the drill, time taken to evacuate and areas requiring improvement. Details will be recorded in the fire logbook, any good practice or lessons learned must be also addressed.4.9 Fire ExtinguishersAppropriate fire extinguishers will be in suitable locations within all Wiltshire Police premises. All fire extinguishers will be serviced annually by a competent contractor and checked weekly for obvious physical damage as part of the 6 monthly building inspection process.4.10 Testing and MaintenanceThe fire safety equipment within Wiltshire Police premises will be maintained, inspected and recorded in the Fire Logbook as stated below:ItemMaintenance RequiredFrequencyBy whomFire ExtinguishersInspection for obvious damage/discharge.WeeklyNominated personFull inspection and service.YearlyCompetent ContractorHose ReelsFull inspection and serviceYearlyCompetent ContractorFire Alarm SystemTestWeeklyNominated person / Facilities Support OfficersFull inspection and serviceYearlyCompetent Contractor.Fire Detection SystemFull inspection and serviceYearlyCompetent ContractorEmergency LightingTestMonthlyNominated person.Full inspection and serviceSix monthlyCompetent Contractor.Note: Any nominated persons may require in-house training in how to test the fire alarm and emergency lighting systems. The Facilities Department can provide support and guidance.
4.11 Fire Safety SignageFire action notices will be displayed in all Wiltshire Police premises in locations designated by the fire risk assessment. These must be kept up to date and not be removed or obscured by other notices / information.All Wiltshire Police premises shall be fitted with means of escape signage to the standards set within the Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations 1996. The signs will be placed and displayed in all Wiltshire Police premises in positions designated by the fire risk assessment. These must not be removed or obscured by other notices / information.5 Information, Instruction and Training5.1 Fire Safety TrainingAll police officers, special constables and police staff will receive basic fire safety training via their induction / probationer training and are required to complete the Mandatory College Learn Fire Safety Training and refresher training courses as required. The training will include the following learning points:ï Action to be taken on discovery of a fire.ï Action to be taken upon hearing the fire alarm.ï How to raise the alarm and fire alarm call points.ï Correct method of calling the fire brigade.ï Escape routes.ï Appreciation and importance of fire doors and the need to keep them always closed.ï Not to use lifts.ï Switching off machinery and isolating energy supplies where appropriate.ï Process of informing visitors, contractors of the fire safety arrangements.ï Arrangements for persons with a disability.5.2 Fire Extinguisher TrainingFire Marshals and departments that have been deemed at higher risk and will need appropriate number of staff trained in the use of fire extinguishers.Training will include:ï Understanding of what to do in the event of a fireï Understand the different types of fireï Understand how to use a fire extinguisher safely and effectivelyï Practical hands-on experience of tacking a fire with a fire extinguisherï Understand fire extinguishers methods of operation, capabilities and limitations5.3 Information to Contractors and VisitorsAll visitors and contractors to Wiltshire Police premises will be informed of the local fire safety arrangements and emergency plan for the building prior to commencing work. This will be available in the station logbook and displayed throughout the building via the fire action notices. Contractors are also required to read the site rules which are also found within the station
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Health and SafetyProcedure Owner/Author:	Sarah SOMERS, Head of Health and Safety Technical Author:Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: OPCC/Chief ConstableRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes25.05.20187.0Data Protection section amended to reflect implementation of GDPR and new DPA26.04.20188.0Standard review11.07.20199.0Standard review - no significant changes05.09.202210.0Standard review – move to fire coordinator roles following agile working, additional detail on relevant legislation addedApprovals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionOccupational Health and Safety Committee (CC chair)07.09.202210.0JNCC (Not required for all procedures)N/ADistribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-Brief--Email to relevant affected Staff/Officers--Other: (state method here)--Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this procedure (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionOccupational Health and Safety Committee09.06.20167.0Implications of the Procedure: Training RequirementsTraining requirements as per section 5 above.IT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure required
Template v4WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICYFirearms and Explosives LicensingDate of Publication: August 2019 Version:	3.0Next Review Date:	March 2023
POLICY STATEMENTThe principle of this policy is to ensure that all firearms, shotguns and explosives in the County are licensed in accordance with relevant legislation. The safety of our communities is of paramount importance when considering the issue of firearms to members of the public and this policy seeks to provide our communities with the best possible service and to protect them from harm.Processes are in place to ensure that firearm, shotgun & explosives certificates are issued only to persons considered suitable to hold them. Any certificate holder who is brought to the notice of the police, in circumstances casting doubt upon their continued suitability to hold a firearm or shotgun certificate, will be the subject of an immediate and robust review process.All applications (including applications from Wiltshire Police Officers and staff) will be treated on their own merits in accordance with the Firearms Act 1968, as amended, taking into account the applicant’s request, against guidance issued on such matters by the Home Office publication ‘Firearms Law Guidance to the Police 2016’ and the Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) ‘Procedural Good Practice Guide 2002’.This will be achieved through a centralised administrative unit responsible for processing applications concerning firearms and shotgun certificates. Specialist Firearm and Explosives Enquiry Officers (FEOs) will undertake interviews with applicants and conduct a risk assessment to ensure they are a fit and proper person to possess firearms. Some of the risk factors considered can be found in appendix A.The Domestic Abuse Unit/Public Protection Unit will be consulted and multi-agency liaison may be necessary to properly assess whether the applicant can hold a firearm or shotgun without danger to public safety or the peace. All applications, where there is a history of domestic abuse, will be referred to the Domestic Abuse Unit for their professional opinion to be given to assist the decision making process.Medical information required by the police: When a person applies for a firearm or shotgun certificate or to be registered as a firearms dealer, the applicant will ask their GP, or a suitably qualified GMC-registered doctor, to provide information to the police which will confirm whether or not the applicant is or has been diagnosed or treated for any relevant medical condition which could affect their ability to possess a firearm safely. A medical proforma to be used for this purpose is part of the firearms application form and should be detached by the applicant and passed by them to the doctor for completion. This process is also to be used for the renewal of certificates.All applicants under the age of eighteen will be subject to additional scrutiny to confirm their maturity and general behaviour. The parent/guardian of the applicant will be required to give authority for the police to approach the head teacher of their son/daughters school. A standard letter will then be sent to the school requesting factual details and history of the applicant’s behaviour and maturity. The details included in any response from the school will be taken into account when deciding whether or not to issue a certificate.In order to facilitate the above the Chief Constable has delegated his authority under s55 of the Firearms Act 1968 (as amended) and Regulation 2 of the Control of Explosives Regulations 1991 to the: Head of Operational Support Services, the Firearms & Explosives Licensing Manager and the Senior Firearms Licensing Officer.This policy applies to all matters relating to the Firearms Licensing function with exception to the seizure of firearms and revocation of certificates, which is dealt with separately in the Firearm and Shotgun Certificate Holders Coming to Police Notice (Seizure of Weapons and Certificates) procedure document.
POLICY AIMThis policy explains how Wiltshire Police will approach the administration of firearm, shotgun and explosives licensing, in accordance with current legislation and Home Office guidance.APPLICABILITYThis policy is aimed primarily at Police Staff within the Firearms Licensing Department, although it remains relevant to other Police Officers and Police Staff who may deal with related matters.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEThe legal basis for this policy is derived from;ï The Firearms Act 1968.ï The Firearms Act 1982.ï The Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988.ï Firearms Acts (Amendment) Regulations 1992.ï Firearms (Amendment) Act 1994.ï Firearms (Amendment) Act 1997.ï Firearms (Amendment) (No2) Act 1997.ï The Firearms Rules 1998.ï 1991 EC Directive (91/477/ECC) Control of the Acquisition and Possession of Weapons.ï Sections 37, 38 & 39 of the Anti-Social Behaviour Act 2003.ï Amendments to the Firearms Act 1968 introduced by the Violent Crime Reduction Bill 2006.ï Explosives Regulations 2014RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSFirearm & Shotgun Certificate Holders coming to Police Notice Procedure Domestic Abuse Policy and ProcedureHome Office Guide on Firearms Licensing LawStatutory guidance for chief officers of police on firearms licensingAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEMajor Investigation and Public Protection > Firearms LicensingDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWThe Firearms Licensing Department is responsible for the accuracy and integrity of this document. This policy will be continuously monitored and updated when appropriate, to ensure full compliance with legislation. The Firearms Licensing Department will review this process to ensure that all aspects are being adhered to in accordance with the framework of this policy.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Firearms Licensing Department is responsible for this policy and procedure. All queries relating to this policy and procedure should be directed to the Firearms & Explosives Licensing Manager either by email to fal@wiltshire.pnn.police.uk or by telephone to 01380 861009.
Appendix AFirearms Licensing Risk Factors Offence, Incident or Intelligence;Medium RiskHigh riskProhibited personSection 39 AssaultAny offence which can only be dealt with on indictment.Unlawful Sexual IntercourseAny offence where conviction is likely to result in a custodial/suspended sentenceSection 4 and 5 Public Order ActSection 1 ,2 and 3 Public Order ActCriminal AssociatesRobbery / BurglaryAny offence involving dishonesty Theft (low value)Any Repeated offending (not minor motoring)Intemperate habits. (Drunkenness)Indecent assaultThreats (other than threats to kill)All assaults other than Sec 39 unless in connection with domestic violenceDisputesTheft high valueAll wildlife CrimeThreats to killDomestic Abuse or violence (victim or witness within the family)Domestic Violence or abuse (aggressor)Drink Drive/in charge OPL (No exacerbating factors)Historic Offences – Certificate granted then reoffends within 12 monthsPossession of class c drugAll drugs offences with exception of possession of class c drugFail to comply with conditions of a firearms/shotgun certificateDrink drive/in charges OPL 2x over limit or other exacerbating factorsPossess firearm without a certificate where certificate has expired within 7 days. (Weapons to be seized) Where this situation is not of the applicants making then Firearms Departments should issue permits )All Firearms Offences except fail to comply with conditions of a certificate and possess without a certificate where certificate has expired within 7 daysCriminal Damage under £5000Criminal Damage £5000 and overUnauthorised access to firearms or ammunition (Weapon to be seized)Any offence under the Protection of Children’s Act 1978Disregard for public safety. (not firearms related)Any racially aggravated offence.
Firearms Licensing Risk Factors Medical Conditions;Medium RiskHigh RiskMultiple Sclerosis *Moderate – Sever DepressionParkinson’s Disease*Bi-Polar disorderMotor Neuron Disease *ManiaCancer (all types)PsychosisChronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease*AlcoholismStress or anxiety, whereby had that person been in employment it would have necessitated certificated absence from workPrevious Suicide attempt (including some suicidal ideation with no active plan)Slight DepressionSelf HarmingPost Natal DepressionUses Prohibited Drugs, such as cocaine and heroin.Post-Traumatic Stress DisorderSectioned (Mental Health Act)Alcohol dependency/excessive consumption/drunkennessArrested Section 138 Mental Health ActEarly Stage Dementia *Mid Stage to Late Stage Dementia*Bereavement ReactionEpilepsy (not Night time seizures only)StrokeAny other life limiting conditionAny other condition which significantlyEffects their quality of life or that of a significant other person in their life.Significant TraumaEpilepsy (Night time seizures only)Heart Failure*Aspergers / Autism /ADHDCertificate holder over 70 year old (in line with Driving Licence assessment)The assessment at this time should be limited to a visit and interview by a Firearms Enquiry Officer regarding the general wellbeing of the certificate holder. Medical enquiries should only be carried out if this interview highlights concerns.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnershipDepartment Responsible:	 Crime Standards and Justice - Firearms Licensing Policy Owner/ Author:	 Firearms & Explosives Licensing Manager Technical Author:	Craig DALBY (Firearms Enquiry Officer)Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor:	ACC Crime and JusticeRevision HistoryRevision DateVersionSummary of Changes13.03.20203.0Policy statement amended to refer to risk assessment and factors. Appendix A added.28.10.20203.0Scheduled review – no changes made. Scheduled review date amended to November 2021.02.03.20223.0Related Policies – reference and link to the HO Statutory guidance for chief officers of police on firearms licensing added.14.09.20223.0Paragraph on ‘Information from GPs’ changed to ‘Medical information required by the police’ with additional instructions for applicants added.ApprovalsThis document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team03.05.20182.0Senior Command Team07.01.20141.0JNCC(Not required for all policies)N/ADistributionThis document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/Officers16.01.20141.0Diversity Impact AssessmentConsultationList below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionImplications of the Policy Training RequirementsNoneIT InfrastructureNone
 WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE PROCEDUREFIRST AID AT WORKAuthorSarah SomersDepartmentHealth and SafetyDate of Initial Publication11.08.06Review Dates01.06.07 / 27.10.11 / 16.01.18Next Review DateOne year or when significant changes in work activity, process or procedure occur.
CONTENTSCONTENTS	2Introduction	3First Aid Procedure	5Responsibilities	6First Aid Provision	8First Aid Arrangements	10First Aid Training	11First Aid Containers	12First Aid Containers	14Monitor and Review	15INDEX	16EMERGENCY FIRST AID PROVISION FORM	17
PROCEDURE – FIRST AID AT WORKIntroductionOverviewThe purpose of this procedure document is to establish guidance on first aid arrangements and provision within Wiltshire Police and to ensure compliance with relevant health and safety legislation. This document also defines Wiltshire Police’s clinical governance arrangements, The document seeks to provide all managers and staff with appropriate guidance regarding the first aid arrangements and provisions provided for all police staff, police officers and special constables.Glossary of TermsTermMeaningHSEHealth and Safety ExecutiveStrategic AimsThe strategic aim/s linked to this document are set out below.European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) ComplianceThe table below lists the ECHR Compliance Guide paragraphs that specifically relate to this Procedure.Reference: The Compliance Guide can be found on Firstpoint in Policy and Procedures / Corporate Development / ECHR Compliance Guide.ECHR Compliance Guide paragraphs relating to this document1. Statement of Compatibility2. Public Access20. Duty of StaffDisability Discrimination Act 1995In writing this procedure the main implications of the above Act, together with the Disability Discrimination Act (Amendment) Regulations 2000 have been taken into account.This procedure has been assessed for relevance to the general duty to provide race equality under the Race Relations (Amendment) Act 2000.This assessment has shown that the procedure and its aims are likely to have the relevance level indicated below
In this regard a full race equality impact assessment will not be undertaken in accordance with the Race Equality Scheme Action Plan.Any information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this procedure will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.
First Aid ProcedureLegal RequirementsThe Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 imposes a duty of care on the employer to ensure, so far as reasonably practicable, the health, safety and welfare of all staff and others affected by our undertakings. In addition, sections 7 and 8 of the Act state that staff must take appropriate steps to safeguard their own health and safety as well as that of others.The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999 require employers to make a suitable and sufficient assessment of the risks to the health and safety of their employees at work and to prevent or control these risks. This assessment can assist the employer in carrying out the first aid needs assessment if control measures fail.The Health and Safety (First-Aid) Regulations 1981 require employers to provide adequate and appropriate equipment, facilities and personnel to ensure their employees receive immediate attention if they are injured or taken ill at work. The Regulations se out the essential aspects of first aid that employers have to address including the requirement to:ï Regulation 3(1) : Provide or ensure that there are provided, such equipment and facilities as are adequate and appropriate in the circumstances for enabling first aid to be rendered to their employees if they are injured or become injured at work.ï Regulation 3(2) : Provide or ensure that there is provided, such numbers of suitable persons as is adequate and appropriate in the circumstances for rendering first aid to their employees if they become injured or ill at work. This person shall not be suitable unless they have undergone Health and Safety Executive approved training.ï Regulation 4 : An employer shall inform his employees of the arrangements that have been made in connection with the provision of first aid including location of equipment, facilities and personnel.The Regulations do not oblige employers to provide first aid for anyone other than their own employees.Authorised Professional Practice (APP)APP is the national body of consolidated professional practice and guidance for policing and is authorised as such by Chief Constables’ Council. It significantly reduces the amount of national guidance in circulation, encourages the use of professional discretion and brings consistency to all authorised police practice.It has the same legal status as previous guidance; it is not the law and so, while police officers and police staff can be expected to have regard to APP in discharging their responsibilities, the status of APP is advisory. There may be circumstances when it is perfectly legitimate to deviate from APP, provided that there is clear rationale for doing so.This policy has been checked against APP. Wiltshire Police has adopted the APP provisions, with supplementary information contained herein, which reflects local practice and the needs of the communities served by Wiltshire Police.Clinical Governance ArrangementsAPP is the national body of consolidated professional practice and guidance for policing and is authorised as such by………………………
ResponsibilitiesIntroductionIn recognition of our ‘duty of care’ to all staff and the public with whom we come into contact, Wiltshire Police seek to promote safety in Wiltshire. This procedural guidance is provided to support the health and safety of staff throughout the organisation, and our commitment to protect and reassure. This procedure links into the Health and Safety policy of Wiltshire Police. Forces must be able to demonstrate that individuals are able to deal not only with incidents professionally but must also be given the training, policy guidance and standards to equip them in meeting the resulting requirements placed upon them by their moral duty of care and associated legislation.Whilst it is not the primary duty of Wiltshire Police to provide first aid, this being secondary to the prevention and detection of crime, police officers have the same commitment to duty of care as any member of the public. Also there is an expectation that police officers will be able to carry out first aid, and that they are more likely to be in situations where violence/ accidents have occurred.The role of the police officer incorporates the lawful use of force and as such they must be accompanied with the subsequent skills and authority to use initiative and exercise discretion in their care of any injured party. They must establish a ‘reasonable practicable’ standard of care to prevent contravening the laws of negligence from careless conduct.The unique position and responsibilities of the police, and high public expectations dictate that the ‘treatment’ of the ‘public’ will, in the absence of advanced medical care, always be the duty of any police representative present.Line ManagersLocal Line Managers are responsible for the implementation of this procedure in areas under their control. Line Managers are responsible for ensuring:ï sufficient numbers of first aid trained staff are in place for areas under their controlï time is allocated for first aiders to be trained and carry out their dutiesï police officers and staff within their control are in date with their required first aid / officer safety trainingï suitable arrangements are in place for the monitoring and maintenance of all vehicle and office based first aid kits including ancillary equipment eg defibrillators.First Aid at Work (FAW) Certificated (paid) Police StaffPolice staff who have been specifically recruited and trained, on a HSE approved First Aid at Work course, are responsible for:ï providing emergency first aid at their work locationï completing an Emergency First Aid Provision Form (available on Health and Safety portal site / attached at end of procedure)ï ensuring an Immediate Report of Injury Form 230 is completed in response to an injury at work where first aid treatment has been givenï the care and replenishment of the first aid kits / equipment on siteï ensuring they are in date with first aid training and attend refresher courses every three years as requiredEmergency First Aid at Work (EFAW) Certificated (paid) Police StaffPolice staff who have been specifically recruited and trained, on a HSE approved Emergency First Aid at Work course, to take responsibility for the provision of first aid to no more than 50 staff working at that location. Their responsibilities are:ï providing emergency first aid at their work locationï completing an Emergency First Aid Provision Formï 
ï ensuring an Immediate Report of Injury Form 230 is completed in response to an injury at work where first aid treatment has been givenï the care and replenishment of the first aid kits / equipment on siteï ensuring they are in date with first aid training and attend refresher courses every three years as requiredAppointed PersonWhere the local first aid risk assessment identifies that a formal first aider is not required an Appointed Person must be in place.An Appointed Person, someone who is not first aid trained, can be appointed to be responsible for first aid provision at locations where:ï less than 25 employees are engaged in low hazard activities at their work locationï less than 5 employees are engaged in higher hazard activities at their work locationTheir responsibilities are:ï the care and replenishment of the first aid kits / equipment on site.ï contacting the emergency services when required.ï advising the Health and Safety Department when:o moving to another work locationo changing roleo changing/reducing hours workedo wish to vacate the roleA police officer or PCSO must be appointed to undertake responsibility for the care and replenishment of first aid kits / equipment at stations which do not have office based police staff.Note:		Appointed persons who are not first aid trained should not be confused with the appointed level of first aid training provided to police officers, special constables, pcso’s and specialist police staff.
First Aid ProvisionRisk AssessmentThe health and safety department carry out an annual full first aid provision risk assessment for all Wiltshire Police workplaces. This is to ensure first aid provision in respect of numbers of first aiders, equipment and facilities is appropriate to the circumstances of each workplace and meets legal requirements. The majority of Wiltshire Police’s first aid needs will be satisfied by the COP Module 2 First Aid Police Skills which is equivalent to the National EFAW Course. Module 2 is delivered to all police officers and identified police staff. However some buildings because of their higher occupancy levels will require additional staff to be trained to FAW (First Aid at Work) level at Appendix 1.Where the first aid risk assessment identifies a need, suitable numbers of first aiders will be provided to enable first aid to be administered without delay should the occasion arise. Increased provision may be required to cover annual leave, sickness, shifts etc. Where the assessment identifies that a first aider is not required, an appointed person will be nominated to take charge of the first aid arrangements including looking after the first aid container and facilities. Refer to Table 1 below for details of the Health and Safety Executive suggested numbers of first aid personnel required to be available at all times people are at work. This guidance will be followed when carrying out the annual first aid risk assessments.Table 1 - Health and Safety Executive suggested numbers of first aid personnel to be available at all times people are at workFrom your risk assessment what degree of Hazard is associated with your Work Activities?How many Employees do you haveWhat First Aid Personnel do you Need?What Injuries and Illness have previously occurred in your Workplace?Have you taken account of the Factors below that may affect your First Aid Provision?Low Hazardeg offices, shops, librariesLess than 25At least one appointed person.* Ensure any injuries and illness that might occur can be dealt with by the first aid personnel you provide* Where first aiders are shown to be unnecessary, there is still a possibility of an accident or sudden illness so you may wish to consider providing qualified first aiders* Inexperienced workers or employees with disabilities or particular health problems* Employees who travel a lot, work remotely or work alone* Employees who work shifts or out of hours* Premises spread out across buildings/floors* Workplace remote from emergency medical services* Employees working at sites occupied by other employees* Planned and unplanned absences of first aiders / appointed persons* Members of the public who visit the workplace25 – 50At least one first aider trained in Emergency FirstAid at Work (EFAW).More than 50At least one first aider trained in First Aid at Work (FAW) for every 100 employed (or partthereof).Higher Hazard eg light engineering and assembly work, food processing, warehousing, extensive work with dangerous machinery orsharp instruments, construction,Less than 5At least one appointed person.5 – 50At least one first aider trained in Emergency First Aid at Work (EFAW) or First Aid at Work (FAW) depending on thetype of injuries that might occur.
chemical manufacturer, vehicle workshopMore than 50At least one first aider trained in First Aid at Work (FAW) for every 50 employed (or part thereof).
First Aid ArrangementsApproved First Aid Certificated Police StaffThe annual first aid provision risk assessment carried out by the health and safety department will identify the number (if any) of first aiders required for each building / workplace. Workplace first aiders should be predominantly based at their work location and working the same hours as the majority of staff based at that location. Requests from part time staff will be assessed on an individual basis, pending the requirements of the local first aid risk assessment and organisation need. Other factors which should be taken into account when selecting a person include an individual’s:ï reliability, disposition and communication skills;ï aptitude and ability to absorb new knowledge and learn new skills;ï ability to cope with stressful and physically demanding emergency procedures;ï normal duties - these should be such that they may be left to go immediately and rapidly to an emergencyThe training of police staff to take up paid first aider roles must be agreed with the Head of Health and Safety and endorsed by their Line Manager in order to ensure the appointment meets the needs of the Force. Once agreed the person, in conjunction with their Line Manager, should complete a Training Request Form and submit it to the Learning and Development Department in order training can be arranged. The Health and Safety Manager will advise Finance to instigate first aid payments for the role as soon as Learning and Development confirm training has been successfully completed. It should be noted that due to Police Regulations the allowance is only payable to police staff members who do not have first aid training included in their job descriptions.It is the responsibility of all first aiders to ensure a Training Request Form is submitted to the Learning and Development Department six months prior to expiry of their certificate of competence. This is to ensure refresher training can be undertaken prior to expiry of their first aid certificate of competence.Police staff whose certificates are out of date will not be paid until they have re-certificated and may be requested to vacate the role dependent on their individual reasons / circumstances for being out of date. Staff should refrain from providing first aid when their certificates are out of date unless essential for life preservation to do so.Approved First Aiders who relocate to another station or whose role/circumstances change, as a result of organisational change or personal choice, cannot be guaranteed to continue as an approved first aider as these changes may not fit with the first aid needs of their work location. Approved First Aiders who find themselves in this situation should immediately contact the Health and Safety Department in order that a review of first aid provision at the locations involved can be carried out. Each situation will be looked at on an individual basis in line with First Aid Regulations and Force requirements and the outcome discussed with the person concerned. Individuals will be notified by email by the People Services Business centre if there is no longer a requirement for them to continue in their first aider role and their first aid allowance will cease. First Aiders who find themselves in this situation will be asked if they wish to be placed on the waiting list for First Aider placements at their work location.Police Staff wishing to become first aiders at a location where no vacancy exists, and who fit the necessary criteria, will be placed on a waiting list until a place becomes available. Likewise employees joining the organisation with a current first aid at work certificate cannot be guaranteed a first aider role where no vacancy exists and will be placed on a waiting list pending a vacancy. Every effort will be made to allocate staff to vacancies on a ‘first come’ basis however where a vacancy urgently needs to be filled those with a current first aid at work certificate may be given priority.
First Aid TrainingPolice Officers, Police Community Support Officers and Special ConstablesAll police officers, special constables and police community support officers are trained to NPIA First aid module 2 (equivalent to the HSE Emergency First Aid at Work) as part of their initial Officer Safety Training (OST). Ongoing first aid refresher training is provided as part of the Officer Safety Training refresher courses.Force Tactical Medics (TFU and PSU)All Tactical Medics receive the enhanced first aid training (NPIA Module 4) in addition to the standard NPIA First Aid Learning Programme module 2 first aid training and refresher training provided to all police officers. They also attend a one day Immediate Life Support Course as a refresher every year.Firearms OfficersAll Firearms Officers receive the enhanced first aid training (NPIA Module 5) in addition to the standard NPIA Module 2 first aid training and refresher training provided to all police officers. They also attend one day refresher training every year.Custody Sergeants / Detention OfficersAll custody staff receive a specific custody first aid module (NPIA module 3) in addition to the standard NPIA Module 2 first aid training and refresher training provided to all police officers.Officer Safety Trainers and Physical Training InstructorsAll Officer Safety Trainers and Physical Training Instructors are trained to HSE First aid at Work standard as a requirement of their role.Recording and Monitoring of Trained First Aid StaffThe Learning and Development Department will ensure that details of:ï staff who are first aid trainedï first aid trained providedï dates of trainingï expiry dates of certificationare recorded and kept up to date on the appropriate Force computer system.
First Aid ContainersWorkplace First Aid ContainersA standard first aid container, supplied with a sufficient quantity of suitable first aid materials will be provided for every workplace. Large or multi floor sites may require more than one container. The container should be immediately identifiable, readily accessible and appropriately sited. A suitable first aid notice will be displayed in every workplace explaining where the first aid container is located and who the first aiders are.Workplace First Aid Container Contents– Green plastic box or bag with first aid markingsï 1 guidance cardï 20 individual sterile adhesive plastersï 2 sterile eye pads with attachmentï 4 triangular bandages (individually wrapped and preferably sterile)ï 6 safety pinsï 6 sterile medium sized wound dressingsï 2 sterile large wound dressingsï 2 pairs of disposable hypoallergenic glovesï 1 pair of dressing scissorsï 10 First aid wipesIn addition all Force first aiders will be provided with a personal issue resuscitation pocket mask.No additional items should be stored within standard first aid containers this includes medication and tablets.In high risk areas such as the Special Enhancement Unit and Vehicle Workshops additional first aid items appropriate to the risk may be included as per the local first aid risk assessment. No medication or tablets to be stored in the first aid kit.Vehicle First Aid ContainersAll new vehicles are supplied with a vehicle first aid container from the Vehicle Fleet Department. If a replacement vehicle is provided the container must be removed and transferred to the new vehicle. Replenishment items for the first aid containers will be ordered and managed locally using the normal requisitioning procedure.Vehicle first Aid Containers Contents – Green plastic box with first aid markingsï 1 guidance cardï 20 individual sterile adhesive plastersï 4 triangular bandagesï 4 safety pinsï 6 medium sized wound dressingsï 6 large wound dressingsï 2 pairs of disposable hypoallergenic glovesï 2 one way valve resusciadesï 2 disposable foil blanketsï 2 crepe bandages (7.5 x 4.5cm)ï 1 pair of tuffcut scissorsï 6 germicide first aid wipesï 6 paper towelsï 1 roll of adhesive tapeï 1 yellow clinical waste bagï 1 rondo pad (10cm x 10cm)ï 
ï 1 ambulance dressing (28cm x 17cm)No additional items should be stored within the above first aid containers this includes medication and tablets.Force Tactical Medics First Aid ContainersThese specialist containers are provided to all Force Tactical Medics and contain first aid specialist equipment. Full details of the contents of these containers are available from the Officer Safety Training Department.Custody First Aid Provision First Aid Kit1 x Large Green First Aid Bag1 x Heart Start Card with BLS Protocols1 x Resuscitation Mask with One Way Valve 3 x Extra Large Sterile Wound Dressings2 x Large Sterile Wound Dressings6 x Medium Sterile Wound Dressings2 x Eye Pad Sterile Wound Dressings3 x Triangular Bandages1 x Tuff Cut Dressing Scissors 3 x Pairs of Non Latex Gloves20 x Individual Sterile Adhesive Plasters 10 x Germicidal First Aid Wipes2 x Rolls of Hypo allergic Tape1 x 500 ml Bottle of Sterile Eye WashResuscitation Equipment in Green First Aid Bag1 x Bag Valve Mask – Adult (only trained medical practitioners to use) 1 x Bag Valve Mask – Infant (only trained medical practitioners to use) 1 x Set Oropharyngeal Airways (range of sizes)Resuscitation Equipment in Medical Room1 x DefibrillatorSuicide Kit1 x Red Suicide Kit Bag 1 x Suction Equipment1 x Ligature Knife (all Custody Staff also have personal issue ligature knives)1 x Resuscitation Mask with One Way Valve2 x Extra Large Sterile Wound Dressings3 x Pairs of Non Latex GlovesTravelling First Aid KitsEmployees who regularly travel, remote or lone work away from their workplace should be supplied with a travel first aid kit. The HSE guidance on the contents of a minimum first aid kit are:ï first aid guidance leafletï 6 individually wrapped sterile plastersï 2 triangular bandagesï 2 safety pinsï 1 large sterile dressingï Individually wrapped moist cleaning wipesï 1 pair of disposable hypoallergenic gloves
First Aid ContainersPurchase and Replenishment of First Aid ContainersAll purchases of first aid equipment and containers must be made from approved Force suppliers. Purchases, replacement or replenishment items of first aid equipment must be ordered and managed using the normal requisitioning procedure through the Force Buying Co-ordinators.First Aid RoomsA suitable first aid room will be available where the assessment of first aid needs identifies this as necessary. It is also good practice to ensure a first aid room is identified for all new build projects within the Force. The first aid room should contain essential first aid facilities and equipment and be readily accessible to stretchers. The room should be exclusively used for first aid, occupational health provisions or breast feeding mothers. Refer to the Health and Safety (First Aid) Regulations for guidance on examples of facilities and equipment which should be provided.In summary, to be effective the first aid room must:ï Be equipped with a couch, desk, chair and telephone.ï Be suitably lit and ventillated.ï Contain a sink and hot and cold running water.ï Contain soap and paper towels.ï Contain a foot operated waste container.ï Contain a store for first aid materials etc.Provision of information to EmployeesFirst aid notices will be clearly displayed in appropriate locations in all Wiltshire Police workplaces. The notices will detail the local first aid arrangements and location of first aid personnel, facilities and equipment.All police staff will be informed of the Force’s first aid arrangements via the police staff induction course. Local arrangements will be discussed by line managers as part of the local induction at their designated place of work.All police officers and special constables will be informed of the Force’s first aid arrangements as part of their probationary training. Local arrangements will be discussed by line managers as part of the local induction at their designated station.Police support volunteers and agency staff will be informed of the Force’s first aid arrangements by their local Line Managers.
Monitor and ReviewWorkplace and Vehicle First Aid ContainersAll workplace first aid containers must be monitored and reviewed regularly by the local nominated first aider or appointed person. Vehicle first aid containers should be reviewed as part of the routine weekly vehicles checks. Replenishments and replacement should be ordered as soon as possible as per the above procedure.First Aid Procedure Document and Risk AssessmentsThe First Aid Procedure will be monitored and reviewed on a regular basis and in light of legislative change by the Health and Safety Section. The Force Occupational Health and Safety Committee and local Health and Safety Committees will also be responsible for monitoring the procedure document and its implementation on an annual basis.The Health and Safety Section in conjunction with staff association representatives will also review local first aid procedures and risk assessment at individual stations / offices as part of the annual health and safety audit process.
INDEXCONTENTS	2Introduction	3Overview	3Glossary of Terms	3Strategic Aims	3European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) Compliance	3First Aid Procedure	5Legal Requirements	5Responsibilities	6Senior Managers	Error! Bookmark not defined.Line Managers	6Police Officers, Special Contables and Specific Police Staff Error! Bookmark not defined.First Aid at Work (FAW) Certificated (paid) Police Staff	6Emergency First Aid at Work (EFAW) Certificated (paid) Police Staff	6Appointed Person	7First Aid Provision	8Risk Assessment	8First Aid Arrangements	10Approved First Aid Certificated Police Staff	10First Aid Training	11Police Officers, Police Community Support Officers and Special Constables	11Force Tactical Medics (TFU and PSU)	11Firearms Officers	11Custody Sergeants / Detention Officers	11Officer Safety Trainers and Physical Training Instructors	11Recording and Monitoring of Trained First Aid Staff	11First Aid Containers	12Workplace First Aid Containers	12Vehicle First Aid Containers	12Force Tactical Medics First Aid Containers	13Custody First Aid Provision	13Travelling First Aid Kits	13First Aid Containers	14Purchase and Replenishment of First Aid Containers	14First Aid Rooms	14Provision of information to Employees	14Monitor and Review	15Workplace and Vehicle First Aid Containers	15First Aid Procedure Document and Risk Assessments	15INDEX	16EMERGENCY FIRST AID PROVISION FORM	17
EMERGENCY FIRST AID PROVISION FORMInjured Person (please use capitals where appropriate)NameDate of BirthJob / DeptDivisionAddressDetails of IncidentDate / Time of IncidentLocation of IncidentDetails of Injury /IllnessDetails of IncidentDetails of First Aid ProvidedAfter Care / OutcomeDISCLAIMERI am the above named person and have been offered appropriate treatment/and transport to hospital. I accept that any consequences, medical or otherwise, resulting from my failure to accept the offer of treatment or transport is my responsibility alone.SignatureWitness (FirstAider)Details of Person Treating (please use capitals where appropriate)NameDateSignatureFAW / EFAWPlease send all completed forms to your Divisional / HQ Health and Safety Administrators.

WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE PROCEDURE        First Aid - Response to Acid AttacksProcedureEffective from: 26.04.18
TABLE OF CONTENTSIdentification	3Ownership	3Revision History	3Approvals	3Distribution	3Equality Impact Assessment	4Consultation	4Implications of the Procedure	4Training Requirements	4IT Infrastructure	4STRATEGIC PRIORITIES	5RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	5DATA PROTECTION	5FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	5MONITORING and REVIEW	5WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDURE	5
IdentificationProcedure Title:	Response to Acid Attacks ProcedureVersion:	V1OwnershipDepartment Responsible:		Health and Safety, People Services Procedure Owner:	Sarah Somers, Head of Health and Safety Dr Rachel Oaten, Consultant in Emergency Medicine / S/Inspector 4327 Rachel OatenDavid James, Health and Safety AdvisorRevision HistoryEffective From	26.04.18Next Review Date:	Annual or when significant changes in work activity,process or procedure occur.Revision Date   Previous Revision DateSummary of Changes25.04.19ApprovalsThis document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionOccupational Health and Safety Committee (CC chair)26.04.18V1Chief Officer GroupNot requiredDistributionThis document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-Brief--ï Force control room Inspectors and Supervisorsï Community Policing Teamsï Special Constabularyï People Development--
Equality Impact AssessmentConsultationList below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDateConsultedVersionOccupational Health and Safety Committee26.04.18V1Implications of the Procedure Training RequirementsAny perceived training requirements needed to implement this procedure should be identified here.IT InfrastructureState here whether implementation of this procedure requires any input from IT, adaption and/or addition to any IT systems or packages?
GLOSSARY OF TERMSTermMeaningHSEHealth and Safety ExecutiveSTRATEGIC PRIORITIESThe Force Priorities linked to this document are set out below.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSAll other Wiltshire Police Health and Safety Policy’s and ProceduresDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this procedure will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING and REVIEWThis procedure will be monitored and reviewed every 6 months and/or in light of legislative change by the Force Clinical Governance Consultant in conjunction with the Head of Health and Safety. The Force Occupational Health and Safety Committee will be responsible for the approval and monitoring of the procedure document and its implementation on an annual basis.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDUREDoctor Rachel Oaten, Clinical Governance Consultant (S/Insp 4327 Rachel Oaten) Sarah Somers Head of Health and SafetyDavid James Health and Safety Advisor
1. Legal RequirementsThe Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 imposes a duty of care on the employer to ensure, so far as reasonably practicable, the health, safety and welfare of all staff and others affected by our undertakings. In addition, sections 7 and 8 of the Act state that staff must take appropriate steps to safeguard their own health and safety as well as that of others.The Health and Safety (First Aid) Regulations 1981 sets out the essential aspects of first aid that employers have to address including the requirement to:ï Regulation 3(1) : Provide or ensure that there are provided, such equipment and facilities as are adequate and appropriate in the circumstances for enabling first aid to be rendered to their employees if they are injured or become injured at work.ï Regulation 3(2) : Provide or ensure that there is provided, such numbers of suitable persons as is adequate and appropriate in the circumstances for rendering first aid to their employees if they become injured or ill at work. This person shall not be suitable unless they have undergone Health and Safety Executive approved training.ï Regulation 4 : An employer shall inform his employees of the arrangements that have been made in connection with the provision of first aid including location of equipment, facilities and personnel.The Regulations do not oblige employers to provide first aid for anyone other than their own employees. Despite this, the Force has a duty of care to members of the public and others affected by our undertakings, therefore all police officers are trained to appointed person level. Specified police staff in operational roles, for example police community support officers also receive basic first aid training.2. Procedure OverviewIt is recognised that our employees will frequently be called to emergency incidents where the immediate provision of first aid will save lives and minimise further harm and suffering. Thus, whilst the primary responsibility for emergency medical support rests with the ambulance service, some of our employees need to be able to administer first aid in emergency incidents. .3. PurposeWiltshire Police recognises the importance of supporting and enabling its workforce in being able to serve and protect our communities. As a Force we want to be seen responsive and adaptive to current threats to our community, bringing those responsible for such offences to justice whilst also protecting our staff. There has been recent concern raised nationally with regards to acid attacks and their increasing prevalence. This has led to the National Police Chief Council providing forces with advice with regards to officer safety. Wiltshire Police want to ensure that we have a robust response to any such
attack occurring in our force area and that every officer feels supported, equipped and competent in their response to initially manage such incidentsThis policy provides a framework to ensure:ï Incidents involving acid and other noxious chemicals are adequately managed in the initial phase if Wiltshire Police are first on sceneï A consistent approach and appropriate equipment is available to staff through consultation with Wiltshire Police First Aid Working Group.4. ScopeThis policy applies to all members of Wiltshire Police staff who are public facing but predominantly to operational officers. All Wiltshire Police staff should have an awareness of acid attacks and the impact they can have on our staff and communities. Specifically all those who are frontline public facing will have additional input through People Development to allow them to manage the initial phase of an attack from a first aid and officer safety point of view and also where appropriate be equipped with supplies to assist a victim of such an attack.5. Definitions5.1 Acid AttackAn acid attack is a form of violent assault defined as the act of throwing acid or a similarly corrosive substance onto the body of another with the intention to disfigure, maim, torture, or kill. Perpetrators of these attacks throw corrosive liquids at their victims, usually at their faces, burning them, and damaging skin tissue, often exposing and sometimes dissolving the bones.The most common types of acid used in these attacks are sulfuric and nitric acid. Hydrochloric acid is sometimes used, but is much less damaging. Aqueous solutions of strongly alkaline materials, such as caustic soda (sodium hydroxide), are used as well, particularly in areas where strong acids are controlled substances.5.2 Clinical GovernanceThis is defined as a system through which Organisations such as Wiltshire Police are accountable for continuously improving the quality of their services and safeguarding high standards of care by creating an environment in which excellence in care delivered by officers and police staff will flourish.The Force Clinical Governance Lead is Dr Rachel Oaten FRCEM BSc (Hons) Consultant in Emergency Medicine at Salisbury District Hospital. Other members of the governance group include members of staff from People Development, Operations, Health and Safety and a Paramedic who works locally with South Western Ambulance Service.
5.3 First Aid Working GroupThis is a newly formed working group within Wiltshire Police looking to ensure that we are meeting national requirements for first aid training, ensuring first and foremost our officers are as protected and skilled as they can be to serve the communities within our Force footprint. The group will review incidents, feedback, equipment and training with a view to becoming a Force that is viewed a carrying out best practice nationally.6. PrinciplesGiven the increasing frequency nationally in which Police are dealing with the effects of acid attacks as well as some isolated cases starting to appear more locally it is vital there is robust guidance in place for staff to follow. In some cases Wiltshire Police officers may be first on scene it is now considered imperative that staff have awareness training into this and also are given the tools to be able to manage an initial incident in the absence of anyone more medically trained e.g. Ambulance Service being on scene. This awareness training will be developed by People Development in conjunction with the First Aid Working Group and delivered in a variety of settings.Wiltshire Police will ensure that the relevant, risk assessments and equipment necessary to ensure staff safety and minimise harm to an individual subject to an acid attack are made available to staff including appropriate safety equipment and consumables. Recent NPCC guidance has been noted and incorporated into this procedure with regards to staff protection and first aid administration.Safety equipment should be provided to anyone who is public facing. This will be clearly identified and carried in operational police vehicles.Staff having access to the additional equipment must have the relevant skills and training to be able to ensure their own safety and that of any casualty. The exact level of competence required has been determined by People Development.All front line, public facing staff should be in possession of a basic police first aid certificate. Officers who are more likely to attend acid related incidents will have increased awareness training around protecting themselves, others and the initial phase of managing casualties should there be no medical personnel on scene.Staff that attend incidents and administer any treatment are expected to provide feedback on any incidents they attend through new feedback processes that are being developed in conjunction with Force Communications. This will allow us to gather a more realistic picture as to what staff encounter on a daily basis and help guide further training and equipment requirements.
There is no nationally recognised awareness training available at present and this training will be an internal Wiltshire Police developed training initiative and probably one of the first forces to do so in the Country.Within this procedure it is recognised that some officers / staff may not wish to provide certain treatments as it is out of their remit and this should be accepted. However, staff who feel that by carrying out an intervention such as cutting off clothes or starting to reverse the burning process, that they are acting in the affected individuals best interest will be supported by Wiltshire Police and will be provided with feedback and an opportunity to discuss the incident with a member of the First Aid Working Group.Any staff member who does feel empowered and compelled to treat a burnt patient above and beyond basic life support should follow the suggested guidelines in Appendix A.Quarterly meetings will be held by the First Aid Working Group to ensure trends are reviewed both nationally and locally and also review any incidents where officers or staff have needed to use equipment supplied by Wiltshire Police. These meetings will be documented, written feedback will be provided to officers who submit incidents or near misses and will ultimately be fed back into Wiltshire Police Occupational Health and Safety Committee meetings chaired by the Chief Constable.7. Training All police officers and police staff whose role is public facing will receive awareness training on: How to deal with an Acid Attack and the immediate first aid treatment. (see appendix A). Training will be delivered during their Initial First Aid Course by the Operational Training team within People Development. Refresher training on Acid Attacks will be reviewed by the First Aid Working Group annually.8. EquipmentEquipment will be initially decided and reviewed by the First Aid Working Group. Protective EquipmentEvery frontline facing member of staff should have readily available to them equipment to be able to protect themselves from injury and bodily fluids when attending an incident.This will include nitrile gloves for skin protection, eye protection for protection from any noxious chemicals and bodily fluids e.g. phlegm / blood, and face masks to minimise any inhalation injury.
First Aid Equipment: Each first aid kit on vehicles will contain equipment to manage the initial phase of an acid attack this will include fluid to pour over skin to stop the burning process and shears to remove clothing.Equipment as and when used should be replaced as soon as practicable with replacement equipment being issued from Wiltshire Police Stores, Devizes.9. Employee responsibilitiesPublic facing employees must ensure they:ï Protect themselves at all times with personal protective equipment available to them. As a minimum gloves should be worn when approaching or treating a person suspected of being the victim of an acid attack.ï Inform Force Control Room as soon as practical to instigate appropriate response from other agencies relevant information where possible should include state of casualty, areas affected by burns and risk to other personnel entering area.ï Staff must have a basic first aid understanding of acid attacks and the initial phase of managing their own safety and that of affected casualties.ï Remain in-date and competent with first aid trainingï Operate within the policies and protocols of Wiltshire Police at all times when operational; this should include completing any relevant paperwork relating to the injury / care delivered for the First Aid Working Group to review.10. Policy Review and Clinical GovernanceGiven the infancy of acid attack awareness across the County this whole policy will be reviewed in six months’ time as it is expected incidents will have evolved and the Operational capability to respond to incidents of this nature may well have changed.There will be quarterly meetings of members of the First Aid Working Group to ensure Compliance with Force Policy, Audit of incidents where first aid skills of officers have been utilised and a report prepared for the quarterly Health and Safety Meeting.Any complaints / incidents relating to officers and their actions will be dealt with swiftly, robustly and in- line with Wiltshire Police Complaints Policy.With the staffing structure we have in place one of our key aims is to be transparent, learn from any incidents and ensure compliance with local and national Policies / Requirements. Wiltshire Police have the added benefit of having a Consultant in Emergency Medicine who can review incidents and if necessary offer support and advice on incidents. With an effective governance structure in place Officers and staff should feel supported in making decisions and not in fear of retribution / disciplinary action.
                                     Appendix A Operational Response to Acid Attacks
WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE PROCEDUREFirst Aid Scope of Practice ProcedureEffective from: 14.02.2020
TABLE OF CONTENTSIdentification	3Ownership	3Revision History	3Approvals	3Distribution	3Equality Impact Assessment	4Consultation	4Implications of the Procedure	4Training Requirements	4IT Infrastructure	4STRATEGIC PRIORITIES	5RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	5DATA PROTECTION	5FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	5MONITORING and REVIEW	5WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDURE	5
IdentificationProcedure Title:	First Aid - Scope of Practice ProcedureVersion:	V2OwnershipDepartment Responsible:		Health and Safety, People Services Procedure Owner:	Sarah Somers, Head of Health and SafetyDr Rachel Oaten, Consultant in Emergency MedicineRevision HistoryEffective From	14.02.2020Next Review Date:	Annual or when significant changes in work activity,process or procedure occur.Revision Date   Previous Revision DateSummary of Changes01.09.1814.02.2020Standard review – no change requiredApprovalsThis document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionOccupational Health and Safety Committee (CC chair)26.04.18V1Chief Officer GroupNot requiredDistributionThis document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-Brief--Email to relevant affected Staff/OfficersThis procedure will be disseminated to the following groups of staff:ï PSU Medicsï First Aid Working Groupï Health and Safety Committeeï People Development--
ï Special Constabulary (specifically qualified Paramedicsand Doctors)Equality Impact AssessmentConsultationList below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDateConsultedVersionOccupational Health and Safety Committee26.04.18V1Implications of the Procedure Training RequirementsAny perceived training requirements needed to implement this procedure should be identified here.IT InfrastructureState here whether implementation of this procedure requires any input from IT, adaption and/or addition to any IT systems or packages?
GLOSSARY OF TERMSTermMeaningHSEHealth and Safety ExecutiveSTRATEGIC PRIORITIESThe Force Priorities linked to this document are set out below.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSAll other Wiltshire Police Health and Safety Policy’s and ProceduresDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this procedure will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING and REVIEWThe Scope of Practise Procedure will be monitored and reviewed annually and/or in light of legislative change by the Force Clinical Governance Consultant in conjunction with the Head of Health and Safety. The Force Occupational Health and Safety Committee will be responsible for the approval and monitoring of the procedure document and its implementation on an annual basis.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDUREDoctor Rachel Oaten, Clinical Governance Consultant (S/Supt 4327 Rachel Oaten) Sarah Somers, Head of Health and Safety
1. PurposeWiltshire Police recognises the importance of supporting and enabling its workforce in being able to serve and protect our communities. As a Force we want to be seen as responsive and adaptive to the needs of communities whilst protecting our staff who serve them. With a dynamic ever changing staff base it is recognised that some people already in the Force or joining the Force may come with extended skill sets e.g. Doctors and Paramedics joining as Special Constables or Transferees from other force areas with additional extended skills e.g. PSU Medics.This procedure provides a framework to ensure:ï Staff are supported in utilising their additional qualifications if required.ï A consistent approach and appropriate equipment is available to staff through Consultation with Wiltshire Police First Aid Working Group.2. ScopeThis procedure applies to all members of Wiltshire Police staff who are public facing and have an additional clinical/medical skill set.3. DefinitionsScope of practiceScope of practice describes the procedures, actions, and processes that a healthcare practitioner is permitted to undertake in keeping with the terms of their professional license. The scope of practice is limited to that which the law allows for specific education and experience, and specific demonstrated competency. Each jurisdiction has laws, licensing bodies, and regulations that describe requirements for education and training, and define scope of practice.DoctorDoctors are responsible for leading the care of patients. They evaluate symptoms, consider possible diagnoses, undertake examinations and tests, advise patients on treatment options and monitor the progress of treatment. If necessary, they will refer patients onwards to a specialist doctor or other health professional for further opinion. All doctors that work with patients in the UK must be registered with the GMC to undertake clinical practice. Since 2009, they are also required to have a medical licence to practice that gives a doctor the legal authority to undertake certain activities in the UK, for example prescribing medication. Doctors are described by the specialist area that they practice in, for example Emergency Medicine, and by the level of training and experience they have, which is called their gradee.g. Consultant.
ParamedicA paramedic is a healthcare professional, predominantly in the pre-hospital and out-of-hospital environment, and working mainly as part of emergency medical services (EMS), such as on an ambulance. The scope of practice of a paramedic will vary between countries, but generally includes autonomous decision making around the emergency care of patients. In some countries 'Paramedic' is a protected title and accountable to a professional regulatory body. In the United Kingdom Paramedics must be registered with the Health Care Professionals CouncilClinical GovernanceThis is defined as a system through which organisations such as Wiltshire Police are accountable for continuously improving the quality of their services and safeguarding high standards of care by creating an environment in which excellence in care delivered by officers will flourish.Clinical Governance Lead is Dr Rachel Oaten FRCEM BSc (Hons) Consultant in Emergency Medicine at Salisbury District Hospital. Other members of the governance group include members of staff from People Development, Operations, Health and Safety and a Paramedic who works locally with South Western Ambulance ServiceFirst Aid Working GroupThe First Aid Working Group within Wiltshire Police look to ensure that we are meeting national requirements for first aid training, ensuring first and foremost our officers are as protected and skilled as they can be to serve the communities within our Force footprint. The group will review incidents, feedback, equipment and training with a view to becoming a Force that is viewed as carrying out best practice nationally.4. Principles.4.1 Given the increasing prevalence of police officers being first on scene at incidents as well as often waiting lengthy periods of time for health care professionals to arrive on scene it is now considered imperative that staff with extended skill sets such as police medics, paramedic qualifications and medical qualifications have capability to assist members of public and if necessary provide life-saving treatment. It is fully recognised that first and foremost Policing is at the heart of each Officers actions on scene and that once all immediate policing actions have been carried out medical assistance could be offered, if required. This Policy does NOT support officer’s solely delivering medical care and ignoring policing responsibility and actions required at an incident.4.2 Wiltshire Police will ensure that the relevant, risk assessments and equipment necessary to ensure staff safety and minimise harm to an individual person are made available to staff including appropriate safety equipment and consumables.1.1 
4.2.1 Safety equipment should be provided to anyone who is public facing. Those with an extended skill set will require gloves, masks and protective eye wear along with equipment appropriate to their role.4.3 Staff having access to the additional equipment must have the relevant skills and training to be able to ensure their own safety and that of any casualty. The exact level of competence required has been determined by People Development for qualifications such as Police Medic Role. For external qualifications such as Paramedic / Doctor Individuals wishing to provide additional skills will need to provide proof of qualification, registration with a professional body and ongoing continuous professional development relevant to their qualification. The qualification will need to be verified and approved by People Development and Clinical Governance Lead.4.3.1 Staff are expected to feedback on any incidents they attend through new feedback processes that are being developed in conjunction with Force Communications.4.4 Quarterly meetings will be held by the First Aid Working Group to ensure trends are reviewed both nationally and locally and also review any incidents where officers or staff have needed to use equipment. These meetings will be documented, written feedback will be provided to officers who submit incidents or near misses and will ultimately be fed back into Wiltshire Police Occupational Health and Safety Committee chaired by the Chief Constable.5. TrainingIt is not anticipated that any further training will be needed for staff with existing qualifications such as Paramedic degree. All Officers who are carrying additional equipment and working at a higher skill set will keep up their own mandatory training as set out in the requirements of their role e.g. a doctor must maintain their competence in Advanced Life Support.Other roles such as Police Medics will be subject to mandatory training as directed by Wiltshire Police People Development and College of Policing guidelines.People Development will also in conjunction with departmental managers review teams first aid / medical requirements and where necessary upskill specific groups to a level appropriate to the roles they carry out.6. Equipment6.1 Equipment will be initially decided and reviewed by the First Aid Working Group.1.1 
6.1.1 Protective Equipment. This will include nitrile gloves for skin protection, eye protection for protection from any splashes / irritation from chemicals, and face masks to prevent any inhalation injury.6.1.2 Medical Equipment has to be fit for purpose, and sit within the skill set of the officer.6.1.3 The NPCC has provided a statement on the supply of medications to officers and it is down to individual forces and governance groups within to decide on what should be issues. However it is noted that there remain concerns over this.6.2 Equipment as and when used should be replaced as soon as practicable with replacement equipment being issued from Wiltshire Police Supplies, Devizes.7. Employee responsibilitiesAn employee with additional skill set and wishing to Practice within Wiltshire Police must ensure they:ï Protect themselves at all times with personal protective equipment available to them. As a minimum gloves should be worn when approaching or treating a member of the Publicï Inform Force Control Room as soon as practical to instigate appropriate response from other agencies e.g. ambulanceï Remain in-date and competent with their skill set and level of trainingï Operate within the policies, protocols and Governance of Wiltshire Police at all times when in work; this should include completing any relevant paperwork relating to the injury / care delivered for the First Aid Working Group to review.8. Policy Review and GovernanceGiven the infancy of allowing Officers with additional skill sets to carry medical kit operationally this will be reviewed in six months’ time as it is expected incidents / response from other services will have evolved and the Operational capability to respond to incidents may well have changed.There will be quarterly meetings of members of the First Aid Working Group to ensure Compliance with Force Policy, Audit of incidents where advanced skills of officers have been utilised and a report prepared for the quarterly Health and Safety Meeting.
Template v8WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICYFRAUDDate of Publication: December 2019 Version:	1.0Next Review Date:	December 2021
POLICY STATEMENTFraud is a hidden and under-reported crime with victims often in denial or unaware of the criminality behind it. Increasingly fraud is becoming more complex and sophisticated, much of which is targeted at vulnerable and elderly people. Technology is enabling fraudsters to carry out attacks more quickly and employ more complex behaviours to remain undetected.The nature of fraud victimisation is not only financial. The emotional impact is significant and includes guilt, misplaced trust and diminished confidence, resulting in detrimental effects on physical and mental health and increased social isolation.Fraud is a type of criminal activity as defined by the Fraud Act 2006.Fraud is also classified as a ‘lyfestyle’ offence and one where the Proceeds of Crime Act can be applied (see Recovery of Criminal Assets Policy and the Seizure and Retention of Money Procedure).All cases of fraud whether reported direct by the victim or referred by the police are now recorded centrally via Action Fraud and analysed by experts within the National Fraud Intelligence Bureau (NFIB) hosted by the City of London Police. Following analysis, the NFIB provides the police and other law enforcement agencies with individual crime packages that identify viable opportunities for either investigation or disruption.The expectation is that all referrals from NFIB will be considered for investigation, however, as with ‘calls for service’ the decision on whether to investigate an allegation of fraud lies solely with the police.Police forces will not record fraud as crimes. Frauds are now given Non-Crime numbers by Police Forces. All fraud and cybercrime will be managed within the NFIB from where it will be accessed by those Government Departments with an interest in such data.Fraud is reported to Wiltshire Police in a number of ways:1) Disseminations to the Force by the Nation Fraud Intelligence Bureau. These disseminations are sent to a ‘Vault’ which is accessed by the Crime and Communication Centre (CCC) Supervisors. A niche is created and then allocated to the most appropriate department after applying the ‘Fraud Allocation Matrix’ which is contained in the ‘Crime Allocation Policy’ on Firstpoint.2) If a member of the public reports direct to the CCC and it is a ‘call for service’ (see below). It is then allocated according to the ‘Fraud Allocation Matrix’ which is contained in the ‘Crime Allocation Policy’ on Firstpoint.3) Partners Agency referrals who include Wiltshire Council, Department for Work and Pensions and Trading Standards. The Fraud Allocation Matrix is used to identify which department investigates.Fraud investigation by Wiltshire Police:Fraud is investigated in Wiltshire Police by four different business areas:> Community Policing Teams (CPT),> Criminal Investigation Departments (CID),> Safeguarding Adults Investigation Team (SAIT) and> Complex Fraud Team (Wiltshire Fraud Niche allocation inbox)> 
The Fraud Allocation Matrix is applied at the earliest stage by either the Crime Recording Supervisors or the Complex Fraud Manager. The FAM was designed to give some clarity to fraud investigators on which business area deals with the reported crime. It works on a point based system to identify where an investigation might require specialist investigative resource.All frauds that are reported or disseminated to Wiltshire Police are investigated to a conclusion, whether that be aï sanctioned outcome,ï no further police action due to a lack of evidence, support,ï not being in the public interest orï more appropriate for investigation or intervention from partner agencies.All outcomes are currently reported back to the National Fraud Intelligence Bureau by our Crime Registrars Department.Reports investigated by the Wiltshire Police are also subject to consideration of the principals set out in the ‘Fraud Investigation Model’ (FIM). FIM is an extension to the principals set out in the Authorised Professional Practice on Investigation.FIM takes into account the unique nature of fraud crime types and considers that the period of harm to victims can be far greater in frauds than in other crime types. The aim of the FIM is to disrupt and protect at the point of reporting to stop the victim suffering further loss.All investigations will be conducted in line with APP Investigations and the Hierarchal Crime Review Procedure.ACTION Fraud:With the exception of crimes meeting the ‘call for service’ criteria (see below) police can advise the victim to report fraud to Action Fraud directly via the contact centre using the contact telephone number or on-line reporting tool.Action Fraud allocate crime for investigation based on these 5 principles:1. The police force area covering the location of the fraudulent operation/ suspect’s address or for Business related fraud the office address of the employee or if no office address, the Head Office of the company.2. The police force area with the greatest number of individual usages or offences3. The police force area where the first offence was committed4. The police force area where the victim resides or works.5. In the unlikely event that it is impossible to determine a Force Area using these principles the NFIB will determine a Force Area.Offences not recorded by Action Fraud (Do NOT report the following fraud offences to Action Fraud):ï making, supplying or use of articles to commit fraud*ï possessing/controlling article(s) for use in fraud*ï possession of false documents*ï making off without payment/bilking* (forecourt crime)ï 
ï forgery or use of drug prescription*ï fraud or forgery relating to vehicle or driver records*ï other forgery*(* these are not recorded by Action Fraud)All the above offences are recorded within Force where the offence has been committed under the respective Home Office Counting Rule codes.Call for Service (CFS):In general terms a ‘call for service’ is a report that requires a response from the police. In the case of fraud the Home Office Counting Rules (HOCR) define the circumstances that should be treated as a call for service.Reports received from members of the public that they have been a victim of Fraud. The call handler will THRIVE+ the incident and those which meet the call for service criteria will be allocated to the most appropriate department (see Fraud Allocation Matrix). The call for service criteria is defined as follows:> The victim is considered vulnerable or they are at risk> There is a known local offender (i.e. resides in Wiltshire and identity can be determined relatively simply)> The crime is ongoing or has recently occurred (i.e. are there time bound investigative leads – e.g. CCTV, ANPR enquiries etc.).If any of the CFS criteria applies the crime must be investigated as appropriate. If the Call for service criteria is not met the call handler will not create a contact record, but refer the caller to Action Fraud, unless they are Vulnerable or at Risk.POLICY AIMThis policy sets out the way in which reports of fraud are managed within the Force to ensure consistency and maximise efficient use of resources. The policy provides a clear and consistent approach in assessing the vulnerability of all victims of fraud to ensure effective support for vulnerable victims.APPLICABILITYAll police officers and police staff who receive reports of fraud or who may be required to investigate fraud allegations.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEFraud Act 2006Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 Equality Act 2010Human Rights Act 1998 Data Protection Act 2018Freedom of Information Act 2000RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSFraud Investigation Model (FIM) Fraud Allocation MatrixCrime Allocation Policy
Hierarchal Crime Review Procedure Recovery of Criminal Assets PolicySeizure and Retention of Money ProcedureAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEAPP > InvestigationAPP > Investigation > Investigating FraudDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document will be classed as suitable for public release when the final draft has been adopted.MONITORING AND REVIEWThis procedure will be reviewed every two years in the light of any national policy or procedural change or due to changes to law or Force strategy or at such other times as may become necessary. Any review will take into consideration feedback/lessons learned from fraud investigations.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Superintendent Head of HQ Crime is responsible for this policy. All queries relating to this policy should be directed to the Accredited Counter Fraud Manager (Wiltshire Police Complex Fraud Team) or the Force Policy Officer.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	HQ Crime - Complex Fraud UnitPolicy Owner/Author:	Supt. Head of HQ Crime / Accredited Counter Fraud Manager Technical Author:	Force Policy OfficerSenior Officer/Manager Sponsor: ACC Crime and JusticeRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of ChangesApprovals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team20.12.20190.5ACC Crime and JusticeJNCC (Not required for all policies)N/ADistribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionSupt. Sarah ROBINSON, Supt. Adrian BURT, Supt. David MINTY02.12.20190.4Supt. Ben MANT, Supt. Steve KIRBY, John FLYNN02.12.20190.4Implications of the Policy: Training RequirementsNo additional training requirements.IT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure required.
       WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICY and PROCEDUREGifts & HospitalityDate of Publication:	 May 2023 Version:	4.0Next Review Date:	May 2025
TABLE OF CONTENTSPOLICY STATEMENT	3AIM OF THE POLICY	3APPLICABILITY	4LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCE	4RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	4AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE	4DATA PROTECTION	5FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	5MONITORING AND REVIEW	5WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICY AND PROCEDURE	5GIFTS AND HOSPITALITY PROCEDURE	61. RECORDING OBLIGATION	62. RECORDING & APPLICATION PROCESS	62.1 Recording offers of gifts and hospitality	62.2 Authorisation	62.3 The Gifts & Hospitality Register	72.4 Applicants’ guidance	73. ASSESSING OFFERS OF GIFTS AND HOSPITALITY	84. REFUSING GIFTS & HOSPITALITY	84.1 Unacceptable gifts & hospitality	85. ACCEPTING GIFTS & HOSPITALITY WITHOUT AUTHORISATION	95.1 Storage of unauthorised items	95.2 Consumption of perishable Items prior to obtaining authorisation	9DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	10
POLICY STATEMENTOn occasion members of Wiltshire Police may be offered gifts and hospitality by members of the public. Wiltshire Police recognises the fact that the majority of such offers will be made for a genuine reason, for instance a small, inexpensive item such as a card, flowers or chocolates to express gratitude to an individual or team, or an item of food or drink offered through kindness and to show support for the Police Service.It is not anticipated that inexpensive gifts would compromise the integrity of individuals within Wiltshire Police, such as discounts aimed at all members of the wider police service (e.g. advertised discounts through police publications). However, all gifts and gratuities must be declared in accordance with force policy where approval will be required from the Head of the Professional Standards Department (or delegated representative) to accept a gift or hospitality.It is therefore important for Wiltshire Police staff and volunteers to understand when it is appropriate to accept such offers and when it is not. All Officers and staff must be aware that not all offers of gifts and hospitality will be appropriate. The motivations of the donor need not necessarily be criminal or corrupt for the integrity of the individual employee or the service as a whole to be damaged.The NPCC 'Abuse of Position for a Sexual Purpose' strategy sites Gifts and Hospitality as an area of risk/vulnerability with regards to this form of serious corruption. As such the matter is to be considered in annual Integrity Health Checks, conducted as part of the PDR.Any gift or hospitality that is or could be reasonably seen as an attempt by a member of public to initiate or pursue a sexual or inappropriate relationship with a member of Wiltshire Police must be refused and steps taken to alert line management and CCU (see procedure section below).It is vital that all officers, staff and volunteers understand the reporting procedures when they are offered a gift or hospitality to ensure transparency, prevent manipulation and corruption and the opportunities for corruption.Wiltshire Police expects all personnel to abide by the Standards of Professional Behaviour for Police Officers and the Code of Conduct for Police Staff, as well as the College of Policing Code of Ethics and maintain the highest standards of professional conduct. Public confidence relies on the integrity of the Force and is linked directly to one of our organisational principles that we will build upon public approval and confidence in Wiltshire Police, as well as our Force values of impartiality, integrity and transparency.Acceptance of an inappropriate gift if the provision is because the donor is aware of the recipient’s role, whether on or off duty, which could compromise the organisation may lead to disciplinary action being instigatedIt is therefore the responsibility of all staff to declare and report gifts and hospitality offered to them on the basis of their role as part of Wiltshire Police. If in doubt, individuals should contact their first or second line manager, Counter Corruption Unit (CCU) or visit the Gifts and Hospitality intranet site for advice.AIM OF THE POLICYThis policy makes a requirement for all offers of gifts and hospitality to be recorded, unless they are subject to an exemption.Table of contents
APPLICABILITYThis policy and procedure applies to all Police Officers, Police Staff, Special Constabulary and Volunteers.While this policy and procedure may not apply to third Party personnel, they should be made aware of their responsibility to comply with the principles enshrined in the Code of Ethics.This policy and procedure does not apply to individuals acting in their capacity as part of any approved secondary employment or declared business interest.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEThis policy and the procedure take their legal basis from the following principles:ï Bribery Act 2010ï Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015 (s26)ï The Police (Conduct) Regulations 2020 for Police Officers.ï The conditions of employment for Police Staff.ï The principles of ECHR namely; legality, legitimacy, proportionality, necessity and accountability.ï Wiltshire Police Organisational Principles.ï Code of Ethicsï Vetting Codes of PracticeSection 26 of the Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015 relates to the corrupt or other improper exercise of police powers and privileges. A police constable exercises the powers and privileges of a constable improperly if they exercise (or fail to exercise) a power or privilege for the purpose of achieving a benefit for themselves, or a benefit or a detriment for another person.Under the Bribery Act 2010 it is an offence to accept a gift or consideration as an inducement or reward for doing or not doing anything in your official capacity; or showing favour (or disfavour) to anyone in your official capacity. Any money, gift or consideration including hospitality, received from any person or organisation holding or seeking to obtain a contract with the Police may be deemed by the courts to have been received corruptly unless proved otherwise.The offences can be summarised as don't offer a bribe, don't accept a bribe and don't bribe a foreign official. A corporate body can also be liable but may utilise a defence that they had "adequate procedures" in place to prevent bribery.The Bribery Act does not prohibit reasonable and proportionate hospitality and promotional or other similar business expenditure, intended to improve the image of a commercial organisation, to better/present products or services, or to establish cordial relations.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSACPO Guidelines on Gifts, Gratuities and Hospitality College of Policing Code of EthicsNPCC Abuse of Position for a Sexual Purpose strategyAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEAPP – Counter CorruptionTable of contents
DATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWGifts & Hospitality management information will be provided to the People Intelligence Board with overall governance from the Culture Ethics and Standards Board which is chaired by the DCC. .This Policy and Procedure is owned by Professional Standards. The Head of Professional Standards will ensure that this policy is reviewed every two years.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICY AND PROCEDUREProfessional Standards are responsible for this policy and procedure. Contact can be made with the department by the following means – Email: ProfStand@wiltshire.police.ukTable of contents
GIFTS & HOSPITALITY PROCEDURE1. RECORDING OBLIGATIONIt is the responsibility of all members of Wiltshire Police to declare gifts or hospitality offered by a member of the public when the offer is made because the intended recipient is a member of the Police Service. This also applies to an attempt by a member of public to initiate or pursue a sexual or inappropriate relationship with a member of Wiltshire Police.This is a mandatory requirement in all instances where an offer is made by a member of the public or an outside organisation.The obligation to record is applicable whether the individual employee is on or off duty at the time and regardless of whether the offer is accepted or not.There is no requirement to record gifts or hospitality offered by other members of the Police Service. There is also no requirement to record gifts received in the course of normal private life from bona fide friends, relatives and associates.2. RECORDING & APPLICATION PROCESS2.1 Recording offers of gifts and hospitalityAll offers of gifts and hospitality will be recorded on the Gifts & Hospitality Register (located on the Professional Standards SharePoint site) which will be submitted for approval.Even if the gift or hospitality is refused by the member of Wiltshire Police and regardless of the result of the application (approved or denied), the gifts and hospitality register MUST still be completed. This is to identify potential corrupters of police officers and staff, i.e. persons who make multiple offers to multiple officers/staff.Where the motivation of the donor of a gift or hospitality could be seen as sexual or in pursuit of an inappropriate relationship, it does not apply where the gift or hospitality itself is a sexual act or advance. The Gifts and Hospitality register is not the appropriate process to use in such instances as the register is disclosable to the general public. Also, the individual member of Wiltshire Police concerned could be caused significant embarrassment as the register may be viewed by other members of the Force.As such an instance would be an overt and direct risk to the integrity of the Force and the individual, the subject personnel must inform their line management without delay so that any immediate risk to the individual and other personnel can be assessed. A detailed report must then be made to CCU as soon as practicable.2.2 AuthorisationInitial authorisation should be obtained prior to the acceptance of gifts and hospitality wherever possible from a line manager of at least the rank of Inspector or Police Staff equivalent.In urgent cases where authorisation cannot be obtained through the Inspector or Police Staff equivalent, approval may be sought from a line manager of at least the rank of Sergeant or Police Staff equivalent.In all cases, the forms must still be completed and submitted to the Counter Corruption Unit for authorisation.Table of contents
2.3 The Gifts & Hospitality RegisterThe detail that is required to be recorded on the register application is:ï Recipient, Recipient’s department and Line Manager.ï Gift/Hospitality descriptionï Detailsï Valueï Date of Offerï Donor Detailsï Circumstancesï Genuineï Independentï Freeï Transparentï Accepted or Declinedï Authorising Officerï Disposal/Current LocationCCU management nominated by the Head of Professional Standards will maintain the central register for all gifts and hospitality and make the final decision to approve or decline applications.CCU will monitor the register to identify potential threats to the integrity of the Force and its employees from unscrupulous or criminal individuals or groups.The Gifts and Hospitality Register is open to public review to ensure transparency and maintain the integrity of the Force and its employees.2.4 Applicants’ guidanceAlthough many of the fields requiring completion in the Gifts Register are self-explanatory, the guidance below may assist the application process:Gift/Hospitality description: This should be a simple overall description of what was received. For example: Box of chocolates and a card.Details: A detailed description is required, including (if applicable) quantities, etc.Value: Approximate value should be recorded if the full value is not known.Donor Details: As much detail as possible should be entered here regarding the person(s) who made the offer of a gift or hospitality.Circumstances: The applicant should record sufficient detail to identify time and location, reason for being at the location and, if the donor is known to the applicant, how they know them(For example: the donor was a witness or victim in a case dealt by the applicant, a resident on the applicant’s regular beat or the Head teacher of a local school frequented by the applicant as part of community engagement).Genuine: Is the offer made for reasons of genuine appreciation for something the applicant has done? Why is the offer being made? The applicant must ask themselves whether they have solicited the offer in any way or whether the donor feels obliged to make the offer.Independent: Would the offer or acceptance be seen as reasonable in the eyes of the public and would a bystander remain confident that the applicant could remain impartial and independent as a result?
Free: The applicant must not feel obliged to do something in return. What are the donor’s expectations of the applicant in return?Transparent: Would the applicant feel comfortable if the details of their acceptance were made known to the public, colleagues or the Force?Authorising Officer: Remember, the authorising officer must be the Detective Inspector CCU, or Head of Professional Standards or a supervisor of at least the rank of Inspector/Staff equivalent.Disposal/Current Location: If a gift was accepted, the method of disposal or place where it is stored should be clearly described. When items are accepted prior to authorisation and are not perishable (see 6 and 7 below), they should be stored in a secure place on Police premises and the exact location should be noted on the register.3. ASSESSING OFFERS OF GIFTS AND HOSPITALITY.During the course of their duties within the community, police officers and staff may occasionally be offered gifts or hospitality which do not in any circumstances amount to a breach of integrity on the part of either party.Examples of such include the provision of light refreshments as a common courtesy in line with policing duties, inexpensive promotional products from partnerships or conferences, or discounts aimed at all members of the wider police community. There is no requirement to record such gifts and hospitality.While offers of gifts and hospitality should be assessed on a case by case basis, gifts or gratuities that could compromise impartiality should never be accepted.At the point of an offer being made, any member of Wiltshire Police must ask themselves the following questions:- What are the background circumstances?- What are the motivations of the person making the offer?- Does the donor feel obliged to make the offer?- What would the perception of the public be should the gift or hospitality be accepted?4. REFUSING GIFTS & HOSPITALITYWhere the motivation behind the offer or the prevailing circumstances are inappropriate or could be perceived by the public as such then the offer must be refused there and then and the matter declared immediately via the electronic register.4.1 Unacceptable gifts & hospitalityThere is no exhaustive list of circumstances where a gift or hospitality should be immediately refused, however, in the following examples offers must be refused regardless of the value or form that the gift or hospitality may take:ï Gifts of thanks or tokens of affection from a member of the public that is or could be reasonably suspected to be an attempt to initiate or pursue a sexual or otherwise inappropriate relationship.ï Individuals or groups seeking to achieve some form of political objective.ï Individuals or groups seeking to prevent (by lawful means or otherwise) members of the public (as individuals, companies or employees) conducting a lawful activity.ï 
ï Individuals or groups involved in criminality or who advocate either active or passive non- compliance with the law.ï A cash payment (other than donations to specific Police charities or Police supported charities)ï A financial reward resulting from the publication of articles relating to the recipient’s role or duties as a member of the Police Service.Acceptance in circumstances such as these could bring the integrity of the member of Wiltshire Police into question and leave the individual member of the Force open to accusations of corruption that could damage the public trust and confidence in the service.5. ACCEPTING GIFTS & HOSPITALITY WITHOUT AUTHORISATIONWhere authorisation is denied the individual must not accept the offer made to them unless circumstances are such that sufficient offence would be caused to damage the relationship or image of the individual or the Force with that person or community.5.1 Storage of unauthorised itemsIn such cases where a gift is accepted without authorisation, management must be informed as soon as possible and the gift stored in a secure location on Police premises until advice regarding appropriate disposal can be obtained from CCU management (as delegated by the Head of Professional Standards) or a line manager of at least the rank of Inspector/Staff equivalent.If an unauthorised item is perishable and only accepted to prevent offence to the donor then it may not be appropriate to store for a reasonable amount of time pending advice on disposal (for example: food containing dairy or raw meat). In these circumstances it will be appropriate to dispose of the item(s) in an appropriate waste bin as soon as practicable.5.2 Consumption of perishable Items prior to obtaining authorisationIt is made clear in this policy that authorisation must be sought before accepting gifts or hospitality. However, it is recognised that some offers made in good faith will be of perishable food and drink that will spoil if stored awaiting authorisation.In cases such as this, as long as the offer is proportionate to the role the officer is fulfilling then immediate consumption will be appropriate.The individual Officer will be expected to apply this test using their common sense and should seek guidance from a supervisor if required.For example: A box of 6 cream cakes worth £5 offered to a response Officer to share with their shift colleagues may be proportionate, however, the offer to the same officer of a three course meal worth£50 would not.Table of contents
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Professional Standards DepartmentPolicy Owner/Author:	Supt. Head of Professional Standards / SSO Sarah Husband Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor:	 Deputy Chief ConstableRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes30.07.20182.0Draft v1.3 published as substantive version 2.0 replacing ACPO Guidelines on Gifts, Gratuities and Hospitality 25012 as Force policy.11.03.20213.0Scheduled review minor changes to regulation and post titles.02.05.20234.0Minor changes to process onlyApprovals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionForce Policy Officer10.05.20234.0Supt. Steve COX (Head of PSD)02.05.20234.0JNCC(Not required for all policies)N/A Minor amendments onlyDistribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionProfessional Standards portal /local force circulation02.05.20234.0OtherDiversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionImplications of the Policy: Training RequirementsNo additional training requirementsIT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure required.
OverviewWe are all personally responsible for our behaviour at work and should all treat our colleagues fairly and with dignity. This procedure outlines what we should do if we have a grievance to raise within the workplace.The Force and OPCC also recognise that some disagreements in the workplace can be normalin some cases where the role is of a challenging nature or environment, and this can apply in many areas of the Police force and the OPCC. When this occurs the vision of the organisation is to support all parties to resolve the concerns, and work together to conclude disputes and conflicts proactively,collaboratively, and in a timely manner. It is the aim of the organisation to reassure all colleagues that no one should feel reprisal in the event of raising a grievance.The document is aimed to provide information for you, your line manager, and all members of the Police Force and the OPCC. The document clearly explains how the grievance process can be approached inan open and professional way.The grievance process provides a framework through which a member of the Police Force or the OPCC can raise concerns that should be addressed in a timely and structured way. Some grievances canbe communicated via the appropriate line manager, arranging informal conciliation and engagement with the colleague’s agreement. The formal grievance procedure is in place to support wherethe informal resolution process may not have worked, or an agreement could not be reached. The individual has the right to decline informal resolution and early intervention if they wish to take the formal route.The grievance procedure comprises of three stages:InformalInformal resolution and engagement with your line manager, or an alternative suitable manager, or HRrepresentative to explore the grievance and discuss possible resolution.FormalFormal Investigation and resolution meeting(s)AppealFormal Appeal to Senior Management or Executive Leadership Team
Term	MeaningAn outcome that provides the individual with satisfaction that their concern has been given
ResolutionMediationIndividualAssigned ManagerInvestigating Officer
due consideration and where possible & appropriate, that action has been taken to address their concernsAn exchange of views that provides a basis for resolution of the concerns that have been raised. Facilitated by a third party, both parties enterinto an agreement and commitments to support a mutually agreeable outcome. The individual who is raising the complaintThe nominated member of the organisation who is responsible for the informal stage of the process including reviewing all information and advising on the most appropriate method of resolution.The nominated member of the organisation who is responsible for the completion of the investigation and advising on the most appropriate method of resolution.
Policy Aim	?The grievance policy is aimed to secure sustainable solutions to workplace disputes, conflicts and complaints. Examples of this may include;Disagreements between colleaguesDisagreements within or between teams or departments Disagreements between managers and their colleagues or teamConcerns or complaints about the allocation or distribution of resource or workload Concerns or complaints raised around the organisations decision makingGeneral Principles	?This process is aligned to the ACAS Code of Practice for grievance procedures.By raising a grievance, the individual is accepting the terms of this procedure and enters into the process with the agreement to seek a resolution. All parties should have the opportunity to seek an amicable resolution at the most appropriate stage within the process.The individual has the right to representation for all stages of the process.Confidentiality should be defined and agreed at the start of proceedings. Any serious misconduct or criminal matters may need to be escalated further. The individual party has a responsibility of confidentiality in the respect of the other parties involved. The disclosure of facts to others within the organisation will need to be formally agreed.When raising a grievance, in the first instance this can normally be raised with the line manager. Where this is not appropriate, the grievance may be referred to another line manager or the HR team, who can assign an alternative manager to support with the grievance process.All members of Wiltshire Police and the OPPC have the right to have their grievance heard through all stages within the process, up to and including the final stage of appeal with an assigned senior manager.
Outline of the grievance processStageMeet with the individual to fully understand theissues being raisedLine Manager or Alternative suitable manager orInformalExplore OptionsHR RepresentationIdentify Appropriate ChannelAgreed timescales with all partiesFormalInvestigation and ResolutionOnce briefed on the matter the IO will meet with the individual and advise on appropriate timescalesInvestigating officerAgreed timescales with all partiesAppealSenior Management or Chief OfficersReview initial Investigation and follow up outstanding actions if requiredRelevant ELT or SLT (Force or OPCC)A meeting to be set up, within 14 days of Formal stage concludingWhat is a grievance?	?On occasion there will be colleague disagreements that may result in a grievance being raised. If they are addressed at the earliest opportunity, they are more likely to achieve a prompt resolution. Grievances that are not resolved can leave individuals distressed and anxious over a prolonged period.Colleagues are encouraged to have discussions with their line manager or HR to enable them to explain their grievance. They will be given an opportunity to explore what a successful resolution may look like. Examples of this could be early interventions like informal conversations, mediation and engagement resolution.Formal complaints are grievances where early interventions have been unsuccessful, or considerations have been made during proceedings that the grievance is so significant/serious that it warrants enacting a formal investigation.Complaints fall into two categories, these are: Complaints against organisational decisions  Behavioural complaints
Issues excluded from the grievance process	?The grievance procedure is not intended to apply, and will not be used, under the following circumstances: Illegal activities, wrongdoing or malpractice (protected disclosures) and any concerns relating to this should be raised under the police force reporting An existing appeal/review process is already in place or begun i.e. job evaluation process, disciplinary/conduct matters, redundancy, flexible working or study allowance Expiry of a fixed term contract of employment Concerns related to organisational benefits and pensions, statutory deductions from pay, for example income tax and national insurance Personal matters not relating to employment Complaints such as disappointment when an individual has not been successful in a promotion/interview process.Timeframes	?Where the formal procedure has been initiated it should always be the aim to resolve grievance proceedings in the most realistic timeframe and with the agreement of all parties. This will be determined by the complexity of the case, number of colleagues involved, and the agreements that are made. It should be clear the proceedings are not open ended, and the process should be delivered in a timely manner for all parties through to resolution.Where there maybe concerns that the agreed timescales cannot be met, amended timeframes can be agreed in conjunction with HR, and with the agreement from all parties. For example, sickness or absence of an involved individual cannot mean that the matter will be delayed indefinitely, and in some cases will be reviewed in conjunction with the HR team.All extensions to the agreed timescales must be documented and a rationale provided.What does resolution look like?	?Formal resolution can be delivered in many forms and will usually be individual to the grievance that has been raised. Some examples include: Clarification of a misunderstanding Exchange and acceptance of differing perspectives/feelings Agreement to provide feedback to someone on their behaviour  Acceptance of an explanation or an apology Agreement to implement a development plan or actions  Agreement to modify poor practice or behaviour Agreement to engage in mediation sessions to improve relationsThere are several other examples to support resolution, and some will not be appropriate for every case. However, it does provide insight to some of the types of the resolution processes.Process requirements:
All parties that are involved to treat each other with dignity and respect when working towards a resolution.Those managing the grievance process should apply honesty, integrity, and transparency within a realistic and agreed timescaleRaising a grievanceTo initiate the process, the individual should complete the online Grievance Form within Unit 4 HR system which will go directly to HR for review before being allocated. Line Management should encourage the reporting of all grievances via the Grievance Form, however, in rare circumstances a Grievance Form may be completed by an HR Representative upon receiving a verbal report of a grievance.The Grievance Form provides the basis and information for the grievance, so it is important that the individual completes the Issue Details tab thoroughly. The form should outline clear details of the nature of the grievance and any potential resolution the individual hopes to achieve so that the assigned manager can review.If it is deemed that the matter is suitable for the grievance process then a meeting will be arranged with all parties in a reasonable timeframe agreed between the individual, the assigned manager, and HR.Informal	?The Informal stage is an opportunity for the individual to explore the issue with a line manager, suitable alternative manager or HR representative. Initial contact should be made by HR or line manager within 10 working days of receipt of the Unit 4 Grievance form.The Informal stage may not include a full investigation if the Assigned Manager and the individual can agree on a suitable resolution from an initial discussion meeting.Assigned manager actions at the conclusion of the Informal stageOutcome: The Assigned Manager should confirm verbally the outcome of the resolution meeting within seven working days of the meeting taking place.Enter the mediation process: The HR representative will support and engage with the individual to organise for suitable mediation to take place.Timescales: The Assigned Manager should monitor the next seven working days and ensure the individual has reached their decision in relation to any further action. The matter cannot be left unresolved.Notification: The Grievance form on Unit 4 ERP should be completed and all relevant paperwork uploaded. This will be reviewed by HR prior to being signed off as complete.If the matter is resolved: The individual will receive information by email through the Unit 4 HR system.
If the matter is unresolved: Individuals are invited to respond to the notification from the Unit4 HR system to escalate to Formal. The HR team will be notified of this and will progress as appropriate.Withdrawal of the grievance: The individual should notify HR to complete the closure of the Grievance form.Formal	?Where an individual does not feel that their grievance has been resolved within the informal stage, the individual may escalate this to a Formal Stage. They should respond to the Unit 4 notification to reject the outcome from the Informal stage.The Formal stage is to be concluded within a reasonable and agreed timescale. A period of up to 10 working days from receipt of that written notification is then permitted for the HR team to allocate a suitable Investigation Officer, and for the Investigating Officer to make contact with the individual. In the case of OPCC staff the Investigation Officer must be a member of a shared services department.The Investigating Officer will be responsible for discussing the time frames with all those involved and agreeing and outlining the expectations of those. We recognise that some investigations can be more complex and so may require more time to reach a conclusion. It is the responsibility of the Investigating Officer to keep all parties updated throughout the duration of proceedings.Once the Formal stage of the grievance process has commenced, the role of the Investigating Officer is to investigate and determine possible resolution/s. This will vary according to the nature and complexity of the grievance.Initial discussion: The Investigating Officer will have a discussion with the individual at an early stage. They must understand the nature of the grievance and scope the level of intervention that may be required.Investigation: The grievance should be fully investigated within this stage. The structure of the investigation is the responsibility of the Investigating Officer, and the scale of the investigation should be proportionate to the nature of the grievance.Where a colleague is seen to be part of the grievance investigation (e.g. where they are the subject of the grievance or a witness), they should be provided with appropriate details, mindful of GDPR, of the grievance prior to a meeting. This is normally communicated via a manager or HR representative aligned to the grievance stage. In some cases, the Investigating Officer may elect to provide the colleague with a summary if there is sensitive information contained within the Grievance Form.At the conclusion of the investigation, a draft copy of the report can be made available to the individual prior to any resolution meeting so they have time to consider their response/s. In some circumstances the evidence given by some witnesses may have to remain confidential. The Investigating Officer should engage with HR prior to sharing report or findings with an individual. Where confidentiality is required an appropriate summary of the evidence gathered can be provided. It is recommended that the Investigating Officer informs the individual what the potential outcome may be prior to the resolution meeting.Resolution meeting(s): Following the investigation the Investigating Officer will meet with the individual and offer suggested solutions based upon the findings of their investigation. This may involve others or be on an individual basis.NB: The individual is entitled to representation from their staff association, or a colleague, at each stage of the proceedings
After the resolution meeting the Investigating Officer should provide written notification to the individual, summarising the outcome of the meeting.A period of up to seven working days from receipt of that written notification is then permitted to allow the individual time to consider if they are: (list not exhaustive) Satisfied that the grievance has been resolved and the matter can be closed  Not satisfied and wish to Appeal the outcome Commencing the mediation processInvestigating Officer actions at the conclusion of the Formal stageOutcome: The Investigating Officer should confirm verbally the outcome of the resolution meeting within seven working days of the meeting taking place.Enter the mediation process: The HR representative will support and engage with the individual to organise for suitable mediation to take place.Timescales: The Investigating Officer should monitor the next seven working days and ensure the individual has reached their decision in relation to any further action. The matter cannot be left unresolved.Notification: The Grievance form on Unit 4 ERP should be completed and all relevant paperwork uploaded. This will be reviewed by HR prior to being signed off as complete.If the matter is resolved: The individual will receive information by email through the Unit 4 HR system.If the matter is unresolved: Individuals are invited to respond to the notification from the Unit4 HR system to appeal the outcome. The HR team will be notified of this and will progress as appropriate.Withdrawal of the grievance: The individual should notify HR to complete the closure of the Grievance form.Appeal	?Where an individual does not feel that their grievance has been resolved within the Formal stage, the individual may request an Appeal. They should respond to the Unit 4 notification to reject the outcome from the Formal stage.An appeal meeting does not require any subsequent investigation or rehearing of the case, unless deemed necessary.Appeals should normally be heard by an appropriate manager from the relevant ELT / SLT (Force / OPCC). The availability of the SLT/ELT manager may impact upon timescales and should be considered, and communicated, at the earliest opportunity.The assigned SLT/ELT manager will consider the reasons for the appeal within the information received and assess the appropriateness of previous conclusions.Outcome: The outcome of the appeal meeting should be confirmed in writing to the individual within seven working days of the meeting taking place.The appeal stage of the grievance procedure will now have been exhausted and this outcome is final. All paperwork must be attached to the Unit 4 ERP Grievance form.
It should be highlighted, when all stages of the internal procedure have been exhausted, in some cases of grievance, it may still not be possible to mutually resolve differences. There is no further right to an internal appeal.?	General InformationDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, UK General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATIONSuitable for public release.HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUALITY IMPACTThis policy has been drafted to comply with the principles of the Human Rights Act 1998 and Equality Act 2010. Members of Wiltshire Police administering this policy are responsible for ensuring that in its application, those to whom the policy applies, shall not receive less favourable treatment because of their age, colour, disability, ethnic or national origin, gender re-assignment, marital status, nationality, race, religion, sex or sexual orientation.This policy has been subject to an equality impact assessment and has been graded Medium Impact. A full Equality Impact Assessment can be found on the Equality Impact Assessment SharePoint page.?	Revision HistoryVersionDateSummary of ChangesGrievance process - support and guidance	Who is my HR contact?Click here	Click here
       WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICY AND PROCEDUREHATE CRIMEDate of Publication: August 2021 Version:	9.0Next Review Date:	August 2023
TABLE OF CONTENTSPOLICY STATEMENT	3POLICY AIM	3APPLICABLILITY	3LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCE	3RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	4AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE	4DATA PROTECTION	4FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	4MONITORING and REVIEW	4WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICY AND PROCEDURE	4PROCEDURE	5Introduction	5Definitions	5Critical Incidents and Repeat Victimisation	6TACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS	7Welfare	79 POINT PLAN – OFFICERS AND STAFF SUBJECTED TO HATE CRIME	7Reporting and Recording	8Supervision	9INVESTIGATION GUIDANCE	10Golden Hour	10Safeguarding	12Justice	13File Completion	14Work Control	14Multi-Agency Forums (including Hate Crime Advisers)	15Radicalisation	16Glossary of Terms	16APPENDIX 1	Hate Crime Aide Memoire	17APPENDIX 2	Police Obligations – Victim Codes of Practice	18DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	19
POLICY STATEMENTWiltshire Police are committed to working with partners to provide the highest standards of service to members of our communities irrespective of race, colour, national or ethnic origins, religion or belief, gender or gender identity, sexual orientation, disability, age or marital status.We are dedicated to the prevention and detection of crime and disorder and the protection of vulnerable individuals, families and communities. As part of this promise we will robustly pursue those responsible for committing or inciting Hate Crime as well as tackle the causes of the prejudice with our partners. We will conduct all investigations with professionalism, respect, integrity and transparency.To ensure the highest possible standards are maintained, Wiltshire Police will create an environment where staff fully understand the concept of Hate Crime, its ramifications for the community, and how best to tackle it.People that work for our organization should never have to suffer Hate Crime, and we will ensure that where our staff are subjected to it that we treat it with the utmost seriousness, just as we would in the public space. Our staff will be aware of the support available to them where they are subjected to it.POLICY AIMThe aims of this policy and procedure are:ï To ensure that victims and witnesses of Hate Crimes and Hate Incidents have the confidence to report their problems to Wiltshire Policeï To ensure that all Hate Crimes and Hate Incidents are properly identified.ï To ensure that all such crimes and incidents are properly recorded.ï To ensure that the initial Police response to such crimes and incidents is effective and affords the appropriate level of protection and reassurance to victims.ï To ensure that investigations and prosecutions into such crimes and incidents are robust and comply with the Victims Code of Practice (See Appendix 2) and the Witness Charter.ï To ensure that wider community issues and long term problems are effectively identified and addressed using a multi-agency problem solving approach.APPLICABILITYThis policy applies to all Police Officers, Police Staff, Special Constabulary and Volunteers.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEThis policy and procedure guide is intended for all police officers and staff who may come across Hate Crimes or Hate Incidents. It follows the standards and guidance set out in the College of Policing Authorised Professional Practice Guidance on Hate Crime and the National Policing Hate Crime Strategy 2014.Adherence to this policy and its accompanying procedure is based upon the below legislative frameworks:Equality Act 2010Disability Discrimination Act (Amendment) Regulations 2003 Data Protection Act 2018Criminal Justice Act 1988 Criminal Justice Act 2003Anti-Terrorism Crime and Security Act 2001 Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing Act) 2000
Freedom of Information Act 2000 Crime and Disorder Act 1998 Protection from Harassment Act 1997 Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 Public Order Act 1986Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 (Ss15 to 26) Human Rights Act 1988Gender Recognition Act 2004 Civil Partnership Act 2004Racial and Religious Hatred Act 2006 Criminal Justice Act 2003 (Ss145 &146)Additionally staff need to be aware of their duty to adhere to the guidance set out in the Government Equalities Office document: Equality Act 2010 Public Sector Equality Duty; What Do I Need to Know? A Quick Start Guide for Public Sector Organisations.Staff are also reminded of their statutory obligations in relation to managing victims and witnesses of crimes and will adhere to the principles set out in the Code of Practice for Victims of Crime 2015.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSHate Crime Strategy 2018 - 2021Crimes or ASB against Vulnerable Adults Procedure Grading and Deployment Policy and Procedure Stalking and Harassment Policy and Procedure Vulnerability StrategyNational Policing Hate Crime Strategy (see APP Hate Crime)AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEMajor Investigation and Public Protection > Hate Crime [under development] Critical Incident Management > Introduction and types of critical incidents                          > Phase 2 - managing critical incidents Public order > Core principles and legislationInvestigation > Working with victims and witnessesDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy and procedure will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWAn Equality Impact Assessment has been completed and the policy will be continually monitored for adverse impact upon any group. The outcome of this monitoring will inform review of the policy which will take place bi-annually.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Head of Crime Standards & Justice and the Equality Diversity and Inclusion Lead are responsible for this policy and procedure. All queries relating to this policy and procedure should be directed to them.
PROCEDUREINTRODUCTIONThis document provides guidance on the procedures that Wiltshire Police will adopt when a Hate Crime or a Hate Incident is reported to or identified by staff. It should be read in conjunction with the policy section. It is important to note that the information contained below is not exhaustive and differing situations may dictate different or more unusual lines of enquiry.This policy is about protecting our staff and also the public, and as such will inform our internal and external processes. Those incidents that occur within the organisation must be treated as seriously as those in the public.DEFINITIONSHate Incidents and crimes are defined in the College of Policing Authorised Professional Practice Guidance on Hate Crime as:Hate IncidentAny non-crime incident which is perceived, by the victim or any other person, to be motivated by a hostility or prejudice based on a person’s race or perceived race,or Any non-crime incident which is perceived, by the victim or any other person, to be motivated by a hostility or prejudice based on a person’s religion or perceived religionor Any non-crime incident which is perceived, by the victim or any other person, to be motivated by a hostility or prejudice based on a person’s sexual orientation or perceived sexual orientationor Any non-crime incident which is perceived, by the victim or any other person, to be motivated by a hostility or prejudice based on a person’s disability or perceived disabilityor Any non-crime incident which is perceived, by the victim or any other person, to be motivated by a hostility or prejudice against a person who is transgender or perceived to be transgender.Hate CrimeA hate crime is any criminal offence which is perceived, by the victim or any other person, to be motivated by a hostility or prejudice based on a person’s race or perceived raceor Any criminal offence which is perceived, by the victim or any other person, to be motivated by a hostility or prejudice based on a person’s religion or perceived religionor Any criminal offence which is perceived, by the victim or any other person, to be motivated by a hostility or prejudice based on a person’s sexual orientation or perceived sexual orientationor Any criminal offence which is perceived, by the victim or any other person, to be motivated by a hostility or prejudice based on a person’s disability or perceived disabilityor Any criminal offence which is perceived, by the victim or any other person, to be motivated by a hostility or prejudice against a person who is transgender or perceived to be transgender.1.1 All Hate Crimes are therefore hate incidents, but some hate incidents may not constitute a criminal offence.1.2 In deciding to report or record a Hate Incident it is important for staff to note that evidence is not needed. All that is required is a perception on the part of anyone that the incident was motivated by prejudice or hate.1.1 
1.3 Hate incidents and hate crimes can be associated with a number of factors e.g. faith, sexual orientation or age. Additionally the perception that an individual is part of a group or is considered vulnerable is also applicable.1.4 Definitions of Hate Incidents:ï Racist Incident: ‘Any incident which is perceived to be racist by the victim or any other person’.ï Faith Related Incident: ‘Any incident which is perceived to be based upon prejudice towards or hatred of the faith of a victim, or so perceived by the victim or any other person’.ï Disablist Incident: ‘Any incident which is perceived to be based upon prejudice towards or hatred of the victim because of their disability, or so perceived by the victim or any other person’. This definition also includes incidents where the victim is mentally disabled as well as physically disabled.ï Homophobic Incident: ‘Any incident which is perceived to be homophobic by the victim or any other person’.ï Heterophobic Incident: ‘Any incident which is perceived to be heterophobic by the victim or any other person’.ï Biphobic Incident: incident which is perceived to be biphobic by the victim or any other person’.ï Transphobic Incident: incident which is perceived to be transphobic by the victim or any other person’. Transphobic relates to gender issues and not sexual orientation and includes the following definitions:> Transsexual:	Is a person who alters their physical appearance either by operation or hormones to become a member of the opposite sex.> Transgender: Is a person who crosses gender boundaries or a man or a woman that adopts the attributes of the opposite sex.> Transvestite: Is a man or a woman that dresses in the clothing of the opposite sex (cross-dresser)ï Sectarian Incident: ‘Any incident that is perceived to be sectarian by the victim or any other person’. A sectarian incident would be one where the motive or perceived motive is based on hatred or prejudice towards a victim of a different sect or denomination etc. of the same religion as the offender. Examples could include incidents between Catholic and Protestant Christians, or between Shi’a and Sunni Muslims.CRITICAL INCIDENTS and REPEAT VICTIMISATION2.1 A Hate Incident or a Hate Crime has the potential to be or to become a Critical Incidentand should be managed accordingly. This should be considered during the golden hour.2.2 A Critical Incident is defined as ‘Any Incident where the effectiveness of the policeresponse is likely to have a significant impact on the confidence of the victim, their family and/or their community’. Further guidance is available in the publication: Critical Incident Management College of Policing Authorised Professional Practice.2.3 Repeat Victimisation can be an issue for victims of Hate Incidents or Hate Crimes, and this would include both members of the public and police employees. The revised definition of repeat victimisation is:“When the same person or place / premises suffers from more than one incident within a rolling 12 month period or the caller self identifies that they are a repeat victim.”
2.4 Secondary Victimisation occurs when victims of Hate Crime or Hate Incidents experience indifference or rejection from the police, as this effectively victimises them for the second time. Secondary victimisation takes place whether or not in fact the Police show indifference or rejection; it is entirely down to how the victim perceives the interaction with the police. The onus rests entirely with the police to manage the interaction with the victim to ensure that they are left with no feelings of secondary victimisation.2.5 Vulnerability. Victims of hate crime can often lead to being identified as being vulnerable. The revised definition of vulnerability in respect of crimes and incidents is:“A person is vulnerable / at risk if as a result of their situation or circumstances they are unable to protect themselves from harm”’TACTICAL CONSIDERATIONSWELFAREHate Crimes/Incidents within the OrganisationPolice employees who are victims of Hate Incidents or Hate Crimes will receive exactly the same high standard of service that they themselves are expected to deliver to members of the public. Reported crimes and incidents will be managed in exactly the same way.9 POINT PLAN – OFFICERS AND STAFF SUBJECTED TO HATE CRIME1. Hate crime must be progressed expeditiouslyHate crimes are frequently linked to other crimes. All hate crimes must be recorded separately and investigated without delay with an appropriately classified niche occurrence created.2. The victim code applies to all victims, including Officers and StaffComplying with the Victim Code means keeping the victim updated at all stages of the investigation, discussing outcome options and taking account of the victim's point of view before imposing an outcome. It also includes the "right to review" when no further action is recommended.3. Investigation of the hate crimeIt is not appropriate for the Victim of a Hate Crime to investigate any element of a crime that they are involved in. This includes taking statements. The integrity of the investigation and the impartiality of the officer/staff could be called into question, which could undermine the case and/or heighten the impact on the victim.4. Welfare support and supervisionThe victim's supervisor should meet with them as soon as practical and consider OHU. The victim may downplay the impact, but supervisors should be aware of the potential effects of the incident, as well as the wider cumulative impact. The victim's supervisor should also complete an accident and near miss form here.5. Supervisors must ensure their chain of command is informedNotifying your manager ensures better support and subsequent investigation. It is important you inform the relevant Staff Association who can provide valuable additional support to the victim as well.6. Submitting the best evidence for a successful prosecutionDue to the emotional impact of hate crime, the affected officer/staff should not write their own statement. A Victim Personal Statement should be obtained, ideally at the point of charge. The OIC must understand the 'points to prove' for hate crime, refer to the Hate Crime Operational Guidance and is responsible for ensuring the CPS are made aware that the case is hate related.
7. Restorative JusticeThis will be supported by the Force if the victim chooses to take part. It will be facilitated by the Restorative Together Team and the victim will be afforded time to engage.8. CompensationIf awarded compensation at court, the Force will expedite the payment to the officer/staff member automatically via the court decision being sent to Finance.9. The Chief Officer's impact statement must be included in all prosecution filesThis is to be submitted to highlight the severity of the incident and the courts will take this into consideration when sentencing. This is held on SharePoint under ‘Chief Impact Statement.’3.1 Additionally, those police employees identified as being responsible for Hate Incidents or Hate Crimes will be in breach of the code of conduct for police officers or police staff. Accordingly all such cases will be reported to a supervisor and to the Professional Standards Department.3.2 Managers and staff should be aware of the signs that a colleague may be a victim of Hate Crime or Hate Incidents, be it internal to the organisation or not. These signs may include:ï Loss of self-confidenceï Frequent absenteeismï Lower quality of workï Out of character conduct.3.3 Wiltshire Police encourages the disclosure by staff and/or their families of any incident that is of concern to them. It will be recorded as per normal crime recording protocol. All reports will be treated in confidence and dealt with in a thorough and confidential manner. Supervisors should consider referral of staff members to the Occupational Health Unit and relevant staff association. Staff are also able to self-refer.REPORTING AND RECORDING4.1 Hate incidents and Hate Crimes may be reported in several ways. These include: In person (either in the street or at a front counter), via the 999 or 101 call systems, online reporting through the Force website, email, direct to supervisors by members of the team, in writing, or via True Vision. It is also important to recognise that these incidents or crimes could be reported by a third party including an outside agency. This is particularly relevant when one considers the definitions of Hate Crimes and Incidents which make it clear that the hatred or prejudice can be perceived by anyone and not just the victim.4.2 All incidents that are identified as Hate Crime or Hate Incidents will be forwarded to the CCC and a storm log or Niche will be generated as the circumstances dictate. The incident will be recorded as per the Grading and Deployment Policy using THRIVE+. See force guidelines for the prioritisation of calls.4.3 Staff receiving reports of Hate Incidents or Hate Crimes will gather a full first account of the incident in a sensitive and reassuring manner. This will include:ï Any previous history that may identify repeat victimisationï Full description of any suspect(s) including their current whereaboutsï Details and locations of any witnessesï Information to assess the immediate risk to the victimï Assessment for the need for specialist staff to attend (Firearms; CSI; CID; SOLO etc.)ï Issues that might affect the safety of staff deployed to the scene.ï 
4.4 Call centre staff will be in a position to provide immediate safety advice to the victim to minimise any immediate threat and explain what the police response will be and what happens next.4.5 All storm logs will be closed to Niche as either a crime (in the event of a Hate Crime being identified) or as a Crime Related Incident (in the event of a Hate Incident but not a Hate Crime being identified). Full details of the incident or crime will be recorded on Niche. TheM.O. field must reflect the type of hatred or prejudice reported. The ethnicity, religion, disability and sexual orientation of the victim should be recorded within Niche, according to the type of hate crime or hate incident being reported. Tasks created should be recorded as a ‘high’ priority where there is a high threat/harm/risk.Note: where an individual has full recognition under the Gender Recognition Act 2004, the act of disclosure may itself be a criminal offence. Full details of the prohibition on disclosure of information can be found in section 22 of the Gender Recognition Act 2004. These same principles should be applied to all victims and any disclosure should be discussed with the victim in advance.SUPERVISION5.1 Incidents where a Hate Crime is identified will be attended by a Police Officer or Police staff dependant on the THRIVE+ assessment made by the call taker, there will be incidents where attendance will be agreed in the form of an appointment or similar.5.2 An officer of at least the rank of Sergeant must be informed that there has been a report of a Hate Crime or a Hate incident where there is an element of threat, harm or risk. This should in practice be a uniform Sergeant responsible for the resources in the area where the incident has occurred.5.3 Where a report of Hate Crime is of a serious or complex nature, CID will be informed and unless exceptional circumstances prevail, they will attend the scene to direct resources and commence a thorough investigation. A crime will be a serious or complex one if, aside from the hate element, this type of crime would be investigated by the CID. If there is any doubt the duty Detective Sergeant at the investigative hub in question should be consulted.5.4 The CCC will seek to identify if the caller is a repeat victim by conducting research on Wiltshire Police databases. This includes assessing if the family of the victim or their community (both geographic and cultural) have previously been subject to similar crimes or incidents. This information must be passed onto the attending officers so that they can properly assess the situation.5.5 Staff attending the scene should seek to identify the victim and provide immediate reassurance by demonstrating how seriously Wiltshire Police take these incidents. Staff should obtain as much detail as possible about the incident and seek to ascertain if the incident or crime is part of a wider issue for that victim, their family or their community. It is important to note that Hate Crimes and Hate Incidents are based upon perception not evidence. If an individual believes that the incident is motivated by hate or prejudice, then it is.5.6 Staff attending Hate Crimes and Hate Incidents must be aware of the risk of Secondary Victimisation. This occurs when victims of Hate Crime or Hate Incidents experience indifference or rejection from the police, as this effectively victimises them for the second time.5.1 
5.7 The welfare of the victim and witnesses is our paramount concern. Victims of Hate Crime are automatically identified and contacted by ‘Horizon’ the Victim and Witness Care team. Victims will be allocated a Horizon Liaison Officer to act as their single point of contact who can refer to both a Police hate crime advisor and other support services where appropriate.The Victim Care Officer must be identified under the ‘Current officers’ tab on the occurrence. Consideration should be made to signpost to the ‘Good Neighbour Scheme’ for immediate local support. Verbal consent will be obtained from victims when considering sharing information and making referrals to partner agenciesINVESTIGATION GUIDANCE6.1 There may not always be a known offender in all cases, but where one is identified, staff should take full details including description. Where it is necessary to do so in order to prevent further harm or progress an investigation staff will take positive action against any identified offender. In the case of hate incidents, this should be documented on the Niche investigation log and an intelligence report submitted where appropriate.6.2 Staff must assess the vulnerability of the victim, their immediate family and the impact on the community. Hate Incidents and Hate Crimes have the potential to escalate rapidly and cause widespread community tension that could lead to large scale disorders or more serious crimes being committed. The key is to identify where there is a risk and take steps to protect the victim, family and community and take preventative action to diffuse tensions.6.3 Where staff identify a threat to community cohesion, they must at once inform a supervisor of at least the rank of Inspector who will ensure a Community Concern Assessment is completed.GOLDEN HOURï If there is a crime scene, identify it and protect it.ï Consider the forensic opportunities (including fingerprints, DNA, footprints and photography, body worn video) and if in doubt consult with a CSI.ï Conduct house to house enquiries.ï Ascertain the details of all witnesses.ï Search the area for CCTV.ï Consider area search, VIPER and street identification for the offender.ï Consider if it is appropriate for an early arrest.ï Take a detailed account from the victim and consider the provisions for vulnerable and intimidated witnesses.ï Record detailed description of property where relevant.ï Ensure that medical consent forms are signed if appropriate.ï Provide victims, and any witnesses with information about Victim Support including the helpline 0808 168 9111 / 0808 281 0113 (local number)ï Properly assess the incident. This includes assessing incidents to ensure that they do not form part of a ‘course of conduct’ as defined by the Protection from Harassment Act 1997ï 
6.4 In all cases involving a crime, officers should obtain a Victim Personal Statement (VPS) on the first meeting with the victim should they wish to provide a VPS at the time.This VPS will need to be reviewed as any case progresses to ensure that it is refreshed and any longer term effects on the victim, their family or their community are captured for future court purposes. If a VPS has not been obtained then clear rationale must be documented on the MG6 or the OEL to explain why, and this will be revisited prior to any charge of a suspect.6.5 Staff must be aware of the risks of victim and witness intimidation and assess the risk of this at their first attendance. If a risk is identified, staff will record the risk and the ways in which this risk can be removed or managed using a range of methods including:ï Home and mobile alarmsï Mobile 999 telephoneï Home security survey / Bobby Vanï Overt and covert measuresï Safety plansï Measures to capture evidence of intimidation (consult with TSU or PPD where appropriate)ï Targeting of suspects (Surveillance, visits, bail conditions etc)In these cases victims and witnesses must be given clear instructions and details of who to contact 24 hours, 7 days a week. Additionally these issues must be flagged up on any case papers and the issues discussed with the CPS at the earliest opportunity. The Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999 introduced a number of measures to assist victims and witnesses in criminal cases by making the process less traumatic. Section 16 applies to vulnerable witnesses who are defined as those:ï under the age of 18ï Any witness whose quality of evidence is likely to be diminished because they:o are suffering from a mental disorder (as defined by the Mental Health Act 1983);o have a significant impairment of intelligence and social functioning; oro have a physical disability or are suffering from a physical disorder.Some disabilities are obvious, some are hidden. Witnesses may have a combination of disabilities. They may wish not to disclose the fact that they have a disability during initial and subsequent needs assessments. Different witnesses on the autistic spectrum may have very different needs.Section 17 of the act applies to witnesses who are in fear or distress at testifying in the case. The act provides that anyone eligible under s16 or s17 is eligible for Special Measures and makes provision for:ï Screens for witnessesï Evidence given via video linkï Use of intermediariesï Clearing of public galleries in courtï Use of communication aids (e.g. alphabet boards, sign and signal boards, hearing loops)ï Removal of wigs and gowns by Judges and barristersï Pre-trial court visitï 
In extreme cases officers will consider the need to involve witness protection officers to protect witnesses and their families. This is a specialist area of work and advice from the force lead should be taken if this to be considered an option.6.6 Staff will update their activity in relation to Hate Crimes and Incidents, on Niche, by the end of their tour of duty. Where appropriate intelligence reports will be submitted. Ensure where appropriate partner activity is recorded on the Niche record.6.7 Where the victim is Police, they must not be down as the Officer in Case on the niche occurrence, nor own the task.6.8 Supervisors will review the activity undertaken by their staff upon attending a Hate Crime or Hate Incident, by the end of their shift.SAFEGUARDING7.1 Staff allocated Hate Crimes and Hate Incidents for further investigation will ensure that they make contact with the victim and witnesses at the earliest opportunity, provide contact details and explain what will be happening next. This is to include Police staff.7.2 In dealing with hate crimes/incidents relating to or involving a vulnerable person, officers should be mindful of the Three Strands of Vulnerability. The responsibility for completing the vulnerability assessment is with the initial attending officer.A person who is the victim of a hate crime or incident, particularly a repeat victim, may be impacted such that this may increase their likelihood of being vulnerable?“A person is vulnerable/at risk if as a result of their situation or circumstances they are unable to protect themselves from harm.” (see also Force Vulnerability Strategy)Strand 1: Adult - concern for safety – No PPD 1 or VRA is required to be completedStrand 2: Crime or ASB against vulnerable adults – Complete VRAStrand 3: Adults at risk - PPD1 to be completed. DO NOT complete a VRAChildren (Under 18), who have come to the notice of police or who are at risk of harm ALWAYS require a PPD1 to be sent to the Children’s MASH, including being present at any incident which involves any of the above Strands of adult vulnerability.Where a Vulnerability Risk Assessment (VRA) has been completed and a risk has been identified the resultant grading will determine the next course of action:ï High risk incidents will be sent to the Duty Inspector to review and ensure relevant safety/security measures are in place.ï Medium and Standard risk incidents will be sent to the Duty Sergeants to review and confirm any relevant initial actions.Additionally, a task must be sent by the officer completing the VRA to CCC to change the vulnerability marker from ‘initial’ to the relevant level of risk.NB: Responsibility for investigating any crimes will remain with the initial attending officer (unless agreed otherwise).7.3 Investigators are responsible for reviewing any risk assessment of victim and witness safety and ensuring that appropriate measures are in place to protect them.7.1 
7.4 Whilst dealing with a suspect in custody, the investigator has a duty to inform the custody sergeant of any information that relates to the vulnerability of the victim and/or witnesses. This will allow the custody sergeant to make an informed decision around whether or not to refuse bail.7.5 When a suspect has been dealt with, the investigator will inform the victim as soon as practicable. Appendix 2 details the minimum time requirements for updating victims as per the Victims Code of Practice. It should be stressed that these are the minimum standards required and it is expected that staff will in all but the exceptional cases exceed thisstandard.If the suspect has been released on bail (with or without) conditions they will ensure that the victim has adequate safety plans in place. It is vital that the victim and witnesses are made aware of the details of any bail conditions, so that they can report breaches and positive police action be taken to arrest the offender. The fact that the victim has been updated and how they were updated (e.g. phone, in person, letter etc.) will be recorded on the Niche Investigation Log.JUSTICE8.1 The investigating officer has a responsibility to ensure that the CPS are made aware that a case is Hate related. It is suggested that this is clearly identified in the opening comments of the case summary (MG5). Importantly annotate the MG6 to inform CPS that the matter is a Hate Crime.8.2 Penalty Notices will not be issued for any offence which includes a Hate Crime aggravating factor.8.3 Authority must be sought from the Crown Prosecution Service before charging an offence classified as a hate crime. Evidence Review Officers (ERO) can however consider offences in their aggravated form.The Crime and Disorder Act 1998, sections 29-32, has created specific offences in relation to assault, criminal damage, public order and harassment which are aggravated by race or religion. With the exception of these offences, the Criminal Justice Act 2003, sections 145 and 146 empowers the court to give increased sentences for offences aggravated by race, religion, disability or sexual orientation.The CPS national policy is that hate crime needs to be dealt with seriously (mostly by way of court proceedings) to ensure victim confidence, address under reporting and the lack of suitable rehabilitation programmes for offenders.8.4 Restorative Justice Measures may be used in some Hate Crime cases as a means of disposal with the agreement of the Duty Inspector or CPT Inspector.Where restorative justice is used consideration should be given to seeking advice from CPS and considering the views of the victim. Any decision to use such a disposal must be recorded on the niche occurrence and must detail the rationale for this outcome.If a Hate crime is judged to be suitable for RJ as part of a disposal, the restorative intervention can either be delivered in a more immediate manner through Level 1 RJ (‘street RJ’) by the police, or the case can be referred to Restorative Together for Level 2 RJ. Cases should be referred on for Level 2 RJ if they are a bit more complex and may take a considerable amount of preparation before RJ can take place. The referral will be screened for suitability by the restorative justice coordinator.
It is worth noting that even if the case goes to court RJ can still be suitable. This will especially be the case if the victim has questions or anything they would like to say to the perpetrator, which they may not have had a chance to express during the court process.FILE COMPLETION9.1 During the investigation of cases involving Domestic Abuse, Hate Crime and all matters of vulnerability, it is the personal responsibility of investigating officers and supervisory officers to ensure that a timely and quality investigation takes place.9.2 A high quality MG5 is essential in the identification of vulnerable victims and witnesses in the investigation. This report being the key document reviewed by the CPS prosecutor from which the facts are drawn in order to inform the court of the circumstances of the offence(s). Likewise vulnerability should be identified within the MG2 (witness assessment).Victims and witnesses are therefore afforded adequate access to support and protection, before, during or after the trial. The completion of the MG11 to a very high standard will improve the quality of care that is provided by our Victim and Witness bureau. The MG6 must annotate that the incident is a Hate Crime.Supervision is essential during these investigations and where supervisory sign off is required it is mandatory that it is completed.During the investigation where the suspect indicates that they intend to make a Guilty Anticipated Plea (GAP) the investigating officer WILL ensure that detailed and comprehensive witness statements are taken from all of those known victims and witnesses involved in the case. Including Victim Personal Statements. Likewise for NGAP cases.The file will then be built in compliance with the latest version of the National File Standard and the Crown Prosecution Service, Directors Guidance on Charging. Failure to comply with this may amount to a breach of PACE.WORK CONTROL10.1 At a strategic level, the Equality, Diversity and Inclusion Inspector will be the key contact for external key stakeholders in order to maintain effective partnership engagement.10.2 The Community Policing Team Sergeant for the area in which the incident took place will be responsible for the following activity:ï Reviewing police activity in each reported Hate Incident/Crime case and ensure that it meets the high standards expected. Ensuring that remedial action is taken where the standard has not been reachedï Reviewing the golden hour investigation and victim/witness careï Ensuring that any follow up investigation is allocated to the appropriate resourceï Making contact with investigating officers to help formulate an investigation plan and ensure that they understand the importance of thoroughly investigating Hate Crimes and Incidents and the role they playï Assessing the need for the tasking of a Hate Crime Advisorï Ensure that the CPT Inspector with geographical responsibility for the area where the incident occurred are informed as soon as practicable of any report and care plan which represents a threat, harm or risk to the victim or community confidence, if they are not available then this must be brought to the attention of the Community Area Deputy and Community Coordinator.ï 
ï The Duty Inspector must be notified as soon as practicable of any report or care plan which represents a threat, harm or risk to the victim or community confidence in order to make the decision on whether the incident is classified as a critical incident and requires additional resourcing, measures and a Community Concern Assessment.ï Named suspects will be discussed within hub DMMs in order that proactive attempts are made in arresting the suspect and that the investigation is progressed diligently.ï It will be the responsibility of the OICs supervisor in ensuring that Hierarchical Reviews are completed in line with current policy.ï Ensuring that investigating officers provide victims with their name, contact details and Niche reference number at the earliest opportunity.ï Ensuring that where needed Victim Personal Statements are recorded and that in longer running cases that they are reviewed and consideration given to obtaining a further VPS.ï Ensure that the Community Coordinator for the area in which the incident or crime took place is informed, providing niche reference number, and details of any assistance neededï Ensuring that where needed, the Community Coordinator involves local partners in a multi-agency approach to supporting the victim and managing the offender and/or locationï Ensuring cases that require a multi-agency intervention are channelled by Community Policing Team Inspector or Community Area Deputy to ASB Steering Group Meetings.10.3 The Intelligence department will ensure that all Hate Crimes and Incidents are represented on the Daily Management Meeting (DMM) Risk Management Portal for daily scrutiny by senior officers.10.4 The Hate Crime Champion for Wiltshire Police will be the Equality and Diversity Development Officer.10.5 The strategic lead for hate crime will be the Superintendent for Crime Standards and Justice.MULTI-AGENCY FORUMS (Including Hate Crime Advisors)11.1 In the case of repeat victims or repeat offenders involved in Hate Crime or Hate Incidents, CPT Inspectors will ensure that the case is taken forward for discussion at ASBRAC/ASB Steering Group Meetings.11.2 At Sector Tasking, the CPT Inspector will be responsible for agreeing and coordinating a multi-agency action plan tailored to tackle the issues associated with an individual case. They will record any agreed plan on the Niche Occurrence and ensure associated actions are undertaken and recorded on the Niche Occurrence Enquiry Log (OEL).11.3 There are voluntary sector agencies that exist that should be invited to ASBRAC/ASB Steering Group Meetings when it is known that a Hate Crime or Hate Incident will be discussed. These groups will be able to provide a valuable insight into the cultural aspects of the issues at hand, thereby enhancing the service that we can provide to victims.11.4 Hate Crime Advisors are responsible for:ï Identifying groups that could be vulnerable to hate incidents and crimes and engaging with them in structured and meaningful waysï 
ï Making contact with victims of hate incidents/crimesï Signposting and working with other agencies to offer and provide relevant and appropriate support to victimsï Liaising with investigating officersFurther	guidance and	a	list	of	Hate	Crime Advisors	by	area	can	be	found	at: https://wiltspolice.sharepoint.com/sites/PPD-CS/SitePages/Hate-Crime-advisors.aspx.RADICALISATION12.1 The Counter Terrorism and Security Act 2015 places a general duty on specified authorities to have due regard to the need to prevent people from being drawn into terrorism. The purpose of Prevent is at its heart to safeguard and support vulnerable people to stop them from becoming terrorists or supporting terrorism.12.2 Factors that may have a bearing on someone becoming vulnerable to radicalisation may include: peer pressure, influence from other people or via the internet, bullying, crime against them or their involvement in crime, anti-social behaviour, family tensions, race/hate crime, lack of self-esteem or identity and personal or political grievances.12.3 If officers/staff believe or suspect that a person involved in a hate incident or hate crime has or may develop links to terrorism and radicalisation they should report this directly to the Duty Inspector without delay. Duty Inspector will consider the level of risk and appropriate response (on a case by case basis). An appropriate intelligence submission should be made and the duty officer from CTPSW can be informed.[See also Prevent Policy documents 1, 2 and 3].GLOSSARY OF TERMSTermMeaningASBRACAnti-Social behaviour Risk Assessment ConferenceCCCCrime and Communications CentreCIDCriminal Investigations DepartmentCPTCommunity Policing TeamCSICrime Scene InvestigatorDMMDaily Management MeetingSIOSenior Investigating OfficerSOLOSexual Offences Liaison OfficerVPSVictim Personal StatementVRAVulnerability Risk Assessment
APPENDIX 1Hate Crime Aide Memoire
Initial Action:* Provide Immediate reassurance and* Gather all information required to complete a Niche Report.* Obtain VPS* Task Horizon via niche
A Hate Incident is defined as:‘ Any non-crime incident which is perceived, by the victim or any other person, to be motivated by a hostility or prejudice based on a person’s race or perceived race, religion or perceived religion, sexual orientation or perceived sexual orientation, person’s disability or perceived disability, or a person who is transgender or perceived to be transgender’ College of Policing APP.

CONSIDER:* Language/cultural barriers* CCTV* Forensic opportunities* H2H* Seize evidence* ID witnesses* ID suspect* Medical consent* Assess wider community impact* Restorative Justice
A Hate Crime is defined as:‘Any criminal offence which is perceived, by the victim or any other person, to be motivated by hostility or prejudice towards someone based on a personal characteristic.’There are five centrally monitored strands of hate crime: race or ethnicity, religion or beliefs, sexual orientation, disability, transgender identity. (Home office guidance 2015)Hate Incidents, include incidents against:* Race* Faith* Disability- both physical and mental* Sexual orientation including:o Heterophophic (Heterophophic)o Bi-phobic (Bisexual)o Homophobic (Gay/Lesbian)* Transphobic (Transgender, Transsexual Transvestite)* Sectarian – prejudice towards a victim of a different sect or denomination of the same religion as the offender* 
APPENDIX 2ADDITIONAL INFORMATIONPOLICE OBLIGATIONS – VICTIM CODES 0F PRACTICEVICTIM NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS (Days)Investigation StagePriority Categories Vulnerable or Intimidated victims/U.18Victims of Most Serious Crimes Persistently Targeted Victims(Days)All other victims(Days)Suspect not arrested, charged, cautioned, reprimanded or final warning.2828Suspect arrested.15Suspect released no further action15Suspect 37(7), 37(2) bailed15Police bail amended or cancelled15Suspect reported and advice file to be submitted33Summons issued55CPS decision is no further action15Suspect charged & bail to court15Police bail conditions change<court15Police remand before court15Court remand in custody15Court remand on bail (tell victim of any conditions)15Defendant fails to appear or warrant issued (tell victim of next set court date)14Suspect cautioned or non court disposal15Defendant appeals against a conviction at Magistrates court11Defendant appeals to court of appeal after conviction at Crown court15Result of appeal known14Working day- a day other than a Saturday or Sunday, Christmas day, Good Friday, or a day which is aï Bank holiday under the Banking & Financial Dealings Act 1971.ï 
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnershipDepartment Responsible:	Crime Standards and JusticePolicy Owner/Author:	Superintendent Dave MINTY / Tamara CAMPE Technical Author:	Sergeant Tom ELLERBYSenior Officer/Manager Sponsor:	ACC Crime Justice and VulnerabilityRevision HistoryRevision DateVersionSummary of Changes18.05.20209.0Inserted 9 point plan, updated policies30.09.20219.09 point plan bullet point 4 amended to state the victims supervisor should also complete an accident and near miss form – link to UNIT 4 ERP also added.09.12.20219.0Section 2.3 Repeat Victimisation definition - words added: ‘and this would include both members of the public and police employees’.ApprovalsThis document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team06.08.20219.0Supt. Dave MINTY02.08.20219.0DistributionThis document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersEmail to Comms staff, and all CPT InspectorsEquality Impact AssessmentConsultationList below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionT/DI Gemma VINTON26.09.20176.1Sgt Georgina ROMANI24.10.20176.2Supt. Phil STAYNINGS31.05.20176.2 s7.2Insp. Alan WEBB18.05.20219.0Federation, Unison, WEPA, Connect, Disability Network, Andrew Irving, Steve Edwards, Russell Griffin, James Williams21.05.20219.0Implications of the Policy Training RequirementsNo new training requirements identified.IT InfrastructureCurrent IT structure in place.
TABLE OF CONTENTS	?PROCEDURE OVERVIEWThe objective of this procedural guide is to clearly define the Wiltshire & Swindon Office of the Police and Crime Commissioner’s (OPCC’s) commitment, procedures and arrangements for the management of health and safety in the workplace.GLOSSARY OF TERMSTermMeaningDSEDisplay Screen EquipmentRIDDORReporting of Injuries Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences RegulationsPROCEDURE.1. Legal RequirementsThe Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 Section 2(3) requires employers with more than four employees to prepare and revise on a regular basis a written statement of safety policy with the necessary organisation and arrangements to carry it out.The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 and Police (Health and Safety at Work) Act 1997 require the Wiltshire & Swindon Office of Police and Crime Commissioner to ensure, as far as is reasonably practicable, the health, safety and welfare of all their employees and others affected by our undertakings.2. List of Relevant Statutory ProvisionsA non exhaustive list of the current relevant statutory provisions affecting the work of the Wiltshire & Swindon Office of Police and Crime Commissioner is detailed below (common abbreviations and the year of enactment are also shown).Fire Precautions (Workplace) Regulations (1997) Regulatory Reform (Fire Safety) Order 2005Health and Safety at Work etc. Act (HASAWA, 1974)Police (Health and Safety) at Work Act (PHASAWA, 1997) Health and Safety (First Aid) Regulations (1981)Reporting of Injuries, Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences Regulations ( RIDDOR, 1995) Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations (COSHH 2005)Electricity at Work Regulations (EW, 1989)Electrical Equipment (Safety) Regulations 1994 Confined Spaces Regulations 1997Control of Lead at Work Regulations 2002 (appears to be one in 1998) Control of Vibration at Work Regulations 2005
 Work at Height Regulations 2005 Dangerous Substances and Explosive Atmospheres Regulations (DSEAR)2002  Health and Safety (Consultation with Employees) Regulations 1996 Employers’ Liability (Compulsory Insurance) Act 1969 and Regulations 1998 Health and Safety (Information for Employees) Regulations 1989 amendment 2009  Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations 1996 The Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Regulations (WEEE) 2006  Hazardous Waste (England and Wales) Regulations 2005 amended 2009 European Regulation - Classification, Labelling and Packaging of Substances 2009 Chemicals (Hazard Information and Packaging for Supply) Regulations 2002 amended 2008  Noise at Work Regulations 1989 - Control of Noise at Work Regulations (2005). Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations (MHSW, 1999 as amended in 2003)  Health and Safety (Display Screen Equipment) Regulations (DSE, 1992 amended 2002) Manual Handling Operations Regulations (MHO, 1992 as amended in 2002) Provision and Use of Work Equipment Regulations (PUWER, 1998 as amended in 2002) Lifting Operations and Lifting Equipment Regulations (LOLER, 1998 as amended in 2002)  Personal Protective Equipment at Work Regulations (PPE, 1992 as amended in 2002) Workplace Health, Safety and Welfare Regulations (WHSW, 1992 as amended in 2002)  Safety Representatives and Safety Committee Regulations (1977) Ionising Radiations Regulations (IRR, 1999) Control of Asbestos at Work Regulations (2012)  Construction (Design and Management) Regulations (CDM, 1994 and Amendment 2000)3. Procedure Overview and Strategic AimsThe following health and safety policy document aims to set out Wiltshire & Swindon Office of Police and Crime Commissioner’s (OPCC) commitment and procedures for effectively managing health and safety.The Wiltshire and Swindon OPCC’s Strategic aims in respect of health and safety are: To support and improve organisational performance through the provision of effective health and safety management and To eliminate or minimise risks to OPCC employees and volunteers, all others affected by our businessthrough the provision of a safe and healthy workplace and culture.In addition, Wiltshire & Swindon OPCC is additionally responsible for; Holding Chief Constable and Chief Officer Group to account for the safety of employees of the Force. The OPCC’s ‘undertaking’ for the purposes of section 3 of the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974, includes monitoring the effectiveness and efficiency of the police force’s health and safety management system. Ensuring that the force is discharging its health and safety responsibilities efficiently and effectively, through its safety management system, by way of corporate governance and scrutiny through the Occupational Health and Safety Committee.4. Wiltshire & Swindon OPCC Health and Safety Policy StatementIn accordance with Section 2(3) of the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974, Wiltshire & Swindon OPCC has issued for the attention of all its employees and others affected by our undertakings a joint written Statement of Safety Policy (see below) in association with Wiltshire Police.The joint Safety Policy is prepared by the Occupational Health and Safety Committee in consultation with staff nominated by the Chief Constable and Police and Crime Commissioner who have designated health and safety responsibilities. The Safety Policy is authorised, supported and jointly signed by the Chief Constable for Wiltshire Police and the Wiltshire and Swindon Police and Crime Commissioner.The joint Policy statement will be brought to the attention of all employees via health and safety notice boards in all police premises, is readily accessible on the Health and Safety pages within SharePoint and displayed on the Wiltshire Police and Wiltshire & Swindon OPCC’s external web sites.
STATEMENT OF SAFETY POLICYWiltshire Police and the Office of the Police and Crime Commissioner for Wiltshire and Swindon attach great importance to safeguarding the health and safety of our employees, others working on or visiting our premises and members of the public to whom we provide a service.We are fully committed to the management and discharge of our responsibilities as employers, under the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974, the Police (Health and Safety) Act 1997 and all other relevant statutory provisions and codes of practices. As the lease holder, owner or licensee of premises the Commissioner also has overall responsibility for managing health and safety matters in relation to the structure of premises.The Chief Constable has ultimate responsibility for the management and discharge of health and safety regulations in relation to policing activities, governed by the Police and Crime Commissioner. The Deputy Chief Constable has been assigned specific responsibility for co-ordinating health and safety, this includes supporting the policy with adequate financial and physical resources.We will establish suitable and sufficient risk control measures and ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the provision and maintenance of safe and healthy working conditions, equipment, safe systems of work and provide the associated training, information, instruction and supervision.We appreciate that effective health and safety management makes good business sense. Embracing these principles and aligning them with our policing objectives will enhance our operational and business performance, through reduced absence, injuries and ill health, reducing liabilities, unnecessary losses and protecting the environment. This goes hand in hand with delivering an effective and efficient policing service for Wiltshire and Swindon.People are our most valuable resource, and we are committed to ensuring our work activities are conducted in a manner that will, so far as is reasonably practicable, protect their health, safety and welfare. As we continue to work through and beyond the covid-19 global pandemic, our new operating model and agile working arrangements, alongside our infection prevention and control policy will ensure the continued health, safety and wellbeing of all our employees. We recognise the value and implications of our young in- service workforce and continue to provide effective training, tutorship and leadership to ensure their safety and enable them to thrive.Wiltshire Police are committed to preparing organisational procedures on new and specific health and safety issues and pursuing progressive improvements in health and safety performance beyond that required by legislation. All supervisors and managers are expected to ensure their working environment is as safe as possible, identifying significant hazards, adequately assessing and controlling risks. Central to creating a positive health and safety culture is the need for all managers to actively consult with staff and staff association safety representatives. This will encourage their participation, co-operation and contribution to health and safety policy and will continuously improve health and safety standards. Effective communication of health and safety information, visible leadership and positive values and behaviours displayed by all employees is fundamental. As well as ensuring the health and safety competence of all employees through regular performance appraisals alongside the provision of expert safety advice.All employees irrespective of their rank, grade or position have a core responsibility for health and safety and have a unique and valuable contribution to make. All employees are expected to co-operate fully in the achievement of this policy and understand their legal responsibilities to take reasonable care of the health and safety of themselves and those other persons who may be affected by what they do or fail to do at work. Any identified breaches will be fully investigated, and employees and managers will be held to account for their actions, as appropriate.A copy of this statement will be brought to the attention of all employees and will be reviewed on an annual basis or in light of any significant changes.We give our full backing to this policy and will support all those who endeavour to carry it out.
Catherine Roper, Chief Constable for Wiltshire Police 13/07/23Philip Wilkinson, Police and Crime Commissioner for Wiltshire and Swindon 13/07/235. Organisation of Health and Safety within Wiltshire & Swindon Office of Police and Crime Commissioner6. Organisational ResponsibilitiesThe following section outlines the responsibilities of all employees within the organisation and ensures that mechanisms are in place through which they can be accountable. These responsibilities will be reinforced through induction/probationer training, management training, role related training, line manager supervision and performance review. Health and safety responsibilities also form a key part of the role related competency framework for individual roles.Health and Safety Policy Makers including; The Police and Crime CommissionerIn the context of the Health and Safety at work act 1974, the Police and Crime Commissioner is the body corporate and therefore has legal obligations upon them under the afore-named legislation for Police Estate management and directly employed OPCC employees. The Police and Crime Commissioner delegates to the Chief Executive the direction and control of matters relating to health, safety and welfare.The Chief Executive of the Office of the Police & Crime Commissioner is responsible for health and safety matters generally is responsible for: Ensuring sufficient resources are allocated to effectively manage health and safety within the OPCC and Wiltshire Police. Promoting and championing a positive health and safety culture within the OPCC.  Regularly reviewing the health and safety performance of the OPCC and Wiltshire Police.  Overseeing the effective running of the OPCC’s health and safety policy and arrangements. Jointly approving and signing the force General Health and Safety Policy Statement with the Chief Constable.  Regularly reviewing the health and safety performance of the OPCC. Promoting and championing a positive health and safety culture within the OPCC. Setting and agreeing health and safety plans for improvement and reviewing progress, through the force Occupational Health and Safety Committee forum.The Police and Crime Commissioner has nominated the Chief Executive to be the health and safety lead member who represents the OPCC as a full and active member of the Joint Health and Safety Committee.The Wiltshire Police Chief ConstableThe Chief Constable has overall responsibility for the effective implementation of health and safety legislation and ensuring that “Wiltshire Police” complies with all relevant statutory health and safety requirements. These responsibilities include: Establishing and overseeing the effective running of the Force’s health and safety organisation and arrangements.  Ensuring health and safety objectives are an integral part of the force strategic assessment and policingplan. Jointly approving and signing the force General Health and Safety Policy Statement with the Police and Crime Commissioner Chief Executive. Consulting with the Police and Crime Commissioner and allocating adequate resources for health and safety. Determining priorities for effective health and safety management.
  Regularly reviewing the health and safety performance of the Force. Promoting and championing a positive health and safety culture within the Force.  Ensuring there is an effective health and safety management system in place within the Force. Devising, authorising and approving new or revised joint Wiltshire Police and OPCC health and safety policy or procedures, through the force Occupational Health and Safety Committee forum. Setting and agreeing health and safety plans for improvement and reviewing progress, through theforce Occupational Health and Safety Committee forum. Establishing strategies and specifying a structure for the implementation of health and safety policy and work plans and ensuring these are integrated into the policing activities of Wiltshire Police. Assigning responsibilities for planning, measuring, reviewing and auditing health and safety policy and procedures Allocating adequate resources for health and safety. Ensuring provision is made for adequate financial resources to ensure that the Force can fulfill its legal obligations and duty of care as required by health and safety legislation.Health and Safety Planners including; All Senior LeadersThe Chief Executive of the Office of the Police & Crime Commissioner delegates operational aspects of health and safety to all senior managers who are responsible for:  Establishing  suitable  management  arrangements  and  workplace  precautions  including  policies,procedures, safe systems of work, standard operating procedures allocated within their direction and control. Ensuring health and safety is effectively planned and managed in areas of their responsibility to meet corporate health and safety objectives. By confirming health and safety objectives are an integral part of the policing plans and business planning. Promoting and championing a positive health and safety culture and encompassing involvement of all employees. Ensuring individual health and safety performance is monitored and included in appraisals. Regularly reviewing the local health and safety performance, including audit compliance, DSE compliance and accident rates.Health and Safety AssistanceIn accordance with Regulation 7 of the Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999, the Wiltshire Police Head of Health and Safety is appointed as the competent person for the purpose of assisting to undertake necessary measures to ensure compliance with statutory provisions.The Head of Health and Safety is responsible to the Chief Executive of the Office of the Police & Crime Commissioner and is responsible and accountable for the provision of competent health and safety advice, assistance and guidance to Swindon and Wiltshire OPCC on all health and safety issues. The Head of Health and Safety is responsible for:  Provision of specialist advice and guidance on all health and safety matters. Monitoring new/changing legislation and advising on the implications and required actions.  Formulating and developing various health and safety policies and procedures. Promoting a positive health and safety culture.  Planning and setting realistic health and safety plans and objectives. Identification of hazards, assessment of risk and establishment of suitable risk control measures for the elimination or reduction of risk. Day to day implementation and monitoring control measures of health and safety plans and policies, utilising both active and reactive techniques. Review and audit the health and safety management system within the Force  Regularly reviewing the health and safety performance of the Force.Head of Facilities and EstatesParticular health and safety responsibilities are assigned to the Head of Facilities and Supplies who is responsible for ensuring that all buildings and other force properties are kept in a safe condition, maintained
in a safe and proper manner and ensure compliance with relevant statutory requirements. The Head of Facilities and Estates is also responsible for (in conjunction with the Force’s Facility Management Consultants and Head of Health and Safety): Control and management of Contractors, Asbestos and Legionella for all Wiltshire Police Facilities.   Where appropriate compliance with the Construction, Design and Management Regulations 1994.  The maintenance, statutory examination and testing of installed services, plant and equipment.  Structural fire safety measures including fire alarms, emergency lighting etc.Health and Safety Implementers including; All Managers and SupervisorsAll Managers and Supervisors will ensure that arrangements for health and safety, including policies, plansand procedures are implemented and continuously monitored and reviewed in areas of their control. Responsibilities include: The health and safety of those employees working under their direction. Provision of adequate supervision, information, instruction and training for all staff under their direction and control to ensure that employees are competent for their tasks and understand their health and safety responsibilities.  Provision of sufficient physical and human resources. Managing and regularly reviewing local health and safety performance, including audit compliance, DSE compliance and accident/injury rates and the provision of continuous feedback to senior managers with regards to compliance rates, successes and failures. Provision of feedback to senior manager with regards to deficiencies and successes in health and safety plans, systems and procedures. Ensuring effective communication of health and safety information and active participation in health and safety activities, plans and performance.More specific responsibilities include: The effective and prompt reporting and investigation of all accidents, injuries, near misses and assaults.  Ensuring risk assessments are carried out and action taken to reduce risk, including operational,dynamic and personal risk assessments. Carrying out regular checks and inspections on any plant, machinery and equipment in accordance with any code of practice and manufacturer’s instructions and ensuring that any necessary repairs carried out on site are done promptly and that defects are reported. Ensuring that all their staff know how to evacuate the premises, providing information as to the location of the assembly point, testing alarms and carrying out evacuation drills. Carrying  out  workplace  inspections  and  maintaining  good  standards  of  health  andsafety/housekeeping within their work area. Ensuring appropriate numbers of first aiders, fire marshals, DSE assessors, COSHH assessors are available as per the requirements of the local first aid and other risk assessments risk assessment. Ensuring that members of staff and others who require it are provided with and use personal protective clothing and equipment as per the requirements of their role.All Employees and VolunteersAll employees, apprentices, young persons and volunteers are responsible for taking care of their own health and safety and others affected by their acts or omissions. The duty of care to third parties is particularly important in relation to visitors and contractors. Responsibilities include: Co-operate with the Wiltshire Chief Constable and Chief Executive of the Office of the Police & Crime Commissioner to comply with statutory provisions or any other health and safety requirement imposed on them and comply with safety instructions, training, policies, risk assessments to ensure their health, safety and welfare. Take care not to misuse or interfere with any safety equipment, machinery or substances provided for health and safety at work. Use any machinery, equipment, substances or equipment in compliance with training and instruction provided. Report to management any work situation with the potential for serious or imminent danger.
 Report any health and safety hazards or shortcomings in protective measures identified in the workplace and to take such immediate action that is necessary, where this is reasonably practicable, to render the hazard safe.Staff Association Safety RepresentativesAll staff association safety representatives are responsible for carrying out their functions as per the Safety Representatives and Safety Committees Regulations. Responsibilities include: Investigating potential hazards and dangerous occurrences in the workplace.  Investigating complaints by employees relating to health and safety. Carry out safety inspections.  To attend safety committees. To make representation to the employer regarding any of the above.The Police & Crime Commissioner will consult with all employees on all matters which could have an effect on their health and safety, in compliance with the Health and Safety (Consultation with Employees) Regulations 1996.Contractors, Visitors and others affected by our business.The arrangements for health and safety will ensure that contractors, visitors and others affected by our undertakings are exposed to the lowest reasonably practicable risk. Contractors Responsibilities Include:  Complying with safety instructions, training, policies, risk assessments laid down by Wiltshire Policeand/or the Chief Executive of the Office of the Police & Crime Commissioner and/or their own organisation to ensure their health, safety and welfare.  Ensuring risk assessments/method statements are carried out and action taken to reduce risk. Use properly and maintain in good condition and not misuse or interfere with any safety equipment provided for health and safety at work. Report any health and safety hazards identified in the workplace and to take such immediate action that is necessary, where this is reasonably practicable, to render the hazard safe.7. Enforcement AuthorityHM Inspectors based at the South West Area Officer of the Health and Safety Executive are responsible for enforcing the provisions of health and safety legislation with respect to the Swindon and Wiltshire Office of the Police & Crime Commissioner.Address:	South West HSE Area Office4th Floor The PithayAll Saints StreetBristol BS1 2NDLocal Authority Environmental Health Officers are responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of health and safety legislation with respect to food hygiene, petroleum installation safety within Wiltshire Police and Swindon and Wiltshire OPCC.8. Joint Health and Safety Policy Statement and ArrangementsAs two separate corporation roles, Wiltshire Police and the OPCC for Wiltshire and Swindon have separate Health and Safety Policy Procedures. Sitting beneath these is a jointly signed Health and Safety Statement confirming the two organisations commitment and cohesion to work together in partnership. Joint general Health and Safety Arrangements for Wiltshire Police and the Wiltshire & Swindon Office of Police and Crime Commissioner are contained within specific joint policies, procedures, risk assessments, safe systems of work and other guidance documents. All such documents are available to all employees through the health and safety portal pages on the Sharepoint site.Health and Safety Management System
The joint Wiltshire Police and Wiltshire & Swindon Office of Police and Crime Commissioner Health and Safety Management System Procedure details key elements of the health and safety management system including; Setting Policy, Organisation, Planning & Setting Standards, Monitoring, Audit and Review. This procedure also includes detailed health and safety communication, control, competence and consultation arrangements.Performance StandardsThe joint health and safety management system details the agreed joint health and safety performance standards including specific policies, procedures, risk assessments, safe systems of work and other guidance documents. All such documents are available to all employees through the health and safety portal pages on the intranet site.Detailed below is a current list of the joint health and safety performance standards in the form of procedural guidance documents. Management of Asbestos Procedure Wearing and Use of Body Armour Procedure  Management of Clinical Waste Procedure Management of Contractors Procedure Display Screen Equipment Procedure  Electrical Safety Procedure Fire Safety Management Procedure First Aid Procedure  Risk Assessment Procedure Health and Safety Training Strategy Health and Safety Inspection Procedure  Health and Safety Auditing Procedure Health, Wellbeing and Stress Management Procedure  Infection Control Procedure  Management of Legionella Procedure Lone Working Procedure Manual Handling Procedure  Noise at Work Procedure Provision and Use of Work Equipment Procedure  Respiratory Protective Equipment Procedure Vibration at Work Procedure Management of slippery and icy conditions Procedure  Young Persons Procedure Working at Height Procedure9. OPCC Health and Safety Management ChartThe OPCC Health and Safety Management chart can be found below.
RELATED DOCUMENTS and Authorised Professional Practice (A.P.P.).All other joint Wiltshire Police and Wiltshire & Swindon Office of Police and Crime Commissioner’s Health and Safety Policies and ProceduresDATA PROTECTION AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION.Any information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this procedure will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUALITY IMPACT.This procedure has been drafted to comply with the principles of the Human Rights Act and Equality Act 2010. Members of Wiltshire Police administering this procedure are responsible for ensuring that in its application, those to whom the procedure applies, shall not receive less favourable treatment because of their age, colour, disability, ethnic or national origin, gender re-assignment, marital status, nationality, race, religion, sex or sexual orientation.This policy has been subject to an equality impact assessment and has been graded Low Impact.
?	Revision HistoryVersion	DateSummary of changesRevised Statement of Safety Policy added.3.007.03.20224.021.07.2023Revision following new chief constable appointment
WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE PROCEDUREHealth, Wellbeing and Stress ManagementEffective from: 19.12.19
TABLE OF CONTENTSIdentification	3Ownership	3Revision History	3Approvals	3Distribution	3Equality Impact Assessment	3Consultation	4Implications of the Procedure	4Training Requirements	4IT Infrastructure	4STRATEGIC PRIORITIES	5RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	5FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	6MONITORING and REVIEW	6WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDURE	6Health and Safety Executive Management Standards	Appendix 1	18
IdentificationProcedure Title:	Health, Wellbeing and Stress Management ProcedureVersion:	V5OwnershipDepartment Responsible:	Health and SafetyProcedure Owner:	Sarah Somers, Head of Health and SafetyRevision HistoryEffective From	09.12.2019Next Review Date:	Three years or when significant changes in work activity,process or procedure occur.Revision Date   Previous Revision DateSummary of Changes27.04.10NAStandard review.16.11.1227.04.10Standard review.09.12.201616.11.12Standard review.25.05.2018Data Protection section amended to reflect implementation of GDPR and new DPA.19.12.201925.08.2018Standard review.ApprovalsThis document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionOccupational Health and Safety Committee (DCC chair)12.12.19V5Chief Officer GroupNot requiredDistributionThis document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefNot requiredEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersEquality Impact Assessment
ConsultationList below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDateConsultedVersionOccupational Health and Safety Committee12.12.19V5Implications of the Procedure Training RequirementsAny perceived training requirements needed to implement this procedure should be identified here.IT InfrastructureState here whether implementation of this procedure requires any input from IT, adaption and/or addition to any IT systems or packages?
PROCEDURE OVERVIEWWiltshire Police is committed to protecting and improving the health and wellbeing of their staff, by adopting policy and practice that enables the organisation and individuals to embrace health and wellbeing in the workplace. The objective of this procedure is to provide a suitable framework by which Wiltshire Police and Swindon and Wiltshire OPCC can comply with health and safety legislation and identify and proactively manage organisational risk factors which can result in work related physical and mental ill health. Wiltshire Police recognises that work-related stress can affect the mental and physical health of its employees and work-related stress is a health and safety issue which is taken seriously by both organisations.The refreshed overarching Wiltshire Police People Strategy 2018-2021 lays out our continued commitment and dedication to our most valuable asset, our people. The strategy identifies the key areas of activity to be addressed to ensure all our officers, staff and volunteers are skilled, capable and engaged in supporting the complex and challenging business of policing across Wiltshire. A significant priority and key theme within the refreshed strategy is our commitment to create a wellness culture. The Wellness Strategy, which sits beneath the People Strategy, has been developed, which covers the following broad issuesStrand one: Creating a well working environment Strand two: Focusing on resilienceStrand three: Making wellness accessible to all Strand four: Engagement and best use of evidenceGLOSSARY OF TERMSTermMeaningRIDDORReporting of Injuries Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences RegulationsHSEHealth and Safety ExecutiveSTRATEGIC PRIORITIESThe Force Priorities linked to this document are set out below.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSï GRA 184 Health, Wellbeing and Stress Managementï 
ï Occupational Health and Wellbeing Procedureï Trauma Risk Management (TRiM) informationï Wellness portal site: http://firstpoint/deptinfo/net/health/default.aspxDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this procedure will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING and REVIEWThe Health, Wellbeing and Stress Management Procedure document will be monitored and reviewed every three years by the Force Head of Health and Safety. The Force Occupational Health and Safety Committee, Strategic Wellbeing Board and People Management Board will all oversee and monitor the effectiveness of the Force’s Health, Wellbeing and Stress Management Policy, Procedure, Action Plans and other measures to reduce work related stress and promote health and wellbeing. The Force Occupational Health and Safety Committee will be responsible for approval and monitoring the procedure document and its implementation on a regular basis.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDURESarah Somers Head of Health and Safety Penny Fuller Head of Occupational Health Steven Marsh Wellness Delivery Manager
1. Legal RequirementsThe Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974 is the primary piece of legislation covering occupational health and safety in the United Kingdom.Section 2 of the Act requires the employer to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the health, safety and welfare of all its employees. This includes the provision and maintenance of a safe working environment, so far as is reasonably practicable, without risks to health and adequate as regards facilities and arrangements for their welfare at work.Section 7 of the Act requires all employees to take reasonable care of their own health and safety and that of those who may be affected by their acts and omissions at work. It is also the responsibility of all employees to co-operate with their employer to ensure they can fulfill their legal obligations.The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999 require the employer to make a suitable and sufficient assessment of:a) The risks to the health and safety of his employees to which they are exposed whilst they are at work; andb) The risks to the health and safety of persons not in his employment arising out of or in connection with the conduct by him of his undertaking.The Reporting of Injuries, Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences Regulations 1995 place an absolute duty on organisations to report specified injuries, diseases and dangerous occurrences in the workplace to the local regional office of the Health and Safety Executive (HSE).The HSE Management Standards advocate a preventative approach to reducing work related stress. The approach involves targeting six main working conditions (demands, control, support, relationships, role and change) and specifies management practises that will help to ensure that these potential sources of stress do not actually act as stressors for employees in the workplace. Although not legally binding, the HSE Management Standards are encouraged and provided as best practice. These standards are supported and adopted by Wiltshire Police and are integral part of the force’s health and well being programme, in order to promote and support the health, safety and welfare of all its employees.2. Health and Wellbeing VisionWiltshire Police’s most valuable asset is its police officers, police staff, special constables and volunteers who devote themselves to delivering the work of the Force and serving and protecting the communities of Wiltshire and Swindon. Creating a healthy working environment which supports the physical, psychological, emotional, social, environmental, financial and ethical wellbeing of officers, staff and volunteers is crucial. Ultimately, the happier, healthier and more resilient Wiltshire Police employees are,
the better the organisation performs. The embedded values and behaviours, an empowered leadership style, along with new and exciting innovations and technology, have helped in shaping the approach to employee wellness. We are committed to developing and maintaining a police service that employees are proud to work for because they feel safe, valued and part of a happy and supportive work community.Wiltshire Police aim to achieve a work environment where:ï Work is recognised by all as important and beneficial, and institutional barriers to sickness, returning to, or remaining in work are removed.ï Health is not adversely affected by work, and good quality advice and support is available to, and accessible by, all.ï There is a culture of self awareness and individual responsibility in the workplace, where individuals take responsibility for their physical, emotional and social wellbeing, and understand how their behaviours affect the health and wellbeing of others.ï Colleagues with health conditions and disabilities are able to optimise work opportunities3. Workplace Wellbeing CharterThe nationally recognised Workplace Wellbeing Charter is an evidence-based award scheme seen as statement of intent, showing commitment to health and wellbeing. The Charter provides advice, guidance and resources to help organisations create an environment in which individuals can flourish. The Charter has been running successfully for over four years and is now endorsed by Public Health England.Wiltshire Police are committed to progressing and achieving the Workplace Charter. In order to establish the Force’s current position with regards to meeting the Charters criteria, the Charter’s self-assessment will be completed. Wiltshire Police will ensure regular re-assessments are also undertaken to assess performance against the Charters three key elements of leadership, culture and communication. The Workplace Wellbeing Charter has now been included in all Force’s HMIC PEEL and FMS assessments. This will be taken into account for future inspections i.e. forces will need to demonstrate they are aware of the Charter and are committed to it at this early stage.Wiltshire Police are committed to supporting the NPCC Well Being & Engagement working group and Oscar Kilo, a web resource funded by Public Health England (PHE) that contains the College of Policing Blue Light Wellbeing Framework. Wiltshire Police will utilise the evidence-based self-assessment tool tailored to the needs of policing, to continuously improve how we support our people.
4. StressWhat is Stress?Stress is the adverse reaction people have to excessive pressures or other types of demands placed on them. There is a clear distinction between pressure, which can be a motivating factor and stress which can occur when this pressure becomes excessive. Stress is experienced when a person cannot cope with the pressures and demands placed upon them either in their work and/or personal lives.Stress in our OrganisationThe working environment of police officers and operational police staff members means that they may have to face traumatic incidents often with confrontational, face to face contact with the public, dealing with bereaved family members, and dealing with death or serious injury. All staff can be expected to carry the memories of difficult work related experiences which may impinge on their job for example, dealing with fatal road traffic incidences, cases of child abuse, control room operators managing stressful incidents and word processing operators typing fatal road traffic collision reports. Additional pressures are created by the demands staff place upon themselves, based on their own needs and perceived or actual expectations of themselves. These can also be exacerbated by personal circumstances. The HSE guidance document entitled “Striking the balance between operational and health and safety duties” also recognises the inherently stressful, unpredictable and dangerous nature of operational police business and sets out the expectations on the police service in relation to the management of these situations.Definition of StressThe Health and Safety Executive defines stress as “the adverse reaction people have to excessive pressure or other types of demand placed on them”. This makes an important distinction between pressure, which can be a positive state if managed correctly, and stress which can be detrimental to health.What causes stress?Many things (or the anticipation of them) can lead to stress:ï pressure to perform at work, at school or in sportsï threats of physical violenceï money worriesï argumentsï family conflictsï divorceï bereavementï unemploymentï moving houseï alcohol or drug abuseï 
Who gets stressed?The list above shows that everyone is at risk of being stressed, since it can be caused by a range of commonplace situations. However, people have very different mental responses to the body’s natural reaction to a stressful situation. For some it can be an essential stimulus, helping motivate them to achieve more. In others it causes an adverse reaction, causing a sense of not being able to cope and demotivation.It is important to differentiate between temporary stress that you know will go away when a situation is resolved, and long-term or chronic stress. Most people can cope with short periods of stress, and it can often be relieved by relaxing, taking a walk, chatting through issues with friends, or having a good night’s sleep. Chronic (long-term, continuous) stress is much harder to deal with, and can be psychologically and emotionally damaging, both for an individual and for friends and family.The symptoms of stressEveryone reacts to stress differently, but there are some common effects that help us recognise it. In times of extreme stress, people may shake uncontrollably, hyperventilate (breathe faster and deeper than normal) or even vomit. For people with asthma, stress can trigger an attack. People who are chronically stressed are also susceptible to any of the following:ï periods of irritability or angerï apathy or depressionï constant anxietyï irrational behaviourï loss of appetiteï comfort eatingï lack of concentrationï loss of sex driveï increased smoking, drinking or recreational drug takingThere can also be physical effects, which may include the following:ï excessive tirednessï skin problemsï aches and pains resulting from tense muscles, including neckache, backache and tension headachesï increased pain from arthritis and other conditionsï heart palpitationsï for women, missed periodsï 
Tackling stressIf you feel that you are suffering from stress, try to identify the aspects of your life that are causing it. Sometimes you may not be able to change or avoid them, but at other times simple lifestyle changes can make all the difference.There are several strategies that can help you deal with stressï delegating or sharing your responsibilities at workï avoiding confrontation with difficult colleaguesï learning to be more assertiveï taking regular exerciseï not using drink or drugs to copeï eating a healthy, balanced diet, rich in fruit and vegetablesï finding humour or absurdity in stressful situationï never taking on more that you know you can cope withï organising your time better to get as much done as possibleï talking to friends or family, and sharing your thoughts and fearsï listening to music or relaxation tapesï tensing and then relaxing your muscles, starting at the toes and working up to the head and neckIf you think that you would benefit from help, either in identifying the things that are causing you stress, or in learning techniques to help you relax, talk to your doctor about this. There are many people who can give you professional help in these areas.5. Proactive Approach to Health and Wellbeing Health and Safety Executive – Management StandardsThe HSE Management Standards have been produced by the HSE to reduce the levels of work related stress reported by British workers. The Management Standards represent a set of conditions that reflect high levels of health, wellbeing and organisational performance.The Management Standards and supporting processes are designed to:ï Help simplify risk assessment for work related stress.ï Encourage employers, employees and their representatives to work in partnership to address work related stress throughout the organisation.ï Provide the yardstick by which organizations can gauge their performance in tackling the key causes of stress.ï 
The aim of the HSE Management Standards is to promote better mental health (less impact of stress) and increased productivity outcomes (i.e. decreased absenteeism and increased wellbeing and productivity) of employees. The Management Standards cover six key areas of work design that, if properly managed, are associated with improved health and wellbeing, higher productivity and improved attendance. The six Management Standards cover the primary sources of stress at work.These are:ï Demands – includes issue like workload, work patterns and the work environment.ï Control – how much say the person has in the way they work.ï Support – includes the encouragement sponsorship and resources provided by the organisation, line management and colleagues.ï Relationships – includes promoting positive working to avoid conflict and dealing with unacceptable behavior.ï Role – whether people understand their role within the organisation and whether the organisation ensures that they do not have conflicting roles.ï Change – how organisational change (large and small) is managed and communicated within the organisation.Please refer to Appendix 1 for full details of the standards.6. Risk AssessmentThe Health and Safety Executive require all organisations to carry out a suitable and sufficient risk assessment for all health and safety hazards, including work related stress. Employers have a duty to ensure that risks arising from work activity are properly controlled. The Management Standards approach assists Wiltshire Police to work with its employees and representatives to undertake risk assessments. Wiltshire Police have produced a comprehensive Generic Risk Assessment, Health, Wellbeing and Stress Management, GRA 184. The risk assessment follows the standard 5 steps to risk assessment approach and was devised with full consultation with employees and the various staff associations. This risk assessment is readily accessible to all employees via the Force firstpoint site.The Health and Safety Executive’s Management Standards should be used as a tool to manage emotional well being across Wiltshire Police. Wiltshire Police have devised a managing wellbeing template/risk assessment to assist Line Managers, Human Resources Managers, Occupational Health Staff with managing the wellbeing of their staff associated with work practices. The following template should be used to record discussions and completed in consultation with the staff member and at the time of the discussion.
The template risk assessment can be used in a variety of circumstances including:ï PDR’s.ï 121’s where staff indicate wellbeing concerns.ï Return to work interviews.ï Performance issues.ï Case conferences.ï Risk Assessment based Medicals by OHU staff.ï Workplace assessments by OHU staff.ï Management and self-referrals.ï Wellness Action Plans7. Wellness Delivery and Communication StrategyA Wellness Culture communication strategy has been established to communicate key messages regarding health and wellbeing. Wiltshire Police have appointed a dedicated Wellness Delivery Manager to drive the Wellness Strategy, as part of this work a Wellness portal site has been developed and launched on the Force firstpoint system. All staff and management have full access to the site which provides information and advice relating to organisational and individual health and wellbeing. Key pages within the site include:ï Occupational Health Guidanceï HR Guidanceï Health and Safety Guidanceï Mental Health including advice regarding stress, panic, bereavement, anxiety.ï Physical Health including advice regarding men’s, women’s and sexual health.ï Fitness and Activity including nutrition advice and fitness opportunities.ï Support including key internal and external support mechanisms.ï TRiM - Trauma Risk incident Managementï Hot Topics8. Strategic Wellness BoardA Strategic Wellness Board has been established to further monitor and embed a positive wellness culture into the organisation. This board, which feeds the Strategic People Board has defined terms of reference and agreed membership.9. Information and TrainingStaff receive information and training in relation to health and wellbeing and wellness in the workplace as part of learning and development training programs and modules, including police officer and police staff induction, management training and risk assessment training. The health and wellbeing training session is provided by the Occupational Health Unit and incorporates stress management, TRiM, early
intervention, resilience and self-awareness/responsibility. The Force also have a number of well- established employee support groups for menopause support, cancer support and Police Tots for new and expectant mothers and fathers.10. People Services and organisational changeWiltshire Police is committed to promoting a healthy and productive workplace through developing effective policies for managing people issues. By adopting progressive people management practices such as flexible working, good line management and involving and consulting with our employees, the organisation will be able to contribute to the wellbeing of staff and will see higher levels of commitment and satisfaction and a reduction in levels of stress. Wiltshire Police works closely with staff and staff associations using the consultation framework to ensure meaningful and appropriate communication and consultation on organisational change. Communications strategies are prepared and delivered detailing clear time frames and information regarding the reasons for the proposed changes. Suitable employee consultation arrangements are in place including suitable opportunities for employees to influence change proposals where appropriate.11. Occupational Health DepartmentWiltshire Police have a suitable, well-resourced and professional OHU department providing comprehensive occupational health services. The includes a full time mental health nurse practitioner. Wiltshire Police have also trained and equipped a number peer supporter and mental health first aiders to support officers and staff and compliment the work of the OHU department.12. Employee Assistance ProgrammeThe Force also provides a twenty four hour employee’s assistance program, this is accessible to all officers and staff for free confidential advice and support and can assist staff with the day-day issues they may face and can help them gain a healthy balance between work and home life.13. Trauma Risk Incident Programme (TRiM)Wiltshire Police recognises the importance of providing psychological support to staff subject to operational incidents identified as ‘traumatic’ and in the preceding years have implemented a number of methods such as the appointment of a welfare officer and critical incident debriefing to address this issue. Whilst not diminishing the accomplishments of such approaches, it is acknowledged that a more structured, measurable and workable process, whereby responsibility for staff welfare is shared between managers and the Occupational Heath Unit (OHU) is also required.Since 2006, the Force has adopted Trauma Risk incident Management (TRiM). TRiM is a tool to assist with early identification of problems that may lead to sickness absence and works by using set factors
and questions to assess an individual’s response to a particular situation or incident, thereby providing a structured and consistent approach for management to apply.14. Responsibilities of Key Stakeholders and StaffAll Employees should:Observe the Force health and safety policy and take care of their own health, safety and psychological wellbeing and that of others, so that they can learn to recognise the signs of stress in themselves and others and be aware of effective strategies to keep stress to the minimum:ï comply with the Working Time Directive, taking authorised breaks and annual leave.ï commitment re individual responsibility – signing up to the health and wellbeing strategy, demonstrated via attendance and work practice.ï accept opportunities for counselling/support when recommended.ï report issues of concern / unacceptable stress levels to their line manager, safety representative or People Services Department so that any problems can be addressed and where possible prevented.All Leaders and Managers should:All Wiltshire Police Managers should:ï Conduct and implement the recommendations of risk assessments and action plans within the areas of their responsibility.ï Ensure good two way communication between management, staff associations, employees.ï Ensure that employees are consulted and provided with constructive feedback in the course of their work, particularly when changes are being proposed or implemented.ï Undertake performance appraisals and ensure that all employees are fully trained to discharge their duties and provide appropriate development opportunities.ï Monitor the workloads of all employees to ensure that staff are neither under or over worked.ï Monitor the working hours and overtime, holidays, breaks, time off in lieu, flexible working sheets.ï Attend all relevant training in relation to good management practice and occupational health and safety.ï Ensure that bullying and harassment is not tolerated within their area of responsibility by taking appropriate action.ï Be vigilant and offer additional support to staff who are experiencing stress inside and/or outside of the work environment.ï Monitor sickness absence relating to stress and refer any member of staff to the Force Occupational Health Unit as required.ï 
ï Liaise with the Force Occupational Health Unit as required, to identify any staff in vulnerable roles and agree proactive initiatives. Ensure that staff experiencing stress have access to appropriate sources of advice and support.ï Consider applications of part time and or flexible working arrangements to assist staff in achieving and maintaining a healthy work/life balance.ï Ensure that employees are fully trained to carry out their duties.ï Ensure all employees have adequate opportunities for rest, meals and refreshments in line with the working time directive and organisational policy.ï To support health and wellbeing initiatives in the workplace.The Police and Crime Commissioner will:ï Actively support Chief Officers in the strategic management of health and safety matters in their force.ï Actively engage and support Chief Officers with the development and embedding of health and wellbeing into the organisation.ï Hold Wiltshire Police to account in relation to the Workplace Wellbeing Charter.The Occupational Health Unit will:ï Provide specialist advice and guidance to the Force in line with government legislation.ï Provide support and guidance for managers to allow them to manage staff with health related issues.ï Provide practical and confidential occupational health support for all staff.ï Provide access to various services that aim to support staff in relation to their work (see below)ï Provide advice and guidance on health work practices, working closely with managers, people services and staff to ensure all aspects of health are explored in relation to the work environment.ï Provide information to all employees regarding healthy work practices and support system in the workplace are discussed during the induction programme, occupational health provide information regarding stress management and self care.ï This includes health issues that affect work as well as health issues that are caused by, or are affected by work.The range of services currently include:-ï Pre Employment Screeningï Risk Assessment Based Medicalsï Referral to a local Occupational Physicianï Referral to an Occupational Health Nurseï Referral to an external Counselling Serviceï 
ï Referral to an external Psychologistï Fast track referral to appropriate specialist for physiological and psychological conditions.ï Referral to Physiotherapistï Immunisation clinicsï Advice regarding health in the workplaceï Infection control adviceï Health surveillance (where the need is identified by the Force)ï Advice regarding healthy lifestyleï TrainingThe Health and Safety Department will:ï Work closely alongside the HR and Occupational Health departments providing specialist health and safety advice.ï Provide specialist advice and guidance in relation to risk management and the completion of risk assessments.ï Engage and communicate with managers, employees and staff associations.ï Work alongside the Learning and Development department with regards to managers training / resilience training.ï Train and support management in the risk assessment process.ï 
Health and Safety Executive Management Standards	Appendix 1.DemandsThe standard is that:ï Employees indicate that they are able to cope with the demands of their jobs, andï Systems are in place locally to respond to any individual concerns.What should be happening/states to be achieved:ï The organisation provides employees with adequate and achievable demands in relation to the agreed hours of work.ï People’s skills and abilities are matched to the job demands.ï Jobs are designed to be within the capabilities of employees, andï Employees concerns about their work environment are addressed.ControlThe standard is that:ï Employees indicate that they are able to have a say about the way they do their work, andï Systems are in place locally to respond to any individual concerns.What should be happening/states to be achieved:ï Where possible, employees have control over their pace of work.ï Employees are encouraged to use their skills and initiative to do their workï Where possible employees are encouraged to develop new skills to help them undertake new and challenging pieces of work.ï The organisation encourages employees to develop their skills.ï Employees have a say when breaks can be taken, andï Employees are consulted over their work patterns.SupportThe standard is that:ï Employees indicate that they receive adequate information and support from their colleagues and superiors; andï Systems are in place locally to respond to any individual concerns.What should be happening/states to be achieved:ï Systems are in place to enable and encourage managers to support their staff.ï Systems are in place to enable and encourage employees to support their colleagues.ï Employees know what support is available and how and when to access it.ï Employees know how to access the required resources to do their jobï Employees receive regular and constructive feedback, andï 
ï The organisation has policies and procedures to adequately support employees.RelationshipsThe standard is that:ï Employees indicate that they are not subjected to unacceptable behaviours e.g. bullying at workï Systems are in place locally to respond to any individual concerns.What should be happening/states to be achieved:ï The organisation promotes positive behaviours at work to avoid conflict and ensure fairness.ï Employees share information relevant to their work.ï The organisation has agreed policies and procedures to prevent or resolve unacceptable behaviour.ï Systems are in place to enable and encourage managers to deal with unacceptable behaviour, andï Systems are in place to enable and encourage employees to report unacceptable behaviour.RoleThe standard is that:ï Employees indicate that they understand their role and responsibilities; andï Systems are in place locally to respond to any individual concerns.What should be happening/states to be achieved:ï The organisation ensures that, as far as possible, the different requirements it places upon employees are compatible.ï The organisation provides information to enable employees to understand their role and responsibilities.ï The organisation ensures that, as far as possible, the requirements it places upon employees are clear, andï Systems are in place to enable employees to raise concerns about any uncertainties or conflicts they have in their role and responsibilities.ChangeThe standard is that:ï Employees indicate that the organisation engages them frequently when undergoing an organisational change, andï Systems are in place locally to respond to any individual concerns.ï 
What should be happening/states to be achieved:ï The organisation provides them with timely information to enable them to understand the reasons for the proposed changeï The organisation ensures adequate employee consultation on changes and provides opportunities for employees to influence proposals.ï Employees are aware of the probable impact of any changes to their jobs. If necessary employees are given training to support any changes to their jobs.ï Employees are aware of the timetables for changes, andï Employees have access to relevant support during changes.ï 
Template v5WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICYHonour Based Abuse(also known as Honour Based Violence)“It is vitally important that, in the first instance, priority is given to the safety of the victim and anyone else who is identified as being at risk of harm. It is crucial that prevention is the focus of intervention and that detection comes secondary to this”.Date of Publication: February 2022 Version:	3.0Next Review Date:	February 2024
TABLE OF CONTENTSPOLICY STATEMENT	3POLICY AIM	4APPLICABILITY	4LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCE	5RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	5AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE	5DATA PROTECTION	5FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	5MONITORING and REVIEW	5WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDURE	5COMMONLY USED ABBREVIATIONS	6APPENDIX A	7HONOUR BASED ABUSE (also known as Honour Based Violence)	7FORCED MARRIAGE	11FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION	14DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	16
POLICY STATEMENTWiltshire Police is committed to playing its role within the coalition of partners in eradicating honour based abuse (violence), forced marriage and female genital mutilation, increasing the confidence of victims, survivors & affected communities and in identifying, prosecuting and bringing offenders to justice.To achieve this aim, this Honour Based Abuse Policy will support colleagues and partner agencies in understanding the strategic intent of Wiltshire Police.This mirrors the National Policing Strategy for Honour Based Abuse (HBA), Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) and Forced Marriage (FM).Investigating Officers should refer to the HBA/FGM/FM procedure for tactical advice on the ‘one chance rule’ and considerations for what should and should not be done when investigating offences.Terminology.There is no statutory definition for Honour Based Abuse and Violence. It is frequently referred to as HBA.Wiltshire Police’s position is that we will use the term Honour Based Abuse. This includes Honour Based Violence but recognises that some Abuse will not be violent (in compliance with the Home Office definition for Domestic Abuse).Please refer to Appendix A for definitions of Honour Based Abuse, Female Genital Mutilation and Forced Marriage.Strategic IntentWiltshire Police commit to:1. building the trust and confidence of affected communities in the police service so that they seek our help directly.2. reduce the under-reporting of all forms of honour based abuse3. provide an effective proactive response on every occasion our help is sought; recognising & responding effectively to risk, keeping victims’ safe and holding offenders to account.4. proactively engage with communities, raises awareness and identifies victims, prospective victims and perpetrators5. demonstrate the Police Service’s leadership on the issues as well as playing an effective role in the coalition of partners to tackle HBA.There are also three key principles that will underpin everything that Wiltshire Police does with respect to HBA/FGM/FM:ï That victims have got a fundamental right to be believed,ï Putting victims (and their children) safety and well-being at the heart of our initial responses and investigations; andï That their personal details will be stored, managed and handled with integrity and confidentially.ï 
Role of the Police ServiceThe police service’s core responsibilities are:ï Protecting life and propertyï Preventing and Detecting crimeï Maintenance of HM The Queen’s Peace,which we will aim to do in a professional, effective, efficient and legitimate way.That said the police can only deliver its role and achieve its objectives with the consent and support of the public. One of the fundamental cornerstones of British Policing is policing by and with consent of the public, therefore our proactive engagement and work with the community, other public authorities and third sector agencies is crucial if we are to deliver our services in an effective and efficient way. In the context of HBA this includes aspiring to actively work with affected communities, the wider community, statutory agencies (including health, education, local authorities, Safeguarding Vulnerable People Partnerships etc) and specialist non-government organisations (NGOs).Investigators should have the confidence to prioritise the safeguarding of victims (and their children) over the prosecution of perpetrators.Role of the Public Protection DepartmentThe Wiltshire Police operating model means that first reports of HBA/FGM/FM will routinely be dealt with by CCC (Crime and Communication Centre) staff or Enquiry Office Staff. These incidents should be treated as a priority and it is anticipated that response officers will ordinarily provide that first face to face response.It is also accepted that, at an early opportunity, the Safeguarding Team within the Public Protection Department will be contacted and they will routinely take ownership of the investigation once the initial risk has been identified and managed by response officers.In the case of a time critical, emergency response, outside of PPD’s operating hours, then the FIM can contact the Duty CID Sergeant for advice.POLICY AIMThe purpose of this policy is to clearly define HBA (as well as FM & FGM) and provide guidance on risk management and investigation in order to reduce the risk of serious harm or homicide and increase the safety, health and well-being of victims, as well as any children.The overarching aim is:ï To protect the lives and welfare of both adults and children at risk of HBA, FM and FGM.ï To investigate all reports of HBA/FM/FGM.ï To deliver the best quality of service to victims and potential victims.ï To build confidential and protective relationships within communities to encourage more victims to have the confidence to report HBA/FM/FGM.ï To adopt a multi agency approach in preventing and reducing HBA/FM/FGM.ï To facilitate effective action against offenders.APPLICABILITYPolice Officers and Police Staff tasked with dealing with allegations of HBA, FM or FGM and all police officers and police staff who are or become aware of any allegation concerning HBA, FM or FGM.
There is a collective responsibility to ensure allegations of HBA, FM and FGM are correctly identified as such, taken seriously and that this policy is adhered to.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEChildren Act 1989Criminal Justice & Police Act 2001 Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004 Forced Marriage (Civil protection) Act 2007Anti-Social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 Domestic Abuse Act 2021.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSHonour Based Abuse FGM and FM Procedure Child Abuse ProcedureDomestic Abuse Policy and Procedure Missing Persons Policy and ProcedureManagement of Missing Persons and Absent Without Leave (Joint Protocol)AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEMajor investigation and public protection > Female Genital MutilationAPP under Major investigation and public protection > Investigating child abuse and safeguarding children.APP under Major investigation and public protection > Forced marriage and honour based violence APP InvestigationDATA PROTECTION ACT 1998Any information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000The policy has been classed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWThis policy will be reviewed every two years, taking into account any newly published Home Office policy, Authorised Professional Practice and NPCC guidelines. Further from this the procedure will be reviewed following a case being investigated in Wiltshire, to highlight any areas for improvement and to ensure these are covered for further investigations.PPD Managers will regularly monitor compliance with this procedure. The Public Protection Department holds overall responsibility for the review and monitoring of this procedure and will conduct all necessary reviews.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe ACC Head of Vulnerability and the Head of the PPD and Safeguarding are responsible for this policy. All queries relating to this policy should be directed to them.
COMMONLY USED ABBREVIATIONSCPSCrown Prosecution ServiceFGMFemale Genital MutilationFGM/CFemale Genital Mutilation / CuttingFMForced MarriageFMPOForced Marriage Protection OrderHBAHonour Based AbuseHBVHonour Based ViolenceNGONon-Government OrganisationNPIANational Police Improvement AgencyPNCPolice National ComputerPNDPolice National DatabaseUNICEFUnited Nations Children’s FundWHOWorld Health Organisation
APPENDIX AHONOUR BASED ABUSE (also known as Honour Based Violence).There is currently no statutory definition of Honour Based Abuse or Violence. It is important that Wiltshire Police refers to Honour Based Abuse (HBA) in the future as this recognises that HBA will not always involve violence.HBA has the potential to be both a Domestic Abuse and a Child Abuse concern, as well as a crime and a non-crime.In terms of the DASH risk assessment (within PPN/1), HBA is a major risk factor for victims and must be regarded as a significant predictor of the likelihood of future harm or homicide. Consideration should therefore be given to grading all incidents with a HBV factor as high risk.Ordinarily, Wiltshire’s Safeguarding Team will investigate HBA crimes or incidents. But, this will need to be agreed through the normal PPD referral process on a case by case basis.There remains much debate amongst practitioners and academics about honour based violence. The use of the term ‘honour’ in relation to violence perpetrated against women, men and children is an oxymoron and has been challenged by many, which is understandable.There is not, and indeed cannot be any honour or justification for the abuse of human rights of and crimes committed against women, men and children. There is only shame and dishonour in the perpetration of such crimes and abuses of human rights. Throughout this strategy the term honour based violence has been adopted to frame the various forms of violence that take place as a result of notions of honour and in line with the terminology used by academics and others in relation to such violence.‘Honour based violence’ is not a form of violence but the motivation, the reason given or assumed for violence. Societies have used cultural and/or religious justifications for male violence against women and girls and other people, based on traditional notions of patriarchy, women as property and acceptable behaviour, whereby an individual, family and community’s honour is weighted on women and girls.Such notions are often supported by varying degrees of social collusion and approval.Honour based violence sits within the wider framework of violence against women and girls. This acknowledges the gendered nature of honour based violence as the vast majority of victims and those at risk are female and that honour based violence takes place overwhelmingly within families. However there remains the issue of male victims and their ability to access services and safety.There is less consensus that honour based violence should sit within the framework of domestic abuse. Some of the reasons cited for this include the nature of honour based violence as being different to domestic abuse in that the perpetrator is NOT necessarily an intimate partner or family member and that there may be multiple perpetrators including other family and community members.The collective nature of honour based violence offending makes it distinct from domestic abuse. Please see HM Government’s updated 1domestic abuse definition and that provided by 2Refuge.Although cases show that much of the violence does originate from intimate partners and the immediate family, further violence can be instigated by extended family members and members of1Domestic Abuse Act 2021 (legislation.gov.uk)2 http://www.refuge.org.uk/get-help-now/what-is-domestic-violence/
the community who support the family’s actions or collude in or perpetrate the violence on behalf of the family.In 2007 ACPO developed a ‘front line’ working definition to enable our police officers and staff members to readily identify what they are dealing with so that they can take effective action to safeguard victim(s), survivor(s) and witness(es) and signpost them to specialist support. This working definition currently remains relevant.The National Police Chiefs Council’s definition of Honour Based Abuse is:‘an incident or crime involving violence, threats of violence, intimidation, coercion or abuse (including psychological, physical, sexual, financial or emotional abuse), which has or may have been committed to protect or defend the honour of an individual, family and or community for alleged or perceived breaches of the family and / or community’s code of behaviour’.Further Explanation‘Honour Based Abuse’, which includes forced marriage (FM) and female genital mutilation (FGM) is a fundamental abuse of Human Rights. It very frequently involves the commission of crimes.There is no honour in the commission of murder, rape, kidnap and the many other acts, behaviour and conduct which make up ‘violence in the name of honour’. Such crimes are shameful and bring dishonour on the perpetrators.Honour based Abuse is a collection of practices, which are used to control behaviour within families and/or communities to protect perceived cultural & religious beliefs and/or honour. Such violence can occur when perpetrators perceive that a relative has shamed the family and / or community by breaking their honour code or code of behaviour. An honour code can define a family’s mindset, way of life or lifestyle.Women and girls are predominantly (but not exclusively) the victims of ‘honour based violence’, which is used to assert male power in order to control female autonomy and sexuality.‘Honour Based Abuse’ can be distinguished from other forms of violence, as it is often committed with some degree of approval and/or collusion from family and / or community members.Examples may include murder, un-explained death (suicide), fear of or actual forced marriage, controlling sexual activity, domestic abuse (including psychological, physical, sexual, financial or emotional abuse), child abuse, rape, kidnapping, false imprisonment, threats to kill, assault, harassment, forced abortion. This list is not exhaustive. Such abuse cuts across all cultures, nationalities, faith groups and communities. It transcends national and international boundaries.We have learnt that concepts of honour and shame have long been associated with Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender (LGBT+) people in affected communities, where there are actual or threatened forced marriages and where the potential for other forms of honour based abuse are seen as a significant and real threat.In addition we know that know that Romany Gypsies and Irish Travellers as racial groups have their own honour code, which governs the conduct of women and girls.Perceptions of Honour: (examples but not limited to)ï Self-awareness / Pride - In communities where honour is prevalent, upholding perceived standards of behaviour can become the basis of a person’s identity and positive self-image.ï Increased Security and Prospects for Offspring -  Families which conform to accepted standards of honour and moral behaviour are more likely to receive benefitsï 
in terms of a better future, especially for their sons, who enjoy increased marriage and career prospects within their community.ï Improved Contacts, Business Opportunities and Social Status - Families which publicly uphold their honour usually gain increased social status and respect. This can result in better contacts within the community which can lead to material benefits such as greater trade for owners of shops and businesses.ï Sense of Superiority - For those with low career prospects, investing in ideas of honour can provide a way to feel superior towards strangers and again increase their social standing within the community.Ways in which honour can be damaged: (examples but not limited to)ï Defying Parental Authority - In many cultures, elder members of the family are expected to control their children. Parents who publicly fail to do so may lose status in the community as a result.ï Becoming ‘Westernised’ (Clothes, Behaviour, Attitude) - Families who allow their children to assimilate into wider society can be seen as betraying their origins, their community and their ancestors.ï Sexual Relationships / Behaviour before Marriage - Many honour-based cultures put a high premium on a girl’s virginity and sexual fidelity. Families whose women are believed to have extra-marital relationships (even of a non-sexual kind) can suffer a decline in honour and social standing. Further from this, as mentioned previously members of the community who are Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual or Transgender (LGBT+) are particularly vulnerable and may not be ‘out’ to their families due to the ‘honour’ repercussions. The confidential nature of such a disclosure to Police must be recognised and maintained.ï Use of Drugs or Alcohol - Drinking alcohol and using drugs not endorsed by religion, culture or tradition can bring shame on families because their children are seen as abandoning or rejecting the values of their parents, their family and their community.ï Interfaith or intercommunity relationships - Families who allow their children to enter into interfaith relationships can be seen as betraying their origins, their community & their ancestors, and seen as not keeping their faith or heritage pure.ï Gossip – SHOULD NOT BE UNDERESTIMATED AS A RISK FACTOR. Rumours andgossip – even if untrue – can damage the status of a family or an individual. Families are often less concerned with the immoral acts themselves than they are with them becoming known about in the community at large. As honour is an intangible asset dependent on a community’s perceptions, an ‘immoral’ act doesn’t become ‘shameful’ or ‘dishonourable’ until it becomes public knowledge.ï Leaving a spouse or seeking a divorce – Women who attempt to leave a relationship are seen as dishonouring an entire family and retribution may be sought against them. Any meetings with a solicitor or reports that are made to the police may be perceived as dishonourable as it is discussing family business outside of the family.Specific behaviours, attitudes and actions that may constitute ‘dishonour’: (List is not exhaustive)ï Reporting Domestic Abuseï Smoking cigarettes or drinking alcoholï Inappropriate make-up or dressï Running away from homeï ‘Allowing’ rape or sexual assaultï The existence of a boyfriendï Pregnancy outside of marriageï 
ï Interfaith relationships or friendshipsï Rejecting a forced or arranged marriageï Leaving a spouse or seeking divorceï Kissing, holding hands or other intimacy in a public placeï Gay men or lesbian women who are declaring their sexualityThe consequences of dishonourThe consequences for a person who damages their honour or that of their family or community can be extreme - sometimes lethal - and include the following:Honour killings’ are the ultimate sanction against (mostly) women who are perceived to have brought that shame or dishonour to a family. There have been a number of high profile cases in the United Kingdom where women have lost their lives in a brutal and ‘symbolic’ manner in recent years. Whilst honour killings are prevalent in South Asian and Middle Eastern countries, evidence suggests that there are on average 12 a year in England and Wales.Honour Killings are often planned and are sometimes made to look like suicide, or an accident (often hangings or burnings). A decision to kill may be preceded by a family council. Relatives (including females) may conspire, aid, abet or participate in the killing. Younger relatives may be selected to undertake the killing or the killing may be performed in front of them to make an example of what is expected within the family. Family members may pay unrelated individuals to carry out these acts on their behalf.None of the world’s major religions condone or support the practice of honour killings – although many who have killed their kin or relatives in the name of family honour have tried to justify their actions on religious grounds. Do not assume that all people from any particular race or ethnic group or religion are all going to have the same views about honour and its significance within the family or community.Dowry or ‘Dahej’ is the payment in cash, land, gold or kind by a bride’s family to the bridegroom’s family, along with the giving away of the bride. If the dowry amount is not considered sufficient or is not forthcoming, the bride is often harassed, abused and made miserable. This abuse can escalate to the point where the husband or his family kill the bride, often perpetrated to look like suicide or an accident.Examples of abuse and violence: (including but not limited to)ï Forced Suicide (being told if they do not kill themselves someone else will kill them and it could be more painful etc)ï Controlling sexual activityï Child abuseï Abuse of Vulnerable Adultsï Rapeï Kidnapping or false imprisonmentï Threats to killï Assaultï Harassment forced abortionï Pressure to return homeï Pressure to go abroadï House ‘arrest’ï Excessive restrictions on home life (not allowed phone, to use internet or develop friendships outside of family circle etc.) – controlling and coercive behavioursï 
Families whose honour has been damaged can be ignored and ostracised by other members of the community. Their children may also be rejected at school by fellow members of their cultural, ethnic or religious group.Families who are associated with dishonour are considered damaged and may receive smaller dowries for their children. In extreme cases, their shops and businesses can also be boycotted or even physically attacked by community members who believe that their collective honour has also been damaged.Community leaders and politicians from honour based communities whose honour is damaged can lose support, prestige and influence as a result.Members of families whose honour is damaged can become depressed, suicidal or abusive. These feelings occur in the wider family as well as with the victim who is therefore blamed for the feelings, distress and ill health that they are causing others.FORCED MARRIAGE'Forced Marriage’ is where one or both of the partners (more often the woman, but not exclusively) is forced or coerced into marrying. This is further expanded upon in Multi-Agency Practice Guidelines: Handling cases of Forced Marriage (HM Government 2008):"A forced marriage is a marriage in which one or both spouses do not (or in the case of some adults with learning or physical disabilities, cannot) consent to the marriage and duress is involved. Duress can include physical, psychological, financial, sexual and emotional pressure".Forced marriage is an abuse of human rights and cannot be justified on any religious or cultural basis. It is regarded as an extreme form of Domestic and/or Child Abuse.European Convention on Human Rights - ARTICLE 12 [Right to marry]:Men and women of marriageable age have the right to marry and to found a family, according to the national laws governing the exercise of this right.UNICEF reports that an estimated 10 million girls each year are married before the age of 18, many of them as young as eight years old to men who may be three or four times their age.Child marriage cuts across countries, cultures, religions and ethnicities: 46 per cent of girls under 18 are married in South Asia; 38 per cent in sub-Saharan Africa; 29 per cent in the Americas; 18 per cent in the Middle East and North Africa; as well as in some communities in Europe and North America (Source: UNICEF).In calendar year 2013 HM Government’s3 Forced Marriage Unit (FMU) gave advice or support in 1302 cases involving people from 74 different countries, which is further broken down as:ï 82% of cases involved female victims and 18% involved male victims.ï Where the age was known, 15% of cases involved victims below 16 years, 25% victims aged3https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/291855/FMU_2013_statistics.pdf
16-17, 33% victims aged 18-21, 15% victims aged 22-25, 7% involved victims aged 26-30,3% victims aged 31+.ï 97 cases involved victims with disabilities.ï 12 involved victims who identified as lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender.It is essential to identify and draw the distinction with arranged marriages, which are fully supported in our multi-cultural and diverse society, where the arrangement is based on compatibility, choice and consent (informed & free consent).As can be seen from FMU’s cases there is evidence to support that LGBT+ people from within affected communities are being forced into marriage to conceal or ‘cure’ their sexuality or address their gender identity.In addition there is also a wealth of evidence, which highlights that people with disabilities e.g. people with mental illness have been or are being forced into marriage. It is suspected that there are a number of reasons for this including;ï parents wishing to find a partner for their disabled adult children, who can then care for them as the parents grow older;ï Assisting claims for residence and citizenship in the UK; andï Retaining wealth, property or land within the family.Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014Section 121 of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 creates an offence of forced marriage in England and Wales as follows:A person commits an offence under the law of England and Wales if he or she –(a) uses violence, threats or any other form of coercion for the purpose of causing another person to enter into a marriage, and(b) believes, or ought reasonably to believe, that the conduct may cause the other person to enter into the marriage without free and full consent.S121 (3) then goes on to state a person commits an offence under the law of England and Wales if he or she –(a) practices any form of deception with the intention of causing another person to leave the United Kingdom,(b) intends the other person to be subjected to conduct outside the United Kingdom that is an offence under subsection (1) or would be an offence under that subsection if the victim were in England or Wales.S121(4) explains that Marriage means any religious or civil ceremony of marriage (whether or not legally binding).An arranged marriage is very different to a forced marriage. In an arranged marriage, both parties enter into the marriage freely. Families of each spouse take a leading role in arranging the marriage and this usually includes the choice of partner. However, the choice of whether or not to accept the arrangements remains with the prospective spouses. In forced marriage, one or both spouses do not consent to the marriage, and duress is involved.However, It is important for officers and staff to note that lines between arranged and forced marriage are not always as clear as they may seem. Women may say that they have had an
arranged marriage but when questioned about what would have happened if they had said no to this marriage they indicate that this wasn’t an option, despite no direct threats being made. If the prospective spouse has been placed under ANY familial pressure to marry, then consent is not given freely and therefore it is a forced marriage. The offence of forced marriage therefore has to be considered even when families ‘only’ apply subtle pressures such as a sense of duty and emotional blackmail. Consent is essential to all marriages in all religions.Some key motives for forced marriage include:ï Assisting claims for residence and citizenshipï Attempting to strengthen family linksï Ensuring land, property and wealth remains within the familyï Preventing ‘unsuitable’ relationships outside the ethnic, cultural, religious or caste groupï Protecting family ‘honour’ï Protecting perceived cultural idealsIssues to consider that may increase the risk of a forced marriage occurring:ï Do they have a secret boyfriend/girlfriend?ï Have they married in secret?ï Are they pregnant?ï Are there any other members of the family who may also be at risk, e.g. siblings?ï Have other siblings/family members been subjected to a forced marriage?ï Is the victim gay or do the family or community suspect that they are gay?ï Is the family very traditional? What is the importance of honour to them?ï Is the victim more at risk from their family members or members of the community?Officers should be alive to the fact that a victim of Child/ Domestic Abuse may be suffering abuse because they are resisting an impending forced marriage. They may present with a variety of indicators such as truancy, episodes of depression and self harm, decline in performance at school, eating disorders, substance misuse or deteriorating behaviour and going missing from the family home.Officers and staff including first line managers and supervisors, must understand that people living within a forced marriage, or under the threat of one, may face significant harm if their families become aware that they have sought assistance from either a statutory agency or from a voluntary or community based organisation. It is vital that full consideration is given to the victim’s safety and in many cases it may not be in their best interests to remain with the family or even in the immediate vicinity.If you suspect that a victim of Child/ Domestic Abuse is under threat of being forced to marry against their will abroad, one option may be to ask the victim to surrender their passport. This may help to at least delay the process whilst they seek expert help.Forced Marriage Protection Orders (FMPO)A FMPO is a civil order which is unique to each case and contains legally binding conditions and directions that prevent the behaviour of a person or persons trying to force someone into marriage. Specific conditions can be applied for, including a power of arrest, should a breach occur.A FMPO can be obtained within 24hrs. Once an order is granted, they are issued by Court personnel with a copy provided to the local police station. An entry must then be entered on PNC to
record the Order and the conditions imposed for the person it was issued to. A physical copy of the order will be sent and stored with Safeguarding Team PPD.Wiltshire Police can apply for a FMPO on behalf of the victim, but this does not negate the victims need to attend court (although this can be done by video link at an undisclosed location). The family of the victim also have the right to oppose the order in which case a temporary order will be made whilst the trial is adjourned for the family to put their defence together.FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION (FGM)Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) (also known as female circumcision or female genital cutting) is an extreme form of Child and/or Domestic Abuse. It refers to the removal of part or all of the female genitalia for cultural or other non-therapeutic reasons. This is extremely painful and has serious consequences for physical and mental health and in extreme circumstances can result in death.The Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003 was enacted in March 2004 and outlawed the practice in this country. It also made it an offence for United Kingdom nationals or habitual4 United Kingdom residents to carry out FGM abroad, or to aid, abet, counsel or procure the carrying out of FGM abroad, even in countries where the practice is legal.The World Health Organisation (WHO) has classified FGM into four main types:Type 1 – Clitoridectomy: partial or total removal of the clitoris (a small, sensitive and erectile part of the female genitals) and, in very rare cases, only the prepuce (the fold of skin surrounding the clitoris).Type 2 – Excision: partial or total removal of the clitoris and the labia minora, with or without excision of the labia majora (the labia are the ‘lips’ that surround the vagina).Type 3 – Infibulation: narrowing of the vaginal opening through the creation of a covering seal. The seal is formed by cutting and repositioning the inner, or outer, labia, with or without removal of the clitoris.Type 4 – Other: all other harmful procedures to the female genitalia for non-medical purposes, e.g. pricking, piercing, incising, scraping and cauterising the genital area.FGM has been documented as taking place in 28 countries in Africa and is found in Middle Eastern and Asian countries. UNICEF estimates that 125 million women and girls globally have undergone FGM and that 3 million girls in Africa are at risk each year. It is also found in migrant communities worldwide including the UK.A very recent prevalence study interim report published by City University, London and Equality Now5 that an estimated 137,000 women and girls with FGM, born in countries where FGM is practiced, were permanently resident in England and Wales in 2011. Over half of the women aged 15 – 49 years with FGM, 53,000 were born in countries with almost universal Type III FGM.From 1996 – 2010, 144,000 girls were born in England and Wales to mothers from FGM practicing countries. We know that girls born to mothers with FGM are at high risk of undergoing FGM.It is believed that the majority of girls undergo FGM between the 0 -15 years, although is known to be practised outside this age range with older women who are married e.g. re-infibulation following4 Prior to 3rd May 2015 the Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003 referred to ‘permanent united Kingdom residents’. This was extended to ‘habitual United Kingdom residents’ by s70 Serious Crime Act 2015. 5 http://www.equalitynow.org/sites/default/files/FGM%20EN%20City%20Estimates.pdf
childbirth and women who are forced to undergo FGM by their husband and/or his female family members.The type and degree of FGM practiced and the reasons that cultures and communities so practices vary. However it appears that many practice FGM because of out-dated notions of honour, perceived culture and/or religious practices and for some communities it is driven by superstition and myth. That said no religion or faith condones FGM.As with other forms of Honour Based Violence, FGM is initiated to control female autonomy and sexuality and is linked to coming of age, purity, virginity, chastity, marriageability and fidelity with a clear connection to the individual’s honour and therefore the family’s honour.A girl who has not undergone FGM may face stigma, discrimination and accusations about perceived promiscuity, bringing shame to herself and her family thereby presenting other risks.In some communities, FGM is regarded as being necessary and even desirable to preserve a woman’s sexuality for later marriage and to reduce the likelihood of promiscuity before properly consummated marriage. Given the multi-cultural mix within the United Kingdom, it is believed that hundreds of young women and children from minority ethnic communities have been or are still being forcibly subjected to FGM and it is accordingly regarded as an extreme form of Domestic and Child Abuse.In Wiltshire, if the FGM is believed to have taken place on a female under the age of 18 it will be investigated by the Child Abuse Investigation Team (CAIT) with support from the Safeguarding Team for the wider family and, where necessary, obtaining a protective order, and if the FGM has taken place on a female over the age of 18 it will be investigated by the Safeguarding Team both of which sit within the Public Protection Department.Indicators of risk may include:ï Family comes from practising communityï Family is not well integrated into British societyï Parents do not want their children to have sexual health classes at schoolï Child talking about taking a long holiday to a country where practice is prevalentï Child talking about a ‘special event’ or party where she is going to become a womanï Children who take a significant amount of time whilst urinatingï Any female child born to a woman or who has a sister subjected to FGM must be considered at risk along with any female children in immediate and extended family.HBA has the potential to be both a Domestic Abuse and a Child Abuse concern as well as a crime and a non-crime.In terms of the DASH risk assessment, HBA is a major risk factor for victims and must be regarded as a significant predictor of the likelihood of future harm or homicide. Consideration should therefore be given to grading all incidents with a HBA factor as high risk.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	PPD and SafeguardingPolicy Owner/Author:	Supt. PPD and Safeguarding / DI Safeguarding Team Technical Author:	Jenny CRADDOCK (DAIT)Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: ACC Crime Justice and VulnerabilityRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes04.10.20182.0Scheduled review – Policy updated to reflect implementation of data Protection Act 2018 and GDPR. No other changes made.22.02.20223.0Scheduled review – policy updated to reflect Domestic Abuse Act 2021 and minor updates around PPD operating model (IPM).Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team22.02.20223.0Supt. PPD and Safeguarding21.12.20213.0JNCC(Not required for all policies)N/ADistribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionImplications of the Policy: Training RequirementsNo additional training requirements needed.IT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure required
Template v8       WILTSHIRE POLICE & POLICE AND CRIME COMMISSIONERHuman Resources Policy Statement(This covers all Wiltshire Police Officers and Police/OPCC Staff)Date of Publication: July 2021 Version:	1.0Next Review Date:	July 2024
POLICY STATEMENTThis policy sets outs the overarching HR principles to be applied to all Police Officers (including specials) and members of staff within Wiltshire Police and Wiltshire Office of the Police and Crime Commissioner (OPCC).Wiltshire Police and the OPCC are committed to achieving their policing priorities through its people seeking to achieve a status of an outstanding employers. We recognise that in order to provide a first-class service to the public, all Police Officers, Police and OPCC staff must be encouraged and supported to serve with integrity and professionalism.Wiltshire Police and the OPCC accept and recognise their obligation to conduct their activities in full knowledge of, and compliance with, the requirements of applicable employment legislation/Police Regulations and Approved Codes of Practice. We will achieve this by seeking to adopt best practice in all people management procedures, encouraging innovation and the wise use of public resources to deliver a value for money service to colleagues.Wiltshire Police and the OPCC are committed to attracting, recruiting and retaining a high caliber workforce that is reflective of the communities we serve.The Human Resources Department provides professional advice, guidance and practical support in employment/regulatory matters to all levels of the business. The principal objectives of the Human Resources Policy is to ensure that:ï All Police Officers and police/OPCC staff are recruited, selected and deployed, based upon their attitude, skill, competency, and aptitude;ï Wiltshire Police develop and maintain fair, flexible, efficient and cost effective administrative and selection processes;ï All new appointments to the Wiltshire Police/OPCC will be subject to a probationary period. This period allows both Wiltshire Police and the probationer to establish the suitability of the role and the capability of the post holder;ï Management practices seek to promote and encourage the motivation, development and retention of the best people;ï Everyone is treated with fairness, respect and dignity, whatever their protected characteristics or their place in the hierarchy;ï Wiltshire Police is committed to a fair and orderly resolution of work-related issues and have established procedures and practices that support that commitment;ï All Police Officers and police/OPCC staff are trained to carry out their role safely and competently, in compliance with relevant legislation and guidance, and are supported to develop to their full potential;ï All Police Officers, Police Staff and members of the OPCC are made aware of the business continuity and orgnisational internal resilience plans within their department; this will be dependent on their specific job role;ï Communications between management, staff associations/Unison and their representatives are mutually accepted as open and honest to encourage partnership working and improve the service to the public wherever possible;ï The Human Resources Department will oversee the grading of police staff roles. The grade of a police staff role will be established though the Force’s agreed Job Evaluation mechanism (currently Hay) and in line with the Job Evaluation (Police Staff) Procedure.ï 
ï Police Officers promotions will be made in line with the National Police Promotion Framework;ï Wiltshire Police develop and maintain effective and efficient administrative processes and procedures relating to the monitoring and recording of the “employment” lifecycleï Wiltshire Police develops and maintains clear procedures in relation to Attendance, Performance and Misconduct management.ï Equality Impact Assessments will be completed for each HR related procedure;ï Individual line managers/supervisors are responsible for ensuring that this policy is applied within their own teams, divisions and departments, with appropriate support from the HR Department.ï When we are less than perfect, we will listen, learn and strive to improve;ï Individual's health, health and safety and welfare needs are always considered;ï That the process to be followed when a member of Police Staff decides to leave Wiltshire Police, either through voluntary resignation or retirement, will be stated on the People Services Portal Page (HR Direct). Under the LGPS Regulations Wiltshire Police is required to formulate, publish and keep under review policies with regard to the arrangements relating to the discretionary powers adopted by the Force. These policies will be detailed in appendix 1 of this policy document.Wiltshire Police has adopted the following areas of the Police Staff Council Handbook (PCSH): Working time, pay (except SAFF payments), sickness, maternity, appointments, travel and subsidies, payment in the event of death.Health and WellbeingWiltshire Police and OPCC operates an agile workforce allowing better work-life balance and flexibility. Staff who are not required for front line duties can flex their time between working from the office when required and from elsewhere at other times.This flexibility seeks to also support those with family responsibilities (children/relatives requiring additional care) ensuring commitments in their personal and work life can be better achieved.Standard working hours for a full-time police officer are 40 hours per week. Standard working hours for a full-time member of police staff are 37 hours per week.Under the Work and Families Act 2006 and the accompanying Flexible Working (Eligibility, Complaints and Remedies) (Amendment) Regulations 2006, a parent of a child under sixteen (under 18 if the child is disabled) and carers of 'relatives' of any age have the right to make a request for flexible working (see People Services Site for details on how to apply).Wiltshire Police and the OPCC have extended the right to request flexible working to all individuals with 26 weeks continuous service. Any applications for flexible working will be fully considered and if declined, a full, objective rationale as to the reason it is not deemed suitable will be provided. Flexible working is any work pattern adapted to suit both the needs of the orgnisations and the member of staff and is intended to help achieve a better work-life balance. The more common forms of flexible working are:ï Job share – more than one person sharing a single postï Part-time – working fewer than standard hours either on a daily, weekly or monthly basisï Compressed hours – working agreed hours over fewer daysï Annualised hours – set annual number of hours worked in any one yearï 
ï Staggered hours – different starting and finishing times for staff in the same workplace. Thisï Could be down to team levelï Flexitime – variable start and finish times negotiated locallyIndividuals can request a flexible working pattern for any reason in an effort to aid their 'work-life balance' or to undertake additional studies or training. This does not affect an individual's statutory rights. Although there is no right to work a flexible work pattern there is a right to request to work flexibly. Applications for flexible working patterns should be considered for all roles unless the role has been objectively justified as being unsuitable for flexible working.Individuals working a flexible arrangement will have equal access to training and promotion opportunities regardless of their working arrangements.Wiltshire Police and the OPCC operates a smoke free environment in accordance with the Health Act 2006. Smoking is not permitted by any visitor, contractor, detained person or member of the public whilst on Wiltshire Police premises or vehicles other than in designated smoking areas.Resignation and RetirementThis policy is supported by a number of HR and Professional Standards procedures (contained within the Policy Library) and guidance contained on the People Services Portal Site.All HR procedure and guidance are written in compliance with prevailing legislation which, where relevant and necessary, is referenced within the procedure or guidance. Monitoring and review of HR procedure and guidance will be undertaken by the relevant HR Head of Department within a maximum of three years.POLICY AIMThis policy sets out the overarching HR principles to be applied to all Police Officers and members of staff within Wiltshire Police and Wiltshire OPCC. It has been designed to reduce the overall number of HR policies and make access easier.The key principles of this policy are to:> ensure staff get opportunities to engage across the organisation and that feedback from this engagement is responded to appropriately;> support staff commitment to Keeping People Safe and improving the safety and wellbeing of the people of Wiltshire;> Support our Officers and Staff in regards to their own safety, health and wellbeing> promote the requirement of line managers to effectively manage employee relations on a day-to-day basis.APPLICABILITYThis policy applies to all Police Officers and staff across the organisation, including those within the OPCC.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEEmployment Rights Act 1996 Equality Act 2010Flexible Working (Eligibility, Complaints and Remedies) (Amendment) Regulations 2006
RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSAll Human Resources Policies and Procedures, including:> Equal Opportunities Policies and Procedures> Issue Resolution and Dignity at Work Policy and Procedure> Job Evaluation (Police Staff) Procedure> Managing Performance and Capability for Wiltshire Police & OPCC Staff Policy and Procedure> Police Staff Discipline Procedure   > Police Performance Regulations Human Resources Guidance (HR Portal Site)AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEProfessional StandardsDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded because of this policy, will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This policy will be assessed for suitability for public release when final draft adopted.MONITORING AND REVIEWThis policy will be reviewed every three years in the light of any national policy or procedural change or due to changes to law or Force strategy or at such other times as may become necessary. Any review will take into consideration feedback/lessons learned from the application of the policy.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Head of HR – Strategy, Policy & Change is responsible for this policy. All queries relating to this policy should be directed to the People Services Centre or the Force Policy Officer.
Appendix 1LGPS Regulations require the Force to formulate, publish and keep under review policies with regard to the arrangements relating to the discretionary powers adopted by the Force.The Regulations and Force discretions are outlined below:REGULATIONPOLICY ON INDIVIDUAL DISCRETIONSBCM12: Augmentation of membership of an active member (up to 10 years)The Force will not exercise this discretion..BCM 13: Whether to grant additional pension to a member (up to £5,000pa)The Force will not exercise this discretion in addition or as an alternative to augmentation.BCM 18(1): Whether all or some benefits can be paid if an employee reduces hours/grade and continues to work (“flexible retirement”)The Force does not give blanket consent for staff in the LGPS aged between 60 and 74 years to flexibly retire and draw immediate payment of pension benefits. Requests will be referred to the Resources Directorate and assessed on their merits taking into account such factors as cost and service delivery.BCM (3): Waiving actuarial reduction on flexible retirement.The Force will not be responsible for waiving actuarial reduction in relation to Flexible retirement.BCM30 (2): Whether to allow early payment of benefits at/after 55.The Force does not give blanket consent for staff in the LGPS aged between 55 and 59 years to retire and draw immediate payment of pension benefits except in the cases redundancy. Requests will be referred to the Resources Directorate and assessed on their merits taking into account such factors as cost and service delivery.BCM30 (3): Waiving actuarial reduction on early retirement.The Force will not exercise this discretionAdmin 16(4)(b)(ii): Whether to extend 12-month period to combine previous LG service.Admin 83(8): Whether to extend 12-month period toallow a transfer-in of non- LG pension rights.The Force will allow an option to combine either previous LG service or non-LG pension rights for 12 months only in both of these discretions. BCM 3 Determine rate of employees’ contributions.The Force will allocate employees to the appropriate contribution rate according to pay band at 1 April each year and adjust only where there is a contractual change during the year.
Admin 22(2): Whether toThe Force will allow the extension of the period in cases where theextend the period for amember was not notified of the right to pay contributions.member to elect to paycontributions to coverunpaid leave of absence,maternity, paternity, oradoption leave beyond 30days after returning towork or leaving.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Human ResourcesPolicy Owner / Author:	Suzie Thompson / Andrew Irving Technical Author:	Natalie StrongSenior Officer/Manager Sponsor: Director of People and ChangeRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes23.07.20211.0Draft v0.5 published as substantive version 1.002.08.20211.0Text on page 3 re flexible working expanded to provide more clarity.04.11.20211.0Bullet point added re business continuity and orgnisational internal resilience plans.Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team23.07.20211.0JNCC (Not required for all policies)19.07.20210.5Distribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionNaji DARWISH (OPCC), Megan KENZIE (Op Fortitude), Supt. Dave MINTY05.07.20210.4Mark ANDREWS and Sarah ENNIS (Police Federation),05.07.20210.4Cliff FULLER and Clare CROSS (UNISON),05.07.20210.4Implications of the Policy: Training RequirementsNo additional training requirements needed.IT InfrastructureNo additional IT Infrastructure required.
Human tissue: seizure, retention and disposal policy (for police forces in England and Wales)Lawful seizure of human tissue in cases of suspicious death and homicide casesContentsIntroduction	2Police Seizure of human tissue	2Guiding principle	3Documentation	4Retention and continuity of human tissue material (within the UK)	4Consultation with the pathologist	4Examination of samples by a second (defence) pathologist	5Sending samples for examination outside of the jurisdiction	5Regular reviews of human tissue seized by police	5Disposal of human tissue material	5Actions when initially suspicious cases revert to non-suspicious	6Single point of contact	6The Coroner	7Family Liaison	7Next of kin and personal representative/s wishes regarding return f body/disposal of human tissue	7Disposal of other human tissue material held on authority of the police	8Pregnancy remains	8Historically held human tissue	8Summary	8Appendices	10Category 1	10Category 2	11Category 3	12References	13Acknowledgements	13
IntroductionIn cases where the police are investigating a suspicious death or a suspected homicide, a forensic post mortem examination will be required to:ï Determine the identity of the deceased person;ï Determine the cause and circumstances of the death, andï Facilitate the collection of forensic evidence to assist in the investigation of the death.All of the above three elements form part of the criminal investigation, albeit the first two elements will also be part of the coroner’s investigation.By virtue of section 14 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009, a senior coroner can authorise a post mortem examination of the body of a deceased person.In cases where a coroner is informed by the chief officer of police (in practical terms the senior investigator) that a homicide offence is suspected, the coroner must consult with the chief officer of police about who should make the post mortem examination (Regulation 12 to the Coroners (Investigations) Regulations 2013 (‘CIR 2013’).Regulation 13(5)(a) of CIR 2013 allows for a representative of the chief officer of police to be present during a forensic post mortem examination. In such cases, a forensic pathologist on the Home Office Register of Forensic Pathologists should be appointed to conduct the post mortem examination.The Home Office registered forensic pathologist will conduct a post mortem examination in accordance with the Code of Practice and Performance Standards for Forensic Pathology.In order to fully investigate the medical cause of death, the Home Office registered forensic pathologist will take samples of tissue and bodily fluids. This may include whole or parts of organs of the body for examination by sub-specialty medical or scientific experts.Police Seizure of human tissueIn the investigation of a homicide or in suspicious death cases, as with all criminal investigations, it is essential that the appropriate lawful power is used to enable the seizure and continued lawful retention of evidence by police.The main sources of law relating to powers of seizure of evidence in the investigation of crime by the police are provided under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (‘PACE 1984) (particularly section 19) and the common law. Police will rely on their common law powers of seizure when they are not on premises. Note however that the definition of premises in section 23 of PACE 1984 is broad. It includes ‘any place’ and in particular vehicles, tents and movable structures, so in reality, rarely will it be necessary for the police to rely on their common law powers.Under section 19 of PACE 1984, an officer lawfully on premises may seize material which he has reasonable grounds for believing is evidence of an offence and that it is necessary to seize it in order to prevent it being lost, altered or destroyed.The Police have a lawful right to be present at a post mortem examination in accordance with CIR 2013 and it therefore follows that they have a right to take tissue samples under section 19 of PACE, provided of course that the requirements of this section are met.
It should be noted that while any human tissue samples that are retained during a post mortem examination conducted for criminal justice purposes and seized under police powers, are likely to be exempt from the Human Tissue Act 2004 (‘HTA 2004’), the Home Office and the Human Tissue Authority (‘HTA’) recommend that the principles of the HTA 2004 and relevant codes of practice are followed.In some circumstances, material initially taken by the forensic pathologist at a post mortem examination on behalf of the coroner may need to be seized as evidence by the police. Such cases may arise where tissue from a non-forensic post mortem examination was initially taken for the purposes of the coroner, but later information comes to light that leads the police to believe that they are dealing with a homicide or that the death is suspicious.In the same way as any other evidence seized by police under section 19 of PACE 1984, human tissue can lawfully be retained under section 22 of PACE 1984. It should be noted that section 22 of PACE 1984 only applies to human tissue seized under section 19 of PACE 1984. If human tissue is seized by police using their common law powers, then their power to retain it is determined by the common law too.Sections 19 and 22 of PACE 1984 are drafted widely to justify the retention of human material for so long as there remains a compelling criminal justice purpose. Conversely the developed common law police power of retention of seized items permits them to be retained for the duration of criminal proceedings but for no longer. There is no doubt that the seizure and retention of human tissue either under PACE 1984 or the common law will automatically engage police obligations of retention and disclosure under the Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 (‘CPIA 1996’).When considering the lawfulness of retention, it is important to be able to demonstrate that certain requirements are met, for example:ï The rationale for retention should be recorded with reference to the test in section 22 of PACE 1984 (where applicable).ï The lines of authority and decision-maker/s should be clearly defined;ï There should be provision for reasonably regular reviews of the question of retention.The system adopted should be one which strives to identify an end point for police retention. There may be cases in which retention of some samples is virtually indefinite but that should be the result of the application of a test to the particular case which at least some, if not, most cases, results in an end point being reached. Material taken from the body and seized under section 19 of PACE 1984 or the common law is subject to the same level of continuity as any other police criminal property or exhibit. For this reason, a trained exhibits officer should be present at the post mortem to ensure that tissue is correctly documented and proper continuity is maintained.It is important to note that if a forensic post mortem examination is ordered by a coroner in circumstances where a criminal offence is not suspected, the powers under PACE 1984 will not be engagedGuiding principleThe guiding principle for police is that if it is deemed by the Senior Investigating Officer (‘SIO’) that the human tissue in question may assist the criminal investigation into the death of the deceased, it should be seized and retained under police authority using section 19
and 22 of PACE 1984 or the common law and not the coroner’s authority. The decision to seize and retain human tissue under the police’s authority eliminates the complexities arising from the simultaneous application of two separate systems for seizure and retention decision making, which arises when retained under the coroner’s authority as well as the police’s.The SIO should also consider (in consultation with the forensic pathologist and Crown Prosecution Service (‘CPS’)) whether an image or histological samples would be sufficient when deciding whether to retain human tissue during the police investigation and for subsequent trial and potential appeal purposes.DocumentationA single list of all material retained at the post mortem examination should be produced and a copy provided to the SIO, forensic pathologist and the coroner. The list should specify under what authority the material was taken (i.e. the coroner’s authority or the police’s authority).This single list must be updated if material is returned to the body or to the next of kin or personal representative/s of the deceased; sent for further examination; or returned to the coroner for disposal. It should act as a comprehensive history detailing the continuity of material, which is easily auditable and from which the provenance of the material can be clearly ascertained. This principle also applies to material taken at any subsequent post mortem examination(s) - for instance a second or ‘defence’ post mortem.Retention and continuity of human tissue material (within the UK)Like any other property seized as part of a criminal investigation, material retained must be kept in secure storage and under suitable conditions (the pathologist will advise on this). The location of material must be properly recorded, indexed and easily accessible.On occasions, human tissue material may be submitted for specialist examination and will be out of direct police control; the SIO must therefore ensure that the specialists who handle the exhibit maintain its integrity and continuity by fully documenting the receipt, storage and disposal of the tissue.The police must maintain a system of tracking the location and storage of human tissue, and the holding institution (for instance the mortuary or hospital laboratory) must be informed of any instructions relating to its retention or disposal - taking into consideration the wishes of the next of kin and the deceased’s personal representative/s.Consultation with the pathologistThe SIO should consult with the pathologist regarding any aspect of the investigation that may have a bearing on the continued retention or disposal of human tissue. This will ensure that tissue that is no longer required can be respectfully disposed of in a timely manner and conversely that police only retain tissue that is required for investigation purposes.Consulting with the pathologist in this way will provide the SIO with confidence that human tissue is not being retained unnecessarily (see ‘Disposal of Human Tissue Material below). Nevertheless, the final decision as to disposal rests with the SIO.
Examination of samples by a second (defence) pathologistOn occasions, samples are sent by the forensic pathologist conducting the initial post mortem, to a second forensic pathologist acting for the defence. In such cases, the first forensic pathologist should seek permission from the SIO to do this, and mechanisms should be put in place to ensure that such samples are returned to police to facilitate disposal in an appropriate manner. The Forensic Science Regulator has issued guidance in this regard entitled ‘Provision of Human Tissue to the Defence’.Sending samples for examination outside of the jurisdictionThere may be occasions when the Home Office’s registered forensic pathologist, or the pathologist acting for the defence, wishes to send human tissue for examination to an expert outside of the jurisdiction (for instance where no suitable forensic expert can be found in the UK). It should be noted that the export of evidence can give rise to problems:ï The material will be outside the control of the police or coroner on whose authority it is held;ï The material is no longer under the control of the courts in this jurisdiction;ï It will be difficult to supervise the actions of those in possession of the material;ï The risk of the material being lost is increased;ï The maintenance of continuity will be more difficult, andï The material will be subject to the laws of the country to which it is exported, and this creates a risk of satellite litigation.It is therefore recommended that human tissue is not exported outside of the three UK jurisdictions unless absolutely necessary (when for instance a suitable expert cannot be sourced within the UK).Regular reviews of human tissue seized by policeIt is the responsibility of the SIO to ensure that reviews of human tissue exhibits are undertaken regularly throughout the investigation. This is particularly important prior to the release of the body and at the post-trial debrief. It is recommended that an early (or perennial) action is entered onto Home Office Large Major Enquiries System 2 (‘HOLMES 2’) for this purpose at the start of the investigation.Disposal of human tissue materialA debrief should take place at the end of each suspicious death or homicide inquiry to decide on the question of tissue retention. This should involve (as appropriate) the police, coroner, CPS and the forensic pathologist and be documented in a recoverable form. This does not need to be a physical meeting, but clear decisions need to be made and recorded in consultation (by whatever means) concerning the retention and disposal of human tissue.In cases where either:
ï The outcome of the death investigation is not one of homicide; orï The outcome of the death investigation is homicide, but the human tissue taken at post mortem is not required for the ongoing investigation;the human tissue should be returned to the body, if possible, prior to release to the next of kin/personal representative/s.In cases where the body has already been returned to the next of kin or personal representative/s, tissue should be disposed of in accordance with the next of kin or personal representative/s wishes.In any event, material should not be disposed of without prior consultation with the coroner who may wish to retain it for the purpose of their duties at an inquest.Where appropriate, the CPS should also be consulted before final disposal of any tissue samples. Advice from the forensic pathologist will assist the SIO and CPS in this decision- making process.Actions when initially suspicious cases revert to non-suspiciousIn many cases, the conduct and result of the forensic post mortem examination will help to inform the SIO at an early stage that the death is non–suspicious. It is possible that a decision may be made by the SIO to declare the death as non-suspicious immediately after the conclusion of the post mortem examination. In such cases, human tissue exhibits may already have been seized using police powers under PACE 1984 or the common law but are no longer required for police purposes.Where this is the case, it is essential that the coroner is informed that the status of the investigation has changed, and that the coroner be consulted about disposal of the tissue - whether it is still required for coronial purposes, or whether it should be returned to the body for burial or cremation. It should be noted that if the material is disposed of by the police in accordance with an appropriate protocol, the HTA 2004 will not apply.If the material is however retained on the coroner’s authority, the consent requirements of the HTA 2004 do not apply although the licensing requirements will. This means that the coroner and those holding the material on his behalf will need to take steps to comply with the licensing requirements of the HTA 2004. In addition, the coroner may only retain samples to help identify the cause of death or the identification of the accused for so long as they need to be preserved for the purpose of fulfilling these functions.Single point of contactEach force should appoint an officer as a Single Point of Contact (‘SPOC’) to oversee the management of human tissue and to ensure that force policy concerning the seizure, retention and disposal of human tissue is complied with. The SPOC will also act as a central referral point for notifications of human tissue finds at HTA licensed establishments. Other responsibilities of the SPOC should include:ï Maintaining a single central data set of human tissue held by the force.ï Making determinations about tissue after the relevant enquiry team has ceased to exist.ï 
ï Liaising with the relevant forensic pathology group practice over tissue retention.The CoronerThe statutory duty to inform the relevant persons about what material has been preserved lies with the coroner. The coroner is also responsible for notifying the chief officer of police or prosecuting authority of any period for which the coroner requires material to be preserved or retained. This is in order that the police do not dispose of material which is no longer required for a criminal justice purpose but may still be required for the purpose of the coroner.Even if (a) there is no period notified by the coroner or (b) the period has elapsed there should be a check with the coroner over disposal.Family LiaisonThe SIO and the coroner should be proactive in pursuing an early resolution of all post mortem examinations and ensure that the conclusion of the body examination process has been communicated effectively to the family via the coroner’s officer and the family liaison officer (‘FLO’) to allow the funeral to take place as soon as possible.Families will want to know details of when the body of the deceased will be released for the funeral and subsequent burial or cremation. The FLO should facilitate this request through the coroner’s officer after consultation with the SIO.Early agreement should be reached between the coroner’s officer and the FLO as to who will communicate with the next of kin or personal representative/s so as not to duplicate contact.The coroner has lawful control of the body and the decision for its release ultimately rests with them. Therefore, the SIO should ensure that the coroner is updated about the progress of enquiries when these may potentially affect the timely release of the deceased for burial or cremation.Next of kin and personal representative/s wishes regarding return f body/disposal of human tissueFamilies should be asked if they wish to wait to receive the body complete (this could take a long time), or if they would prefer the body (even if not complete) to be returned as soon as possible. However, they should be made aware that some material from the body may be preserved for further examination or evidential reasons and possibly retained for many months or even years. For example, if examination of the brain is necessary, it is often more than six weeks before a report is available. In paediatric cases, delays may be even longer.The wishes of the next of kin or personal representative/s regarding eventual disposal of human tissue taken at post mortem should be ascertained in writing [each force should adopt a standard form for this purpose]. This may include the following options:ï Return of material to the next of kin or personal representative/s for burial or cremation; orï 
ï Disposal by incineration at the request of the police.It is essential to explain to the next of kin or personal representative/s the fact that small samples such as blocks and slides may be retained indefinitely (usually up to 30 years) depending on the individual circumstances of each case, and a record of the fact that this has been explained to them should be made and retained. This may be particularly so in cases where the perpetrator has been convicted and the material is retained until the convicted person is released from prison, or in un-detected cases which will be subject to review.Retention of human tissue should align with any requirements of Management of Police Information (MOPI).Disposal of other human tissue material held on authority of the policePregnancy remainsRegarding the disposal of pregnancy remains, which may have been retained in connection with a criminal inquiry; although the seizure will likely have been made under the relevant provisions of PACE 1984 or the common law, disposal in these extremely sensitive cases should be conducted, where possible, and dependant on the circumstances of the case, in the spirit of the HTA publication ‘Guidance on the disposal of pregnancy remains following pregnancy loss or termination’.Historically held human tissueHuman tissue taken at post mortem is sometimes discovered at mortuaries and hospital laboratories by the HTA during their routine inspection regime of post mortem establishments. Such discoveries will be reported to the Home Office Forensic Pathology Unit (‘HOFPU’), and they will liaise with the relevant police force to determine whether it should be disposed of.The police must confirm to the holding establishment (e.g. mortuary or pathology laboratory etc.) whether the human tissue is still required for a criminal justice purpose, or whether it should be respectfully disposed of and inform the HOFPU of the outcome.Material no longer required for a criminal justice purpose is divided into three categories as per the Forensic Science Regulator’s guidance. How material is disposed of depends on which category the material falls into and each should be considered on a case-by-case basis. The flowcharts attached, in conjunction with the National Decision Model, will assist in the decision-making process.SummaryAll human tissue must be accounted for and capable of audit at all stages of the investigation, from initial seizure through to final lawful disposal.The SIO must therefore be confident of:
ï A lawful power to seize;ï A continuing lawful purpose to retain and examine;ï A clear policy for disposal;ï The fact that the coroner has been informed in writing of all material preserved; and updated where the status of the investigation reverts to non-criminal.Forces are advised to adopt a policy whereby human tissue exhibits are reviewed periodically by force review teams, as reliance cannot be placed on those originally investigating homicide cases, due to the passage of time and the retirement and turnover of staff. This will help to prevent human tissue exhibits being overlooked and retained unnecessarily when they are no longer required for a criminal justice purpose.
AppendicesCategory 1
Category 2No
Category 3Category 3Samples of human tissue that incorporate asignificant part of the body eg, organs, limbs, etc.
WouldNo	family like material returned?Not known
Yes

Insignificant
How significant is thematerial?Significant No
No		Is it within 5 years of PM?YesAre family contactable?
Yes
Consider sensitive disposal in line with guidance (rationale must be documented)
Yes 
Would contact cause disproportionate stress? 
No
NoAdvise of implications in writing
Is return appropriate?Yes

Is return stillNo	required?YesObtain signeddisclaimer
Are there H&S (biohazard) issues?No
Return items (via undertaker if appropriate)
ReferencesForensic Science Regulator. Legal Issues in Forensic Pathology and Tissue Retention. https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/fsr-legal-guidanceGuidance on the disposal of pregnancy remains following pregnancy loss or termination. https://www.hta.gov.uk/sites/default/files/Guidance_on_the_disposal_of_pregnancy_remains.pdfManagement of police informationhttps://www.app.college.police.uk/app-content/information-management/management-of- police-information/National decision-making modelhttps://www.app.college.police.uk/app-content/national-decision-model/the-national-decision- model/Practice advice: The medical investigation of suspected homicide (2019)http://library.college.police.uk/docs/appref/The-medical-investigation-of-suspected- homicide-(COP)-v1.0.pdfProvision of human tissue to the defence (England and Wales) https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_da ta/file/390484/215_Tissue_and_the_Defence_Issue_1.pdfReport on the police human tissue audit 2010 - 2012 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_da ta/file/115689/police-human-tissue-audit.pdfAcknowledgementsDocument prepared by:       Home Office Forensic Pathology Unit, pathology@homeoffice.gov.uk with assistance from:Forensic Science Regulator Human Tissue Authority
Template v5       WILTSHIRE POLICE & POLICE AND CRIME COMMISSIONERINFORMATION MANAGEMENT POLICYDate of Publication: February 2021 Version:	3.0Next Review Date:	May 2025
TABLE OF CONTENTSPOLICY STATEMENT	3Rationale	3Intention	31. APPLICABILITY	42. PRINCIPLES	4Responsibility	4Accessibility and Re-use	4Quality	5Quantity	5Security	5Disclosure	5Transparency	6Retention	6Risk Management	63. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES	6Expectation of all staff	7Supporting SOPs and Guidance	7Implementation Strategy	7POLICY AIM	7LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCE	7RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	7AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE	8DATA PROTECTION	8FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	8MONITORING AND REVIEW	8WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICY	8DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	9
POLICY STATEMENTInformation is the lifeblood of policing. It underpins our operational activities, processes and systems leading to effective investigations, timely arrests and improved criminal justice outcomes. It also helps to prevent further crimes being committed and is vital in the fight against crime.Information Management describes the means by which an organisation efficiently plans, collects, organises, uses, controls, shares, disseminates and disposes of its information, and through which it ensures that the value of that information is identified and exploited to the fullest extent.RationaleWiltshire Police and the Office of the Police and Crime Commissioner (OPCC) have a duty to obtain, use and lawfully share a wide variety of information with our partners in order to discharge our collective duties effectively and keep communities safe. The collection, exploitation and sharing of information is an essential function of policing. Managing information effectively is crucial for:ï keeping people safeï providing evidence to investigate, prosecute and prevent crimeï managing the businessï mitigating risks around the poor use of information such as non-compliance with legislation, harm to the public and loss of reputation.The Information Management policy and any supporting System Operating Procedures (SOPs) and guidance are required to reflect legal obligations and national policy. These include but not necessarily limited to:ï The Code of Practice on the Management of Police Information (MoPI) and the Authorised Professional Practice (APP) for Information Managementï UK-GDPRï Data Protection Act 2018ï Human Rights Act 1998ï Freedom of Information Act 2000ï Computer Misuse Act 1990It will ensure that all staff, including our partners, understand their responsibilities with information and are provided with the knowledge and standards to use that knowledge in line with legislative requirements and in pursuance of our policing vision and aims.IntentionThe Information Management policy in conjunction with supporting SOPs and guidance, sets out how Wiltshire Police will ensure that information is managed effectively and lawfully throughout its lifecycle.This policy is intended to provide officers, police and OPCC staff, contractors, volunteers and other relevant parties with clear and concise guidance that enables them to create, use, retain and dispose of information appropriately, lawfully and with confidence.The policy is intended to enable consistent and transferable procedures and information sharing across other police, government and partnership organisations.The Chief Constable has a responsibility under the Management of Police Information (MOPI) Code of Practice to establish and maintain an Information Management Strategy (IMS) under the direction of a Chief Police Officer or equivalent. This policy and supporting SOPs and guidance cover the key points of an IMS as defined by the Authorised Professional Practice (APP) on Information Management and is therefore intended to fulfil that requirement.
1. APPLICABILITYThis policy applies to everyone with access to the OPCC and Forces’ information, whether employees, contractors, volunteers, professional partners and employees of other organisations, and whether on police or partner premises, or working remotely.The policy applies to all information, whether held digitally or in paper or other physical format. This includes (but is not limited to) text, data, images, and voice and video recordings, and covers both structured material (e.g. Force IT systems and databases) and unstructured material (e.g. documents, emails).Records are documents or data that provide evidence of the Forces’ actions and decisions and are required for legislative and audit purposes, as well as providing an ‘organisational memory’. Generally the same principles contained within this policy should be taken as applying to both information and records.The policy applies to both personal1 and non-personal information and covers all information gathered for the effective running of the organisation. This includes information required for ‘Law enforcement purposes’, which is defined by the Data Protection Act 2018 as necessary for the:ï prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences, orï execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against andï prevention of threats to public security.The Law enforcement purposes provide the legal basis for the collecting, recording, evaluating, sharing and retaining of police information.Information held for Law enforcement purposes specifically includes (but is not limited to) the following business areas:ï Crime Managementï Intelligenceï Public protectionï Custody2. PRINCIPLESThe key information management principles are as follows:ResponsibilityInformation management is everyone’s responsibility and they must ensure that information is used appropriately and in accordance with the force Values and Behaviours, Code of Ethics and Data Protection Act 2018 (includes: General Data Protection Regulations (UK-GDPR)).Accessibility and Re-useAll information obtained or created for organisational or policing purposes belongs to Wiltshire Police and/or the OPCC. It must be treated as an organisational asset, and managed and stored in an authorised system and/or location.Wherever feasible, information should be recorded only once and all policing information concerning an individual (also referred to as ‘a nominal’) should be linked so that it is easily retrievable.1 As defined by the Data Protection Act 2018
All information should be in a form which facilitates re-use and interoperability across the Force, and with other Forces where appropriate.Wherever feasible, information should be migrated to newer formats and / or systems when the current ones become obsolete.QualityAll information should be accurate, adequate, relevant and timely, and recorded in a manner appropriate for potential future disclosure, and in accordance with national and legal requirements.In regard to information held for a policing purpose, the information should comply with the principles of the National Intelligence Model (NIM), and should be evaluated, graded and recorded accordingly. Where appropriate, the source of the information, the nature of the source, any assessment of the reliability of the source, and any necessary restrictions on the use to be made of the information will be recorded to facilitate later review, reassessment and audit.Data quality audits and data improvement initiatives will be carried out where appropriate.QuantityThe quantity of any information, especially personal information, which is captured and retained should be proportionate to the Law Enforcement Purpose or business requirement.SecuritySafeguards to the information held by the force are documented in the Information Risk Management Policy and achieved through compliance with this policy, other policies, standards and guidance.Appropriate safeguards must be put in place to protect personal, sensitive and/or information classified under the Government Security Classification Scheme (GSC) (see Government Security Classification Guidance Handout for details). The extent of the safeguards should be in proportion to the degree of risk posed.The Government Classification Scheme (GCS) details how information should be marked and handled. All information sent via email or post must be dispatched in accordance with the requirements stated on page 2 of the Government Security Classification Guidance Handout.DisclosureThe ethos of MoPI is that information should be re-used in order to fulfil a Law Enforcement Purpose and/or to protect the public from harm. However, the Force is also required to comply with the law and therefore information may only be accessed, shared or disclosed internally or externally when it is considered appropriate to do so.Particular care should be taken with personal, sensitive and/or information classified under the GSC to ensure sharing is lawful and proportionate. Information Sharing Agreements (ISAs) should be put in place where personal data is being regularly disclosed to or received from partners, and Data Processing Agreements (DPAs) drawn up where one party is processing information on another party’s behalf.Any ISAs or DPAs should be written in accordance with the good practice advice and guidance provided by the Data Protection Officer (DPO) and Force Solicitor. A library of current ISAs and DPAs will be maintained by the DPO.
TransparencyIt is the Forces’ and Police and Crime Commissioner’s policy to fully comply with the Freedom of Information Act 2000. Information which is not exempt from disclosure will be made available on request.RetentionAll information, particularly personal data, should not be retained longer than necessary. Information obtained for Law Enforcement Purposes will be reviewed, retained and disposed of on a risk assessment basis, and in accordance with the APP on Information Management, wherever practical. In all other cases, time-based disposals will be applied, in accordance with Force Records Retention Schedule and the National Police Chiefs’ Council Retention Schedules where applicable.Risk ManagementInformation management risks will be considered, and appropriate mitigations implemented, whenever significant changes are made to Force processes or systems. Where personal data is being processed, this will require the completion of a Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA).3. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIESOverall responsibility for Information Management rests with the Chief Constable as Data Controller for the Force and the Police and Crime Commissioner for the OPCC.The Senior Information Risk Owner (SIRO) holds responsibility for overseeing all central functions for Information Management and for making strategic decisions in regard to information risks across Wiltshire Police and OPCC, particularly when there is a potential conflict between operational and security requirements.The term Information Asset Owner (IAO) is used for the corresponding function at project, programme or organisational unit level.Where appropriate, senior business leaders will be appointed as IAOs to provide governance and oversight for significant information assets. They are responsible for ensuring this information is managed in accordance with this policy and are accountable for the confidentiality, integrity and availability of their information asset.The Information Governance Strategy Board (IGSB) is the governance authority that commissions and approves all activities, policies, standards and guidelines in support of the Wiltshire Police/OPCC Information Strategy.The Head of Information Management & Assurance / DSIRO has responsibility for maintaining all information policies and ensuring that risks to the Forces’ information are appropriately managed.The Data Protection Officer (DPO) responsibilities include; monitoring internal compliance with DP legislation, informing and advising on data protection obligations, providing advice regarding Data Protection Impact Assessments (DPIAs), acting as a contact point for data subjects and the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO).The Force Records Manager and the Force Operations Manager, Justice are responsible for the provision of advice in relation to records management and leadership in the maintenance and development of records management facilities, standards and practices in order to secure the Force’s compliance with records management legislation and guidance.
The Force Disclosure Unit provides services and advice in relation to information sharing and disclosure under the Data Protection and the Freedom of Information Acts.All Managers and supervisors have responsibility to ensure their staff is aware of, and adhere to, policies and procedures relating to information management and the appropriate use of information systems. They are also responsible for identifying any local risks relating to information and escalating them if appropriate, in accordance with the Information Risk Management Policy.Expectation of all staffAll those who access and use Force information are responsible and accountable for the information they handle whether on computers, on paper, or through the spoken word. Training determined through agreement with Learning and Development and IAOs must be completed and all must be familiar with the requirements of this policy, and relevant procedures and standards.Supporting SOPs and GuidanceWhile the intention of this Information Management Policy is to provide clear and concise direction, considerably more detail is necessary to provide clear procedural requirements and guidance. Such detail will be contained in a set of SOPs and guidance, produced by Business Area leads/Managers, which are to be regarded as policy in so far as compliance with their instruction is required.Further advice and guidance can be obtained from the Force Policy and Procedures site.Implementation StrategyThis policy will be available via the intranet and on the public website. It will also be circulated for the attention of staff.POLICY AIMThe aim of this policy is to ensure that all Force and OPCC information is held lawfully and is readily accessible on demand; promote consistent management of all records throughout their lifecycle; ensure all information is captured and maintained in such a way that its evidential weight and integrity is not compromised; promote auditable decision-making and to maintain information management best practice.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEThis policy is underpinned by:ï the Data Protection Act 2018,ï UK GDPRï the Human Rights Act 1998,ï Freedom of Information Act 2000,ï Computer Misuse Act 1990, andï College of Policing (COP) Authorised Professional Practice (APP) on Information Management.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSRecords Management Policy Information Security Policy
System Operating Procedures (SOPs) Freedom of Information PolicyData Protection PolicyForce Records Retention ScheduleNational Police Chiefs’ Council Retention SchedulesHome Office Code of Practice on the Management of Police Information (MoPI) Government Security Classification Guidance HandoutAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEInformation management National Intelligence Model (NIM)DATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWThis policy will be reviewed every two years by the Force Records Manager, or in response to significant changes in Force strategy, national policy or legislation.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Information Management and Assurance Business Area is responsible for this policy. All queries relating to this policy should be directed to the Records Manager or Force Policy Officer.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	 Information Management and Assurance Policy Owner/Author:	Keith LEWIS / Leonie CALLAND Technical Author:Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: Deputy Chief ConstableRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes08.02.20213.0Procedure amended to include reference to the OPCC.24.05.20233.0Scheduled review: No changes made.Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionForce Policy Officer26.05.20233.0SLT – Keith LEWIS24.05.20233.0JNCC(Not required for all policies)N/ADistribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Equality Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionImplications of the Policy: Training Requirements
None. None.
IT Infrastructure
Template v5WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICYInformation Risk ManagementDate of Publication: June 2021 Version:	4.0Next Review Date:	June 2023
TABLE OF CONTENTSPOLICY STATEMENT	31. Introduction	32. Information Risk Management Policy	4Responsibility & Accountability	4Competence	5Management	5Business Risk Environment Overview	5Information Risk Appetite	6Governance	6Delegation and Escalation	6Top Level Business Risks Overview	6Business Impact Assessment Overview	73. Landscape	84. Key Areas of Information Risk	9POLICY AIM	9APPLICABILITY	10LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCE	10RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	10AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE	10DATA PROTECTION	10FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	10MONITORING AND REVIEW	10WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICY	10ANNEX A - Terms of Reference – SIRO	11ANNEX B - Terms of Reference – Information Asset Owners	12ANNEX C - Information Security Risks	14ANNEX D - Policy: Transmitting Personal Data beyond the Secure Boundary	17ANNEX E - Incident Reporting Requirements	19SECURITY INCIDENT REPORT	20ANNEX F - Examples of Possible Threat Types	22DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	26
POLICY STATEMENT1. IntroductionThe ability of the Wiltshire Police to deliver its policing priorities including public protection, stewardship of resources and to protect its reputation is dependent, often critically dependent, on its ability to manage information and information risks.The Wiltshire Police Executive Leadership Team has stated its commitment to managing information risks effectively and the standard of Information Risk Management (IRM) expected.Implementation of the Wiltshire Police IRM Policy and the basic principles set out in the policy for identification, assessment, management and escalation are mandatory for all Police Officers, Police Staff, 3rd parties, other agency representatives and delivery chain partners.The policy applies to all information risks and sets out accountabilities, how risks are to be managed and performance tracked.What are ‘Information Risks’?Information is essential to policing operations and enabling services. It takes many forms – from data sets of sensitive personal data through to records of sensitive meetings, personnel records, policy recommendations, correspondence, case files, intelligence reports and historical records. It exists in many formats from databases through e-Mail, persistent and non persistent messaging, paper, video and digital / magnetic media.Information is not the same as Information Technology (IT) – IT Infrastructure, Systems, Services and Applications are the assets / platforms on which information is stored, processed, manipulated, retrieved, output, communicated, exchanged and managed. Therefore, information risks are not necessarily the same as IT security risks although managing IT security risks is a fundamental / critical component of any strategy to manage information risks.Risk management not only means mitigating risks but also taking considered risks where the rewards are expected to be greater than any short term losses. The risks of not managing information illustrate this. Information Risks have the same characteristics as other organisational risks and must be managed with the same degree of consideration.A Risk Assessment (RA) is essential to prioritise the correct actions for each part of our business. Some information, for example web publications, rarely carries security risks associated with disclosure – the risks here are more likely to be about tampering with the published official record or failure to achieve sufficient dissemination of key information. This is in contrast with Classified or other sensitive information where risks are more likely to be around confidentiality, disclosure or integrity although there are cases which demonstrate that there are also risks in not sharing sensitive information and of not maintaining sufficiently accurate records.What is Information Risk Management?Information Risk Management (IRM) adapts the generic processes of Risk Management and applies it to the Confidentiality (the property that information is not made available or disclosed to unauthorised individuals), Integrity (the property of safeguarding the accuracy and completeness of information) and Availability (the property of being accessible and usable on demand by an authorised and authenticated entity) of information and the information environment.Table of contents
Information Risks when realised are therefore threats to:Confidentiality – resulting in unauthorised access or disclosureIntegrity – resulting in inaccurate, incomplete or corrupted information or dataAvailability – resulting in authorised and authenticated users not being able to access information on demandInformation Risk Management must be incorporated into all decisions in day to day operations and when effectively used is a tool for managing information proactively rather than reactively.2. Information Risk Management PolicyThis policy sets out the Wiltshire Police Commitment to the management of information risk.Responsibility & AccountabilitySenior Information Risk Owner (SIRO) – Deputy Chief Constable with responsibilities as set out at Annex A including responsibility for advising the Accounting Officer (Chief Constable) on information risk exposure, accepting or rejecting residual information risks on behalf of the AO and setting this policy. The SIRO is the only person authorised to approve deviations to this policy.Head of Information Management & Assurance (Deputy SIRO) – directly responsible to and accountable for the provision of information management and governance advice and guidance to the SIRO, presenting and promoting Information Management, Records Management, Data Protection, Information Security and Risk Management policy to the Executive Leadership Team, ensuring that Information Management & Assurance strategies, plans, policies and initiatives are linked to and consistent with national strategic aims and objectives for information, undertaking quarterly and annual Information Management & Assurance reviews and ensuring that any significant control weaknesses are reflected in Statements of Residual Risk / Statements of Internal Control, publishing and maintaining this and complementary policies, the provision of threat assessments and warning advice, commissioning independent assurance of the Wiltshire Police Information Security Management System including the implementation of this and complementary security policies in accordance with Statutory and Regulatory body requirements & expectationsRecords Manager – operationally responsible for the effective and appropriate management of Wiltshire Police operational and business records from their creation through to their eventual disposal, providing access to accurate records for a range of operational and business purposes and ensuring that legal and regulatory obligations are met (this includes controlling the number of records created and stored, identifying which records are to be preserved for business, historical and research purposes and which records should be destroyed).Information Asset Owners (IAO) – responsibility, including that attendant with implementing this policy as set out at Annex B.Data Protection Officer (DPO) - inform and advise the AO and the employees (who carry out his Processing) of their obligations, to monitor compliance with GDPR / LED, to provide advice in relation to a data protection impact assessment (including monitoring compliance), to co-operate with the Supervisory Authority (Information Commissioner’s Office) and to act as the principal contact point for the Supervisory Authority and Data SubjectsTable of contents
CompetenceTraining – SIRO, H IM & A and IAO will receive specific formal IRM training from an approved commercial provider.Authorised Users – will receive Information Management and Data Protection training as part of the induction and development process and through managed learning environment training. Security Operating Procedures (SyOPs) / practice directions are available for reference through ‘firstpoint’.Behaviour & Culture – all leaders, managers and supervisors will model the behaviours and culture that ensures information is valued, protected and used for the public good. All staff and stakeholders are encouraged to identify risks which may be reported anonymously if necessary through the Professional Standards Department (PSD) confidential reporting line.ManagementA threat assessment may be issued by the H IM & A to the SIRO and disseminated to IAO.Control of information risk will be carried out using an Information Security Management System (ISMS) in accordance with applicable standards and community of trust governance and information risk baseline requirements. IAO will have some discretion over how to demonstrate compliance although in the majority of areas, a specific approach will be mandated. Security Classification, Personnel Security, Physical Security and Business Continuity are governed by separate policies and guidance as outlined in Chapter 3.Business models and business plans will take account of information risk assessments.Measuring performance and providing assurance – Wiltshire Police will:ï Measure and improve information risk management culture using the Community of Trust GIRRï Report risks quarterly in response to legislative and regulatory body requirementsï Audit the implementation of this and complementary security policies at least annually and make a public statement about the quality of our system of internal controlï Report incidents in accordance with Cabinet Office, Home Office and local requirements as outlined at Annex Eï Ensure that all mission critical Information Systems (IS) handling Classified or otherwise sensitive information (personal data for example) will be ‘Assured’ in accordance with applicable HMG Standards and ‘Reassured’ when the threats and or risks change or when the system undergoes significant change or at least every 5 years for Official, every 3 years for Official-Sensitive and annually for Secret. Supporting infrastructure will be subject to bi-annual AssuranceNon compliance – will result in performance / misconduct considerations and, in some cases criminal investigation unless the SIRO has explicitly authorised a compliance expectation waiver.Business Risk Environment OverviewRisk management is seen as the key to successful delivery of policing whilst protecting stakeholder interests. This allows Wiltshire Police to have increased confidence in achieving its desired outcomes, effectively constrain threats to acceptable levels and reach informed decisions about exploiting opportunities.Table of contents
      Information Risk Appetite National – CautiousForceOfficial – Open (Willing to consider all options and choose the one that is most likely to result in successful delivery while also providing an acceptable level of reward).Official-Sensitive – Cautious (Preference for safe options that have a low degree of residual risk and may only have limited potential for reward).Secret – Minimalist (Preference for ultra safe options that have a low degree of inherent risk and only have a potential for limited reward).Risk ToleranceOfficial – Medium Official-Sensitive – Low Secret – Very LowReason for Variance (if any)National Classification changeNB. The SIRO will be given every possible option for managing risk above set risk tolerance level.GovernanceThe Wiltshire Police Information Risk Appetite is owned by the SIRO and approved by the AO. It is reviewed and updated on an inherent and residual basis and at least annually and or when triggered by a major security incident or identified very high risk.Delegation and Escalationï The roles authorized to accept information risk are as follows:ï Risks assessed as very low or low can be accepted by IAO provided there is a documented security case for acceptanceï Risks assessed as medium must be escalated to H IM& A who can accept provided there is a documented security case for acceptanceï Risks assessed as medium-high must be escalated to H IM& A who can accept provided there is a documented security case for acceptance accompanied by a specific Risk Balance / Escalation Case describing the risk management decisionï Risks assessed as high must be escalated to the SIRO who can accept provided there is a documented security case for acceptance accompanied by a Risk Balance / Escalation Case document describing the risk management decision.ï Risks assessed as very high cannot be accepted under the current risk appetite. Any identified very high risks should be escalated immediately through the SIRO to the AO and, if applicable, the PIAB through NPIRMT.Top Level Business Risks OverviewCompliance, legal and regulatory risk: Wiltshire Police has an Averse approach to this category of risk. Legal compliance is of primary importance for the organisation. Avoidance, wherever possible, of risk and uncertainty is a key objective.Table of contents
Financial risk: Wiltshire Police has a Minimalist approach to this category of risk. It must operate within strict and tight budgets with little contingency and few opportunities for flexibility. There is a preference for ultra safe options that have a low degree of inherent risk and only have a potential for limited reward.Operational and policy delivery risk: Wiltshire Police has an Open approach to this category of risk. Its operational activities involve a high degree of inherent risk. Wiltshire Police is willing to consider all options and choose the one that is most likely to result in successful delivery while also providing an acceptable level of reward.Information risk: Wiltshire Police has (currently – June 21) a Cautious approach to this category of risk. There is a preference for safe options with low degrees of residual risk which may have only limited potential for business benefit delivery risk appetite. IAO must take into account the nature of any benefits and the different risk appetite categories when making information risk management decisions.Reputation and credibility risk: Wiltshire Police has a high profile and a Cautious approach to this category of risk. There is a preference for safe options with low degrees of residual risk which may only have limited potential for reward. Wiltshire Police intends to review this posture and, if possible, move to an Open posture (understanding that this risk approach introduces a level of inherent reputational risk and requires controlled, accountable and externally audited risk management processes to reduce the associated level of residual risk).      Business Impact Assessment Overview Public Order, Public Safety & Law EnforcementOfficial: Consequence of CompromiseImpact on Life & Safety – Risk to an individuals personal safety or liberty.Impact on the Provision of Policing Services – A disruption to policing services and operations requiring a reprioritisation at force level in order to meet expected levels of service.Impact on Crime Fighting – Hinder the detection, impede the investigation or facilitate the commission of low level crime (that is crime not defined in legislation as serious crime) or hinder the detection of serious crime.Judicial Proceedings – Cause a low level criminal prosecution to collapse, cause a conviction for a low level criminal offence to be declared unsafe or referred for appeal.Official-Sensitive: Consequence of CompromiseImpact on Life & Safety – Risk to a group of individuals safety or liberty.Impact on the Provision of Policing Services – A disruption to policing services and operations requiring reprioritisation at a national level (Cross Border Mutual Aid for example) to meet expected levels of service.Impact on Crime Fighting – Impede the investigation of or facilitate the commission of serious crime as defined in legislation.Judicial Proceedings – Cause a serious crime prosecution to collapse, cause a conviction for a serious criminal offence to be declared unsafe or referred for appeal.Table of contents
Secret: Consequence of CompromiseImpact on Life & Safety – Threaten life directly leading to limited loss of life.Impact on the Provision of Policing Services – A disruption to policing services and operations requiring emergency powers (MACP for example) to be invoked to meet expected levels of serviceImpact on Crime Fighting – Cause major, long term impairment to the ability to investigate serious crime as defined in legislation.Judicial Proceedings – Cause a number of criminal convictions to be declared unsafe or referred for appeal (persistent and undetected compromise of the evidence handling chain for example).3. LandscapeTable of contents
4. Key Areas of Information RiskRisk Category	Example of Risk
Governance & Culture
Lack of comprehensive oversight and control (anything can go wrong)When something goes wrong, handling it badly and not learning (so it happens again)Third party mistakes (reputation suffers)New business processes don’t take information and privacy risk into account (with potentially serious consequences)

Information Management & Integrity
Critical information is wrongly disposed of / destroyed, not kept or can’t be found when needed (leading to reputational damage or financial penalties)Lack of basic records management disciplines (which can have wide ranging consequences)Inaccurate information (causing the wrong decision to be made or the wrong action to be taken)Critical electronic information becomes useless due to technical obsolescence (legal, reputational and financial consequences)Critical information is lost (legal, reputational and financial consequences)

The Human Dimension
Notwithstanding published rules (policies and procedures), staff, acting in error do the wrong thing (and things go badly wrong)Despite having rules, staff (the insider threat attack agent), acting deliberately, do the wrong thing (and things go badly wrong)3rd parties obtain our information illegally or inappropriately (exposing it or act maliciously)

Information Availability & Use
Inappropriate disclosure of Classified or other sensitive information (causing reputational damage or worse) Failure to disclose critical information for public safety, public order or law enforcement purposes (leading at worst to loss of life)Failure to utilise the value of the information asset (leading to a waste of public money)Failure to allow information to be disseminated / communicated to the right people at the right time (leading to service delivery failure)

POLICY AIMThe aim of this policy is to set out the Wiltshire Police Commitment to the management of information risk allowing Wiltshire Police to deliver its policing priorities including public protection, stewardship of resources and to protect its reputation.APPLICABILITYThis policy applies to all Police Officers, Police Staff, Special Constables, Volunteers and all contracted third parties. The policy applies to all information risks and sets out accountabilities, how risks are to be managed and performance tracked.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEHMG Security Policy Framework Applicable HMG IA Standards No 6 ISO 27001 Part 3Freedom of Information Act 2000 Data Protection Act 2018RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSHMG Security Policy Framework NPCC Community Security PolicyBusiness Continuity Management Systems (BCMS) Policy Information Management PolicyForce Information Security Policy Risk Management PolicyVetting Policy and ProcedureAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEInformation Management RiskDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations (UK-GDPR) and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWThis policy will be reviewed bi-annually taking into account any newly published HMG policy and NPCC policy and guidelines.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Head of Information Management & Assurance is responsible for this policy. All queries relating to this policy should be directed to the Head of Information Management & Assurance.Table of contents
Annex ATerms of Reference – SIROThe WP SIRO (DCC) is responsible for ensuring that information risks are effectively managed. The SIRO is accountable to the Accounting Officer (AO) (Chief Constable) and provides an annual report of the assessment and treatment of risks.Responsibilities include but are not necessarily limited to:Leading and fostering a culture that values, protects and uses information for the public good:ï Ensuring WP has a plan to achieve and monitor the right culture across the force, our partners and those involved in the service delivery chainï Taking visible steps to support and participate in that planï Ensuring that WP has Information Security & Assurance specialist capability and Information Asset Owners who are skilled and focused on the issuesOwnership of the information risk management policy and risk assessment process:ï Testing outcome and ensuring it is usedï Ensuring risk policy is complete including how WP implements minimum mandatory measures in its own activity and that of partners and how compliance will be monitoredï Ensuring that risk assessments are completed every quarter taking into account extant legislative and regulatory body expectations and guidanceï Understanding (based of risk assessments) what information risks there are to WP through the service delivery chain and ensuring that they are addressed and that they inform investment decisionsï Ensuring that risk assessments and action taken benefit from adequate levels of independent scrutinyï Considering all requests to deviate from policyAdvising the AO on information risk aspects of the statement of internal control:ï Receiving annual assessments of performance, including material from Information Security & Assurance specialists, independent assessors and IAO covering minimum mandatory measures as well as actions planned for WP specific circumstancesï Providing advice to the AO on the information risk parts of statements on internal controlï Sharing assessments and supporting material with the Home Office and Cabinet Office in support of pan government work in this areaTable of contents
Annex BTerms of Reference – Information Asset OwnersInformation Asset Owners are senior police officer and police staff colleagues involved in running an operational or business area which uses registered WP Information Systems (IS) and Information Assets. Their role is to understand what information is held, what is added, what is removed, how information is moved, who has access and why. As a result, they are able to understand and address risks to the information, ensure it is fully used within the law for public good and provide written input to the Protective Security Manager at least annually on the security and use of the Asset under their control.Responsibilities:Leading and fostering a culture that values, protects and uses information for the public good:ï Understanding WP plans to achieve and monitor the right culture across the force and our partnersï Taking visible steps to support and participate in that planï Participating in and contributing to the activities of the IAO community, identifying best practice and opportunities for continuous improvementKnowing what information is held, what is added, what is removed and how:ï Maintaining an understanding of the Asset and how it is usedï Approving and minimizing information transfers whilst simultaneously achieving the business purposeï Approving arrangements so that information placed onto removable media for example flash memory devices, CD-Rom and Laptop computers is the minimum necessary and appropriately protected with approved encryption methods when requiredï Approving disposal schedules and mechanisms for paper and electronic records from the AssetKnowing who has access to an Information Asset and why and ensuring use of it is monitored:ï Understanding WP policy on information useï Being aware of and understanding relevant statutory requirements with regard to handling informationï Checking that access provided is the minimum necessary for the efficient conduct of business, considering requests for access from other business area / partner agency users and maintaining records of requests for access and decisions reachedï Undertaking / commissioning checks of Information Asset useï Reporting security breaches promptlyUnderstanding, identifying and controlling risks in relation to their Information Asset and providing assurances to the Protective Security Manager (PSM):ï Contributing to the implementation of the Information Risk Management Policy in their operational / business areaï 
ï Contributing to risk assessmentsï Providing (at least annually) written assessments to the PSM on the use and security of the Information Asset they are responsible for and the information they holdï Making the case where necessary for new investment to secure the Information AssetEnsuring the Information Asset is fully used for the public good including responding to requests from others:ï Considering whether better use of the Information Asset could be madeï Receiving and logging requests for access from othersï Ensuring decisions on access are taken accordinglyTable of contents
Annex CInformation Security Risks AssetsAn Asset is something assigned value by WP. By definition, Assets require protection. The proper management of and accountability for Assets is vital in order to maintain appropriate protection and these two aspects are prioritized responsibilities for all staff. An inventory of Information Assets associated with the Information Security Management System (ISMS) will be maintained with each Asset clearly identified, appropriately valued with ownership and security classification agreed and documented. Examples of Assets include but are not limited to:ï Information Assets – databases, data files, voice records, image files, system documentation, user manuals, training material, operational and support procedures, business continuity plans, fallback arrangementsï Paper Documents – contracts, guidelines, corporate documentation, documents containing important performance dataï Software Assets – application software, system software, development tools and utilitiesï Physical Assets – computer (including laptop computers, PDA, Blackberry, flash memory devices) and communications equipmentï Corporate Assets – organisational image and reputationï Services / Infrastructure – computing and communications services, utilities including heating, lighting, power, air-conditioningAsset Values & Potential ImpactsIn order to identify the appropriate protection for Assets, they will be valued in terms of implications to operations and business. These values will be expressed in terms of the potential impacts of unwanted incidents from Confidentiality, Integrity and / or Availability loss perspectives. In order to assess these potential losses consistently, a value scale for Assets will be applied. For each Asset and each of the possible losses, a value will be assigned.ThreatsAssets are subject to many threats. Threats have the potential to cause unwanted incidents resulting in harm to a system and or Assets. This harm can occur from a direct or indirect attack against information for example unauthorized disposal, destruction, disclosure, modification, corruption and availability or loss of Assets.Threats can originate from accidental or deliberate sources or events but need to exploit system, application or service vulnerabilities in order to successfully cause harm to assets. (Threat type examples appear at Annex F).VulnerabilitiesThese are weaknesses associated with Assets which may be exploited by a threat causing unwanted incidents resulting in loss, harm or damage to Assets. Vulnerabilities in and of themselves do not cause harm – they are conditions or sets of conditions allowing a threat to adversely affect an Asset.Table of contents
Security RisksA security risk is the potential that a given threat will exploit vulnerabilities to cause loss or damage to an asset or group of Assets. Measures of risk are determined from the combination of Asset value and assessed levels of related threats and associated vulnerabilities (threat x vulnerability x impact / value).Security RequirementsThere are three (3) main sources of security requirements to be documented in the ISMS:ï Unique security risks which could lead to significant losses in operational / enabling service capability if they are realisedï Statutory, regulatory and contractual obligations which must be satisfied by WP and trusted third partiesï Unique principles, objectives and obligations that WP has developed to support operations and business processes and which apply to our ISOnce these security requirements have been identified, they will be formulated in terms of requirements for Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability.Security IssuesWhen determining security requirements, it is important to understand what damage risks can do to operations and business. When establishing the context, identifying potential risks and valuing assets the following questions will be asked:ï What are the most important parts of the business, how are they supported by using or processing information and how essential is this supportï What essential decisions depend on the accuracy, completeness and currency of information and its availabilityï What sensitive or classified information needs to be protected and whyï What are the implications of information related security incidentsLegal, Regulatory & Contractual RequirementsThe security requirements specifying statutory, regulatory and contractual obligations that WP, trusted third parties and service providers / suppliers have to satisfy will be documented in the ISMS. It is important, for example controlling proprietary software copying, safeguarding organizational records and satisfying the Data Protection Act that the ISMS supports these requirements and that the implementation of, or absence of security controls in each IS does not breach statutory obligations or commercial contracts.Organizational Principle, Objectives & RequirementsThe security requirements relating to force wide principles, objectives and requirements for information processing to support operations and business will be documented in the ISMS. It is important that the ISMS supports these requirements and vital that the implementation of or absence of security controls in each IS does not impede efficient operations and business. Each security requirement will be translated in terms of the Confidentiality, Integrity and or Availability of the information encompassed by the ISMS.Table of contents
Information Security ControlsSecurity controls are practices, procedures and mechanisms which are designed to protect against threats, reduce vulnerabilities, limit the impact of an incident or protect against risks in any other way. Effective security requires a combination of controls that perform one or more of the following functions:ï Detectionï Deterrenceï Preventionï Limitationï Correctionï Recoveryï Monitoringï AwarenessExpenditure on information security controls will be balanced against and appropriate to the value of the information and other Assets at risk and the operational or business harm likely to result from security failures.Table of contents
Annex DPolicy: Transmitting Personal Data beyond the Secure BoundaryThese mandatory instructions apply whenever there is a requirement to transmit (send or receive) personal data / information beyond the secure boundary of the WP. In relation to e-Mail, the secure boundary encompasses the Public Services Network (PSN) and the Government Secure Intranet (GSI).Circumstances in Which Personal Data / Information may be TransmittedWherever there is an approved operational / business requirement to transmit personal information / data belonging to the WP or our delivery partners / trusted third parties across the boundaries of our secure premises:a) The approval of the IAO for the information must be obtained before such information is transmittedb) Before giving approval, the IAO must be satisfied that:o The data to be transmitted cannot be stripped of personal information without undermining the purpose of the transmissiono There is an operational / business need to transmit the personal information which cannot be met by alternative means not involving the movement of the information outside the secure boundaryo The proposed means of transmitting the information accords with the guidance below and the reasons have been recorded (for example in an Information Transfer Register - ITR)o There is evidence that the security measures applied by the receiving party to protect the information are appropriate having regard to the nature of the data and covering technical, physical, procedural and personnel security requirementso A risk assessment has been carried out and mitigating measure have been applied – the risk assessment must include the arrangements for the transmission of information and the security arrangements applied by the receiving partyo The measures set out in this policy are in place and fully complied withc) Personal information will, wherever possible be transmitted to a remote computer on a secure site – both the communication link and the data at rest being protected to an agreed standard. Where this is not possible and it is necessary to use removable media, the reason will be recorded in the ITR.d) Where it is necessary to use removable media to transfer personal information / data:o The information transferred to the removable media must be the minimum necessary to achieve the business purpose in terms of the numbers of people covered by the information and the scope of information held – where possible, only anonymised information should be heldo The removable media must be encrypted to an agreed standardo Each individual transfer of data will be recorded in the ITR together with other information described belowTable of contents
e) The ITR will record:o The date and time on which the information is transmittedo Sender and recipient detailso The means by which the information is transmittedo A description of the informationo The name of the person who prepared the information for despatcho The despatching business area reference number for the transmissiono The reasons for transmitting the information including reference to the risk assessmento Confirmation that the information has been received with the date and time of receipto The name of the IAO and confirmation that the transfer was authorisedTable of contents
Annex EIncident Reporting RequirementsReporting of an Incident Involving WP IT Equipment and InformationPlease use this report to notify any loss or theft of WP Information Assets, unauthorised disclosure of information or misuse of equipment of identification & authentication privileges. This report may be completed electronically or by hand. Once completed, you can either e-Mail the completed report to (enter Group Mailbox address) or send the hand completed report to (enter Internal Postal Address).Table of contents
SECURITY INCIDENT REPORTReporting Officer’s DetailsNameDepartment / Commande-MailTelephone NumberDate ReportedDetails of Asset1Type of Asset?2If loss of a remote access laptop, was the Secure Id tokenalso lost?YesNo3ClassificationOfficialOfficial- Sensitive4Asset /SerialNumbers?5Date incident happened or when1st identified?6Type of incident?TheftLossDamageAccidentalDeliberateUnauthorised InformationDisclosureAccidentalDeliberateAsset misuseOther (please state)7Cost of replacement (ifknown)?8Incident description
9What action was taken when theincident occurred?10Crime referencenumber (if applicable)Subsequent Actions11Who has been notified of thisincident?12What action is planned to prevent or reduce the risk ofany re-occurrence?13What actions, if any, areoutstanding?14Any other relevant information?15Do you have any recommendations for preventing thistype of incident?16Is there any advice you would like concerning thisincident?Table of contents
Annex FExamples of Possible Threat TypesThe table gives examples of typical threats that might be considered during the threat assessment process. Threats can be caused by one or more events of a deliberate, accidental or environmental nature.Checklist 1: Potential Threat Types to ConsiderThreat types = D (Deliberate), A (Accidental) and E (Environmental). D is used for all deliberate actions aimed at information assets, A is used for all human actions which can accidentally damage information assets and E is used for all incidents which are not human based.EarthquakeEFloodingA, D, EHurricaneELightningEIndustrial ActionA, DBomb AttackDUse of ArmsDFireA, DWilful DamageDPower Supply FailureAWater Supply FailureAAir Conditioning FailureA, DHardware FailureA, DPower FluctuationA, ETemperature / Humidity ExtremesA, D ,EDustEElectromagnetic RadiationA, D, EElectrostatic ChargingETheftDUnauthorized Use of Storage / Exchange MediaA, DDeterioration of Storage MediaEHuman ErrorA, DSoftware FailureA, DUnauthorized Software UseA, DMasquerading of User IdentityDIllegal Software UseA, DMalicious SoftwareA, DIllegal Import or Export of SoftwareD
Maintenance ErrorA, DUnauthorized Network AccessDUnauthorized use of Network FacilitiesDTechnical Failure of Network ComponentsATransmission ErrorsA, DDamage to Communications LinesA, DTraffic OverloadingA, DEavesdropping of CommunicationsDCommunication InfiltrationDTraffic AnalysisDMessage MisroutingA, DMessage ReroutingDRepudiationDCommunications Service Failure (Network Services)A, DStaff ShortagesA, DUser ErrorsA, DResources MisuseA,DChecklist 2: Common Vulnerabilities to ConsiderThis can provide help during vulnerability assessments.	It is emphasized that this list is not exhaustive in any way and in some cases, other threats may also exploit these vulnerabilities.Environment & Infrastructure1Lack of physical protection of the building, doors and windows – could be exploited by for example threat of theft2Inadequate or careless use of physical access control to buildings, areas and rooms – could be exploited by, for example, the threat of wilful damage3Unstable power grid – could be exploited by, for example, the threat of power fluctuation4Location in an area susceptible to flood – could be exploited by, for example, the threat of floodingHardware5Lack of periodic replacement schemes – could be exploited by, for example, the threat of deterioration of storage media6Susceptibility to voltage variations - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of power fluctuation7Susceptibility to temperature variations - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of temperature extremes8Susceptibility to humidity, dust, soiling - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of dust
9Sensitivity to electromagnetic radiation - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of tempest radiation10Insufficient maintenance / faulty installation of storage media - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of staff error11Lack of efficient and effective configuration control - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of staff errorSoftware12Unclear or incomplete development specifications - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of software failure13No or insufficient software testing - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of unauthorized use of software or use of software by unauthorized users14Complicated user interface - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of staff error15Lack of identification and authentication mechanisms - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of masquerading user identities16Lack of audit and accounting - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of use of software in an unauthorized way of repudiation of action17Well known flaws in software - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of the use of software by unauthorized users18Unprotected password tables - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of masquerading user identities19Poor password management (easily guessable passwords, storing passwords in clear view, insufficient frequency of password change) - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of masquerading user identities20Inappropriate allocation of user privileges / access rights - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of inappropriate access to information breaching the need to know principle21Uncontrolled downloading and use of software - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of malicious software22Lack of system and other documentation - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of staff error23Lack of back-up copies - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of malicious software or the threat of loss through fire or flooding24Lack of effective change control - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of software / hardware failure25No logout when leaving work stations / client devices - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of unauthorized access to information assets26Disposal or reuse of storage media without proper erasure - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of unauthorized access to information of unauthorized use of softwareCommunications27Unprotected communications lines - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of eavesdropping28Poor cabling controls - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of communications infiltration29Lack of identification and authentication of sender and receiver - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of masquerading user identities
30Transfer of passwords in clear view - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of unauthorized network and other information asset access31Lack of proof of sending / receiving messages - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of repudiation32Dial up lines - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of network access by unauthorized users33Unprotected (unencrypted) sensitive traffic - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of eavesdropping34Inadequate network management (routing resilience) - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of traffic overloading35Unprotected public network communications - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of unauthorized access to information assetsDocuments36Unprotected storage - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of theft37Lack of care during disposal - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of theft or unauthorized access to information38Uncontrolled copying - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of theft39Lack of compliance with protective marking precautions - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of theft, unauthorized / uncontrolled access, loss of documentsPersonnel40Absence of personnel - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of staff shortage41Unsupervised work by third parties - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of theft or unauthorized access42Insufficient security education, training and awareness - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of staff error43Incorrect use of software and hardware - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of staff error44Lack of monitoring mechanisms - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of repudiation of action or the use of software in an unauthorized way45Lack of effective policies and procedures - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of staff error46Inadequate recruitment and vetting procedures - could be exploited by, for example, the threat of infiltration, theft, wilful damageTable of contents
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Information Management & AssurancePolicy Owner/Author:	Keith LEWIS (Head of Information Management & Assurance) Technical Author:Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: Deputy Chief ConstableRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of ChangesJune 20172.0Bi-annual review - non substantive (phraseology / abbreviation and acronym amendments)June 20193.0Bi-annual review – changes to Responsibility & Accountability ( inclusion of DPO and Records Manager) slight changes to top level business risks overviewJune 20214.0Non substantive narrative.Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement TeamJune 20193.0Head of Information Management & AssuranceJune 20193.0JNCCN/ADistribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionN/AImplications of the Policy: Training RequirementsNo additional training requirements.IT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure required.
Template v5       WILTSHIRE POLICE & POLICE AND CRIME COMMISSIONERInformation Security PolicyDate of Publication: May 2021 Version:	4.0Next Review Date:	May 2023
TABLE OF CONTENTSTERMS AND DEFINITIONS	3POLICY STATEMENT	4SCOPE	5ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES	5ACCREDITATION	6MOBILE & REMOTE WORKING	7THIRD PARTY & SUPPLIER REMOTE ACCESS	7INCIDENT REPORTING	7NEED TO KNOW	7PHYSICAL SECURITY	8SECURITY EDUCATION AWARENESS & TRAINING	8PRACTICE DIRECTIONS	8POLICY AIM	8APPLICABILITY	8LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCE	8RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	8AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE	9DATA PROTECTION	9FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	9MONITORING AND REVIEW	9WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICY	9DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	10
TERMS AND DEFINITIONSAccreditationThe process to ensure that the security policy has been implemented to reduce risk for an IT system to an acceptable level.AssetAnything that has value to the organisation.AvailabilityThe property of being accessible and usable upon demand by an authorised entityConfidentialityThe property that information is not made available or disclosed to unauthorised individuals, entities, or processes.Information SecurityPreservation of Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability of information; in addition, other properties such as authenticity, accountability, non-repudiation and reliability can also be involved.Information Security EventAn identified occurrence of a system, service, network state indicating a possible breach of information security policy or failure of safeguards, or a previously unknown situation that may be security relevant.Information Security IncidentA single or series of unwanted or unexpected information security events that have a significant probability of compromising business operations and threatening information security.IntegrityThe property of safeguarding the accuracy and completeness of assets.Risk ManagementCoordinated activities to direct and control an organisation with regard to risk.
POLICY STATEMENTSafeguarding the confidentiality, integrity and availability of all information and associated assets held by Wiltshire Police and the OPCC is paramount to ensuring public confidence in the delivery of public services and therefore supports the strategic goals of the Force. Consequently Wiltshire Police (the Force) and the OPCC must manage business impacts and risks of all information and associated assets.The Force and OPCC recognise the importance of all information assets and the need for proper, effective management of all information processes. It is essential therefore that there are safeguards and counter measures in place to provide the continued confidentiality, integrity and availability of Force and OPCC information. Furthermore, the Force and the OPCC have a requirement to comply with relevant regulatory and legislative requirements and to be able to demonstrate this.The achievement of information security needs a combination of policies, standards, procedures, guidelines, appropriate organisational structure, physical security considerations, and measures to safeguard the IT network infrastructure and information systems.This policy provides an overarching structure for information security throughout the Force and OPCC. This Policy forms the structure for practice directions and other security procedures relevant to information security.All personnel with access to information owned by the Force and/or OPCC will be made aware of, and, are required to comply with the provision of this Policy.Wiltshire Police and OPCC recognise the need to ensure information and information assets are managed and protected appropriately. The Policy aims to support this by providing a ‘defence in depth’ approach that encompasses four main areas:ï Physical Security;ï Personnel Security;ï Technical Security;ï Policies and Procedures.Fostering a professional culture and developing a positive attitude toward security is critical to the successful delivery of this Policy and in support of this the Force and OPCC will ensure that those responsible for information security and management are made aware of their responsibilities.In support of this policy, the Force and the OPCC will:ï Ensure that information is accessible only to those authorised to have access;ï Ensure the Force/OPCC IT systems, applications and networks facilitate the security of our data;ï Safeguard the accuracy and completeness of information and processing methods;ï Ensure that we meet our regulatory, legislative and contractual requirements;ï Address the security of all of our services and processes to ensure that risks are identified and appropriate controls are implemented and documented;ï Provide a secure working environment for staff and contractors at our premises;ï Produce incident response plans for essential Force functions, supporting services and infrastructure, which will be maintained and tested on a regular basis;ï Require all third parties working on our behalf to ensure that the confidentiality, integrity and availability requirements of all business systems are met;ï Promote security awareness and provide appropriate information security training for our employees.ï 
SCOPEThe Policy applies to all information (including information processes) and assets owned by the Force and OPCC. The Policy provides a common basis for the Force/OPCC to develop, implement and measure effective information security management practices.The Policy and associated practice directions apply to all Police Officers, Police and OPCC Staff, Special Constables, Volunteers and employees from agencies or organisations who by the nature of their role, are required to access Force/OPCC information and information assets.ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIESInformation Security Governance Board (ISGB)The IGSB, Chaired by Deputy chief Constable (SIRO), has ownership of the Force Information Security Policy.The IGSB is the governance authority responsible for commissioning and approving all activities, policies, standards and guidelines relating to the Information and Security landscape.The objective of the board is to provide strategic direction and oversight for both Wiltshire Police and Wiltshire OPCC on matters relating to information governance and security and to provide guidance for each Senior Information Risk Owner (SIRO) to fulfil their statutory roles on behalf of their organisation.ISGB will:ï Meet as quarterly. Additional meetings may be scheduled by the SIRO where required.ï Provide effective and consistent governance to ensure that information is treated as a strategic asset and managed as suchï Direct the development of more effective information processes and policy across the force and with partner agenciesï Create a consistent and measurable approach to the development of information capability and formally report progress as agreed by the SIRO to ELT and CMBï Ensure that there are the minimum set of Systems, Applications and Standards to manage and exploit information effectively across Operational, Enabling Service and OPCC areas of businessSenior Information Risk Owner (SIRO)Deputy Chief Constable is responsible for establishing a comprehensive programme of work to achieve progress through identifiable milestones, ensuring information risk management is embedded organisationally, best practice IA measures are implemented and effective legislative / regulatory body compliance expectations regarding the management of information and business risks, as they relate to policing priorities, are achieved and maintained.Head of Information Management and AssuranceThe Head of Information Management and Assurance is responsible for establishing an information risk and security management system proportionate to Force size, structure, policing priorities, strategies, plans & objectives, security requirements and implemented processes. Operational responsibilities are detailed in the Information Risk Management Policy.Records ManagerThe Records Manager is responsible for maintaining an information asset register, recording all Wiltshire Police ‘critical information assets’ in conjunction with a range of information relevant to managing risk to each asset and ensuring compliance with Authorised Professional Practice and Statutory Guidance on the Management of Police Information (MoPI) requirements and expectations.
Information Asset Owners (IAO)IAO are required to understand what information is held, what is added and what is removed from Information Systems (IS) under their control, who has access and why. Consequently, they will be able to understand and address risks to the information over which they have responsibility and ensure that information is fully used within the law for public good. IAO will not assume ownership of any corporate risks that are incurred outside the scope of their particular area of responsibility including projects and or programmes.Commanders and Heads of DepartmentCommanders and Heads of Department (Force and OPCC) are responsible for the day to day security and management of all information processes within their area of responsibility and are required to ensure local compliance with this and other security policies, procedures and processes.Information Security OfficerThe Information Security Officer is responsible for coordinating and implementing technical aspects of Information Security effectively across the Force and the provision of technical support to the Head of Head of Information Management and Assurance.Force Data Protection Officer (DPO)Data Protection Officer is responsible for providing ‘Notification’ to the Information Commissioner of all processing of personal data by Wiltshire Police and OPCC, ensuring processing is fully compliant with the requirements of the DPA 2018 and General Data Protection Regulations and supporting the Accreditation process by considering the requirement for Privacy Impact assessments (PIA) to be undertaken.Line managersLine Managers are responsible for ensuring compliance with the Policy and Practice Directions by the regular monitoring of their staff and information processes.UsersAll personnel have a personally assigned responsibility for the preservation of the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information systems accessible by them and information entrusted to them. Information can only be used for permitted policing purposes Specific responsibilities and accountabilities are detailed in Security Operating Procedures (SyOPs).ACCREDITATIONAll information systems, services and applications processing, handling or storing protectively marked or other sensitive information will be subject to a process of security accreditation in accordance with HMG Information Assurance Standards and accreditation / security requirements will be specified in all IST contracts.Security Operating Procedures (SyOPs)SyOPs, designed to assist in the efficient operation of IS detail the security standard against which all IS will be operated, define roles and responsibilities and notify users what they can and cannot do. They include:ï Scopeï System Managementï Physical & Environmental Securityï Communications & Operations Managementï 
ï System Administrationï Starting up and Ending Sessionsï Identification & Authenticationï Counter Compromise Actionï Incident Reporting & Managementï Information Exchangeï Protective Monitoring / Audit & AccountingAll Users of Information Systems are required to comply with SyOPs at all times and non compliance can result in misconduct or in some case criminal proceedings being instigated.MOBILE & REMOTE WORKINGThe Mobile and Remote Working Policy will detail the security, supervisory, routine usage, health & safety, legal and limitation on use requirements of the Wiltshire Police.THIRD PARTY & SUPPLIER REMOTE ACCESSThe Third Party / Supplier Remote Access Policy sets out the conditions that are required to maintain the confidentiality, integrity and availability of Wiltshire Police and OPCC information and information systems when third parties require access. No Third party access is allowed until the appropriate Head of Technical Service agrees and provides written permission.INCIDENT REPORTINGAccurate and timely reporting of security incidents is vital to reducing the potential impact and damage to the Force/OPCC. All security incidents are to be reported to the ICT Service Desk as soon as it is practicable to do so.Incidents (as defined in SyOPs) will be recorded for onward reporting to PolWARP in accordance with Procedures for Use of the Police Warning, Advice and Reporting Point (PolWARP). The reporting format will be dictated by the type of incident and is divided into two categories – Fast Time Incidents and Slow Time Incidents. Incidents involving cryptographic items will be reported to CINRAS and will be handled according to the national Policy for Handling Cryptographic Incidents reported via CINRAS.Some security alerts could originate from the National Monitoring Centre (NMC), these will be managed similarly within the force with national oversight by NMC.NEED TO KNOWThe effective use (including the sharing) of information is a key priority for the Force and OPCC.Access to information and supporting processes is required for the efficient conduct and management of operations but will be limited to those with a demonstrable need to know and use it who have been appropriately security cleared. In all cases, access to information will be on a least privilege basis. Information and other assets, including supporting processes will be managed and safeguarded to documented levels throughout their lifecycle, including creation, storage, transmission and disposal.Asset Classification & ControlThe Force and OPCC has adopted the Government Security Classification Scheme
Protecting Personal DataPersonal data will be protected from unauthorised access, disclosure, release and loss, and will be handled in accordance with prevailing legislative requirements and specific minimum measures covering access, removable media, controlled disposal, authentication and audit and those with access to or management responsibility for personal data will undergo appropriate training. Information Sharing Agreements (ISA) will explicitly address security requirements.PHYSICAL SECURITYPeople, information, infrastructure and equipment assets will be afforded physical protection commensurate with the threat, the impact / consequence of loss / compromise, vulnerability, value and local circumstances / environment. The layered / defence in depth approach incorporating prevention, detection, response and recovery is detailed in the Physical Security Policy. Headline expectations (clear desk, security furniture, clear screen, start cease work checks etc) are addressed in SyOPs.SECURITY EDUCATION AWARENESS & TRAININGAll personnel will receive appropriate instruction with regard to information security and will be required to re-affirm compliance with the Policy at regular intervals. Additionally, all personnel are required to ensure they remain current with 'Practice Directions' published for reference on the Intranet / SharePoint.PRACTICE DIRECTIONSPractice Directions provide personnel with guidance on specific subjects and should be read in conjunction both with this Policy and, where appropriate, the relevant SyOPsPOLICY AIMThis Policy applies to all information (including information processes) and assets owned by the Force and the OPCC. The Policy provides a common basis for the Force and OPCC to develop, implement and measure effective information security management practices.APPLICABILITYThis Policy applies to all Police Officers, Police and OPCC Staff, Special Constables, Volunteers and employees from agencies or organisations who by the nature of their role, are required to access Force and OPCC information and information assets.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEBS ISO/IEC 27001:2005 BS 7799-2:2005Human Rights Act 1998 Computer Misuse Act 1990 Data Protection Act 2018Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 Freedom of Information Act 2000Official Secrets Act 1989RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSAcceptable Use of Force Systems Policy Information Risk Management Policy Mobile and Remote Working Policy Physical Security Policy
Third Party / Supplier Remote Access PolicyNPCC Information Systems Community Security Policy HMG Security Policy FrameworkHMG InfoSec StandardsAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEInformation Management > Information AssuranceDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWThis Policy will be reviewed bi-annually by the Head of Information and Assurance, and at other times as dictated by organisational needs.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Head of Information Management and Assurance is responsible for this policy. All queries relating to this policy should be directed to the Force Information Security Officer or Force Policy Officer.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Information Management and Assurance Policy Owner/Author:	Head of Information and Assurance Technical Author:	NCC GroupSenior Officer/Manager Sponsor: Deputy Chief ConstableRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes05.06.20173.0Non Substantive Change & Bi-annual Review. – Authorisation: SIRO25.05.20183.0Data Protection section amended to reflect implementation of GDPR & new DPA.12.05.20214.0Scheduled review. Minor amendments to job and board titles; policy extended to cover OPCC.Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionForce Policy Officer12.05.20214.0Deputy Chief Constable   N/A Minor amendments onlyJNCC(Not required for all policies)N/ADistribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionNeil COWLING (ISO), Jonathan JONES (ICTSO)January to May 20214.0Laura NORTH (DPO), Leonie CALLAND (Records Manager)January to May 20214.0Implications of the Policy: Training RequirementsNoneIT InfrastructureNone
POLICY STATEMENT.This policy must be read in conjunction with the College of Police Authorised Professional Practice (APP) on the Management of Police Information (MoPI) (see APP > Information Management > Sharing police information).Wiltshire Police and OPCC are committed to achieving the priorities set out in Wiltshire and Swindon Police and Crime Plan 2022-2025:Priority 1: A police service that meets the needs of its communities Priority 2: Reduce violence and serious harmPriority 3: Tackle crimes that matter to local communities Priority 4: Improve the experience of victims and deliver justiceInformation is the ‘lifeblood’ of the organisation and without it Wiltshire Police and OPCC would be unable to achieve their vision to make Wiltshire the safest county in the country. Our partners and other local organisations play a key role in strengthening delivery, driving up collective confidence and improve wellbeing whilst reducing dependency and demand on Public Services.Information Sharing, with our partners, the public, local organisations and the wider Law Enforcement community is a two–way process. This will ensure that all agencies have access to a rich picture of information which will allow ‘Superior Knowledge at the Point of Decision’ where the value of information is exploited to the fullest extent.Wiltshire Police and OPCC will share information, including personal information, where it is lawful and appropriate to do so and that such sharing supports a Law Enforcement Purpose.Wiltshire Police and OPCC will not share information, including personal information, in support of revenue gathering processes by partners or other organisations.This policy applies to information processed for Law Enforcement Purposes by Wiltshire Police and OPCC which is recorded in any manner including, but not limited to, any written, electronic, photographic, or paper based information.Information received from partners will be managed in accordance with the guidance on MoPI, UK General Data Protection Regulations and Data Protection Act 2018 (Data Protection Legislation), specific information handling procedures or constraints on the use of information will be detailed within each individual ISA.
This policy does not include the sharing of information with the Disclosure and Barring Service through the Quality Assurance Framework, the sharing of material as provided by the Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 or the sharing of information between police forces for a policing purpose.This policy does not prevent the urgent sharing of information where there is an overriding duty to the public, i.e. life threatening circumstances.Where regular sharing of information with a partner is considered necessary an Information Sharing Agreement (ISA) will be entered into. See Information Sharing Process for further information.In order to achieve the aims of this policy Wiltshire Police and OPCC will: Ensure that all information sharing will be conducted having regard to the rights of the individual and to Data Protection Legislation; Establish appropriate management and administrative practices to facilitate the sharing of police information with others; and; Ensure that all staff are supported in understanding their responsibilities when sharing police information Ensure that a Privacy Impact Assessment is considered as part of a project, plan or proposal to ensure that privacy risks are minimised while allowing the aims of the project to be met whenever possible. Guidance on how to conduct a Privacy Impact Assessment can be found in the ICO’s ‘Conducting privacy impact assessments code of practice’.Legal Basis for Information Sharing.There are three main categories of information sharing within the Police Service:- Required by or under statute (statutory obligation)- Permitted by or under statute (statutory power)- Common Law Statutory Obligation: Where a statutory obligation exists Wiltshire Police has made provision for the sharing of information through either the Disclosure and Barring Scheme (DBS) Manager or the Force Disclosure Unit Senior Decision Maker. Any request to share information via a statutory obligation must be referred to one of the above individuals, who will give the appropriate advice. Statutory Power: Applies to the sharing of police information with another party where there is a specific legal power to do so, but not an obligation to share. This includes sharing:  Within the police service; and;  Partner agencies that have a statutory power to share or receive information. Common Law: Applies to the sharing of police information under common law to support the policing purposes. Where the common law is used to justify information sharing, a risk assessment must be undertaken using the guide at Appendix A to this policy.
Roles and Responsibilities.Where a need to share information on a regular basis has been identified the Head of the Department undertaking the information sharing will own the process and be responsible for the creation of an ISA.All ISA's are to be created in consultation with the Data Protection Officer (DPO) and a copy of each approved ISA is to be held by the DPO, who will provide a central repository of such agreements and a programme of review.All finalised ISA’s will be ‘signed off’ by the Head of Information and Assurance.Where an ISA does not exist and it is considered unnecessary to create one or the decision to share is a one-off, the individual sharing the information is to record the sharing by completing the template at Appendix A to this policy. See Information Sharing Process for further information.Glossary of Terms.TermMeaningLaw Enforcement Purposesprevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences, orexecution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against andprevention of threats to public security.MoPIManagement of Police InformationOPCCOffice of Police and Crime CommissionerISAInformation Sharing AgreementAPPAuthorised Professional PracticeUKGDPRUK General Data Protection RegulationsDPA 2018Data Protection Act 2018POLICY AIM.This policy seeks to achieve through the appropriate sharing of information:Improved public services through an increased capability of all stakeholders to make informed decisions about how best to protect the public;Improved operational policing by enabling links to be made between people, objects, locations and events;Increased professionalism and understanding of the process of sharing information; Increased openness and transparency amongst partners which in turn will build confidence and trust;The lawful sharing of information
APPLICABILITY.This policy applies to all police officers, police staff and OPCC staff.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCE.This policy sets outs Wiltshire Police and OPCC’s commitment to the sharing of information under the Home Office Code of Practice on the Management of Police Information.Data Protection Act 2018 UK GDPRFreedom of Information Act 2000RELATED DOCUMENTS and Authorised Professional Practice.APP > Information Management > Sharing Police InformationHome Office (2005) Code of Practice on Management of Police Information Information Management PolicyInformation Security Policy Data Protection PolicyFreedom of Information Policy (APP) Information Risk Management PolicyDATA PROTECTION AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION.Any information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, UK General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUALITY IMPACT.This policy has been drafted to comply with the principles of the Human Rights Act 1998 and Equality Act 2010. Members of Wiltshire Police administering this policy are responsible for ensuring that in its application, those to whom the policy applies, shall not receive less favourable treatment because of their age, colour, disability, ethnic or national origin, gender re-assignment, marital status, nationality, race, religion, sex or sexual orientation.This policy has been subject to an equality impact assessment and has been graded Low Impact.
(This form is also available on the Forms and Templates page).APPENDIX ASharing of Information where an Information Sharing Agreement is not in place.Points to ConsiderDetails1. Who is asking for the information?2. Record here their name, position, organisation and contact details.3. Have you verified the identity of the person requesting the information?4. What information is being asked for, what purpose will it be used for?5. Is the information being requested Personal information?6. Does this information contain sensitive or confidential material as identified in law?7. Has a legal gateway or a policing purpose to share information been established?8. If yes, how do they want the information?9. What ethical, personal or operational risks are likely to result from any decision to share this information, or may arise from a refusal to share?10. Record your decision, how you made it and what information was shared.Name	……………………………………………………….	Date ………………………… Signature …………………………………………………………………………..After disclosure, please attach a copy of this form to the original material/file or attach to the relevant NICHE record.
?	Revision HistoryVersionDateSummary of Changes7.015.04.2024Review and update7.026.04.2024Policy adapted onto the new SharePoint policy template.
Template v8       WILTSHIRE POLICE & POLICE AND CRIME COMMISSIONERLeave Procedure and Other Authorised AbsencesDate of Publication: November 2022 Version:	5.0Next Review Date:	November 2024
TABLE OF CONTENTSPROCEDURE OVERVIEW	3GLOSSARY OF TERMS	3RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	3AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE	3DATA PROTECTION	3FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	3MONITORING and REVIEW	3WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDURE	3ANNUAL LEAVE ENTITLEMENT	4PRINCIPLES	4REQUESTING ANNUAL LEAVE	5CARRY OVER / BRING FORWARD OF ANNUAL LEAVE	6SICKNESS DURING ANNUAL LEAVE / PUBLIC HOLIDAYS	6ACCRUAL OF ANNUAL PERIODS OF ABSENCE	7ANNUAL LEAVE WHEN LEAVING	7BANK / PUBLIC HOLIDAYS	7RECALL TO DUTY FROM ANNUAL LEAVE – POLICE OFFICERS	7COMPASSIONATE LEAVE	8DEPENDANTS LEAVE	8JURY SERVICE	10MEDICAL APPOINTMENTS	10RESERVED ARMED FORCES	11OTHER LEAVE	11UNPAID LEAVE	11REMOVAL LEAVE	11RELEASE FOR POLICE SPECIAL DUTIES	11RELEASE FOR SPORT EVENTS	12RELEASE FOR COMMUNITY / VOLUNTEERING LEAVE	12APPENDIX A - BANK/PUBLIC HOLIDAYS	14DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	16
PROCEDURE OVERVIEWAnnual leave is an entitlement awarded to Police officers and Police staff and OPCC staff under Police Regulations / their terms and conditions of appointment. The amount they are entitled to is dictated by those terms, however the means through which such leave is managed within Wiltshire Police and the OPCC is via this Procedure, which incorporates any relevant legislative requirements.A period of annual leave is an approved period of absence from the workplace. This Procedure aims to provide a managed framework that allows staff to plan and take their leave whilst ensuring that operational efficiency is maintained. All staff have a personal responsibility to plan their leave throughout the leave year, to ensure that they take regular managed breaks from the workplace to maintain their health and wellbeing and to avoid the risk of losing untaken leave at the end of the leave year.This procedure is intended to inform you of the various types of leave available to an individual. This procedure refers to Police Staff, OPCC staff and Police Officers unless otherwise stated. GLOSSARY OF TERMSRELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSMaternity and Adoption Leave Parental LeaveAttendance Management ProcedureSupport for Learning and Development ProcedureAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICENone applicable.DATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this procedure will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING and REVIEWMonitoring the effectiveness of the procedure will be undertaken in conjunction with the People Services Centre to establish the type of queries that arise. The procedure will be reviewed by People Services.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDUREHR are responsible for this procedure. All queries should be via the People Services Centre.
ANNUAL LEAVE ENTITLEMENTThe annual leave period runs from 1 April each year to the 31 March of the following year.Due to varying working patterns, ease of calculation and to maintain a fair and consistent application, all leave entitlements will be calculated in hours, rounded up to the nearest minute.POLICE STAFF AND OPCC STAFFAnnual leave entitlement increases with continuous service as below:Length of ServiceLeave EntitlementOn appointment185 hrs (25 days)Completion of 5 years continuous service222 hrs (30 days)Completion of 20 years continuous service237 hrs (32 days)Where your continuous service reaches one of the above milestones part way through the year, the increase in leave entitlement will be calculated pro rata for that year.POLICE OFFICERSEvery member of the police force holding a rank below that of superintendent shall be granted leave in each leave year as detailed below:Length of ServiceLeave EntitlementLess than 2 years’ service176 hrs (22 days)2 or more years’ continuous service200 hrs (25 days)10 or more years’ continuous service216 hrs (27 days)15 or more years’ continuous service224 hrs (28 days)20 or more years’ continuous service240 hrs (30 days)Every member of the police force of or above the rank of superintendent shall be granted each leave year the following period of annual leave:Leave EntitlementSuperintendent248 hrs (31 days)Higher than that of Superintendent who has not completed 10 years’ relevant service336 hrs (42 days)In any other case384 hrs (48 days)PRINCIPLESï The Global Rostering System (GRS) will be the authoritative data source for all leave. No other leave record will be recognised by the Force for leave purposes.ï The standard working day for police staff is 7 hours 24 minutes. The standard working day for police officers is 8 hours. The hourly leave total is allocated on that basis.ï Leave entitlements are calculated on a pro rata basis for part time staff and officers.ï On joining, annual leave entitlement for that current leave year will be calculated at a daily rate.ï Officers and staff have a personal responsibility to plan and take all their leave within the leave year in consultation with their line manager.ï 
ï A 2 week period will include any ROSTERED rest days at the start, during or at the end of the annual leave.Officers and Staff should be aware that some requests for leave may not be approved, either for operational / organisational reasons or to ensure fairness in the allocation process. For periods of known high demand for annual leave (i.e. school holidays/Xmas and New year) as well as times of known high levels of operational demand (e.g. Solstice/WOMAD/RIAT etc.) consultation may need to be carried out with the RMU/Line managers to facilitate granting of annual leave. In particular consideration will be to previous leave allocations to ensure fairness (i.e. school holidays/Xmas/New Year etc.)It will not be considered fair or reasonable for an individual to expect to routinely pre-book annual leave more than 12 months in advance on the assumption that it will be approved year on year. All requests for leave should be approved by the first line manager / RMU (as appropriate to each Departmental procedure), to ensure that wider resourcing issues have been considered.When on leave, individuals are paid at the basic rate for their job plus any regular allowances normally paid unless specified otherwise.Senior staff and officers should consider the wider management team when submitting leave requests, to ensure Force resilience, especially in terms of command.When an individual is due to commence a period of annual leave of one week or more (7 days when combined with Rest Days, subject to the exigencies of duty) their tour of duty for the last working day should not normally finish after 1800 hours, this should be requested via staff’s line manager.REQUESTING ANNUAL LEAVEAll staff have a personal responsibility to plan their leave throughout the leave year, to ensure that they take regular managed breaks from the workplace to maintain their health and wellbeing and to avoid the risk of losing untaken leave at the end of the leave year.An annual leave record will be maintained for every person within GRS. All applications for leave must be made via GRS. No other leave record is recognised by the Force for leave purposes.Managers are responsible for planning their resources to ensure that the required number of people are on duty at any one time. Leave requests will be considered on the basis of balancing local operational demands whilst trying to accommodate individual preferences. Wherever possible managers will try to accommodate leave requests looking at capacity within their wider team. It is a legal requirement for staff to be able to take their annual leave within the leave year, therefore requests for annual leave should normally take priority over any requests for Specials Leave, Sports Leave or Volunteer / Community Leave being made at the same time.Individuals must obtain management approval for annual leave prior to making firm holiday / financial commitments as approval is not guaranteed.The maximum period of absence from work that will normally be approved is two working weeks plus any rostered rest days at the start and finish.In special cases where a longer period is sought (e.g. extended period of travel) or for time critical events (e.g. a wedding or honeymoon), applications should be made well in advance, to the Departmental Head.
All requests for leave should be approved by the first line manager / Resource Management Unit (as appropriate to each departmental procedure), to ensure that wider resourcing issues have been considered.CARRY OVER / BRING FORWARD OF ANNUAL LEAVEThe management of annual leave is an individual’s responsibility and the expectation will be that individuals will book their annual leave entitlement in the leave year.GRS will allow the carry over into the following leave year the maximum of one weeks contracted hours for an individual if there is leave unused from the preceding leave year.Any unused leave above this figure will be lost unless special circumstances detailed below apply.Such reasons may include extended sickness, maternity leave or exceptional operational demand and previous leave requests having been declined due to the exigencies of duty. Anything over a contracted working week would need to be exceptional circumstances with SMT approval.During extended periods of long term sickness an employee is still entitled to take leave. For example, if they: are not physically able to work, but physically able to take a holiday, or have a mental health condition that might be helped by a holiday. First line managers should be aware of excessive amounts of leave being carried over at the end of the year, and may request the individual to book leave to reduce the risk of losing it.When an individual applies for annual leave and it is declined then this is recorded on their leave record within GRS along with the reasons why, for audit purposes.Bringing ForwardDuring the last month of their individual Annual Leave year, staff may be allowed to bring forward leave from their next leave year, up to a maximum of the equivalent of their contracted working week in hours. There will then be a corresponding reduction in the amount of leave available to them for that following leave year.Emergency/Unforeseen SituationsIt is recognised that some staff have traditionally kept a pool of un-booked annual leave for “just in case” moments. The Force accepts that there may be occasions when due to unforeseen situations a member of staff may require to be absent from work and in order to cater for this, managers have the abilities to authorise additional paid leave such as ‘Dependants Leave’ or ‘Compassionate leave.SICKNESS DURING ANNUAL LEAVE / PUBLIC HOLIDAYSWhere sickness interrupts a period of annual leave an individual may seek to reclaim the relevant time upon presentation of a fit note (the replacement for the medical certificate). This applies to the hours of annual leave covered by the doctor’s certificate, the cost of any fit note rests with the individual.Individuals cannot claim bank / public holiday enhancements if they were unable to work their rostered shift due to sickness. Similarly where an individual becomes sick on a free day or a rest day, they will not have days reallocated to them.
ACCRUAL OF ANNUAL PERIODS OF ABSENCEAnnual leave will continue to accrue during periods of sickness absence and maternity leave.ANNUAL LEAVE WHEN LEAVINGIf an individual leaves part way through the leave year, they will be entitled to receive payment for the annual leave accrued for that leave year, calculated on a daily basis.If they have taken more leave than they have accrued, this will be deducted from their final salary.BANK / PUBLIC HOLIDAYSThere are normally 8 Bank and Public Holidays recognised per year:? Good Friday? Easter Monday? May Day Holiday? Spring Bank Holiday? Late Summer Bank Holiday? Christmas Day? Boxing Day? New Year’s DayTo ensure consistency of practice across the organisation, all officers and staff will have their bank and public holiday entitlement calculated in hours. As a general principle, a bank or public holiday is worth 8 hours to a full time officer, 7 hours and 24 minutes to a full time staff member, and pro rata for part time staff.GRS will automatically calculate the relevant amounts for each year, based upon an individual’s contracted weekly hours, including any adjustments required under Police Regulations where applicable. See Appendix A.Police Officers now have the option to nominate alternative days as their statutory Public Holidays (except 25th December). Please refer to the separate substitution procedure for further details.RECALL TO DUTY FROM ANNUAL LEAVE – POLICE OFFICERSRecalled to dutyCompensation daysOr:PeriodRecalled for 1 or 2 daysAdditional 16hours (2 days) annual leave8 hours annual leave (1 day) and 8 hours (1 day) pay at double timeIn lieu of each day that you were recalledRecalled for 3 days or moreAdditional 16hours (2 days) annual leave8 hours annual leave (1 day) and 8 hours (1 day) pay at double timeIn lieu of each day that you were recalled for the first two daysAND:12 hours annual leave8 hours annual leave (1 day) and 4 hours (1/2 day) pay at double timeIn lieu of each day recalled thereafterThe above applies to a period of absence from duty of 3 or more days, where at least one of those days is a day of annual leave and other days, if not days of annual leave, are rostered rest days, days taken off in lieu of overtime, public holidays, free days (or days taken off in lieu thereof) or monthly leave days, or any combination thereof. It also applies in the case of a member of a police force who is required to work on a day scheduled to fall in a period of absence from duty as it applies in the case of a member who is recalled to duty from such a period.
NB: there is no comparable facility to recall police staff to duty. In the event of there being such a requirement, it would be dependent upon the agreement of the individual in question and recompense should be on the same basis as above.COMPASSIONATE LEAVECompassionate leave is time off from work when urgent and compelling situations arise such as the death or serious sickness of an immediate relative, guardian or partner of a member of Wiltshire Police. Wiltshire Police have enhanced this entitlement by providing full pay for a reasonable period of time off.Heads of Departments are authorised, after consultation with RMU, to grant paid compassionate leave on occasions of serious illness or the death of an immediate relative, guardian or partner of a member of Wiltshire Police / OPCC. Such leave will not exceed a total of five days in any one year unless considerable travelling is involved (e.g. having to travel abroad).Applications for longer periods of compassionate leave in excess of a week, or in particular circumstances where longer term flexibility or changes to contractual hours may be required, will be considered by the Head of Department and RMU.Individuals or managers must advise RMU of all compassionate leave in order that the abstraction can be recorded on GRS.In order to ensure a fair and consistent application of paid compassionate leave, RMU management will have the autonomy for final decisions.DEPENDANTS LEAVEDependants leave is an entitlement to take a reasonable amount of unpaid time off work to deal with unexpected events or emergencies and to make necessary longer term arrangements. The emergency must involve a person who is dependent upon the member of staff.Wiltshire Police / OPCC have enhanced this entitlement by providing full pay for a reasonable period of time off.Wiltshire Police / OPCC offer all individuals, regardless of length of service, the right to take a reasonable amount of time off work to deal with certain unexpected emergencies concerning a dependant and to make any necessary longer term arrangements.There is no qualifying period for Dependants Leave. This leave is for you:1. If a dependant falls ill, or has been injured or assaultedThe illness or injury need not necessarily be serious of life threatening, and may be mental or physical.2. To make longer term care arrangement for a dependant who is ill or injuredWhere a dependant needs to be cared for because of an illness or injury, you can take time off work to make longer term care arrangements.3. To deal with the death of a dependantWhen a dependant dies, you can take time off to make funeral arrangements as well as to attend the funeral.
4. To deal with an unexpected disruption or breakdown of care arrangements for a dependantTime off can be taken where the normal carer of the dependant is unexpectedly absent; for example, a childminder or nurse may fail to turn up as arranged, or the nursery or nursing home may close unexpectedly.5. To deal with an unexpected incident involving a child during school hoursYou can take time off to deal with a serious incident involving your child during school hours. For example, if your child has been involved in a fight, is distressed, has been injured on a school trip or is being suspended from school.6. When a dependant is having a babyWhere necessary, you can take time off to assist a dependant when she is having a baby. This does not include taking time off after the birth to care for the child. You may be able to take paternity leave for this purpose.A dependant is a person who reasonably relies on you and can be defined as:ï Your spouse/partnerï Your childï Your parent or guardianï a person living in your household as part of your family but is not a tenant lodger, boarder or live–in employeeï a person who reasonably relies on you for assistanceï a person who reasonably relies on you to make arrangements for the provision of care in the event of illness or injury.You are entitled to take a reasonable amount of time off to deal with the circumstances that you face. Legislation/regulations do not specify the amount of time off which is reasonable, since this will vary according to the circumstances of the emergency. In most cases one or two days leave should be sufficient to deal with the problem. For example, if your child falls ill with chicken pox, the leave should be enough to help you cope with the crisis – to deal with the immediate care of your child, visiting the doctor and to make longer term care arrangements. The right to time off does not enable you to take two weeks off to look after your child yourself. You would need to agree any extended absence with your manager, utilising leave in the normal way.The right is for generally unforeseen short term difficulties. If you know in advance that you are going to need time off, you should request leave in the normal way.You have an obligation to inform your line manager of the reason for the absence and its likely duration as soon as reasonably practical. The Line Manager must notify RMU for the approved leave to be recorded on GRS.You are not entitled to take unlimited amounts of time off. The RMU will monitor the number and lengths of previous absences. This leave is there to support you when you need to deal with genuine unforeseen circumstances.NB: Managers must ensure that Payroll are informed of any periods of agreed unpaid dependants leave.
JURY SERVICEWhen an individual is notified that they have been chosen for jury service, they must inform their line manager as soon as possible with the dates they are expected to attend court.The court will send them a ‘Certificate of Loss of Earnings’ form which needs to be sent to payroll for completion. Payroll will calculate the net pay per day. There is a maximum daily amount than can be claimed. If an individual’s actual daily amount exceeds the maximum, payroll will show the maximum amount limit. This should be presented to the court upon attendance.Following court attendance, they will receive a remittance advice letter from the court. This details the loss of earnings they have incurred and what has been paid directly to them in their bank account. Individuals should send a copy of this remittance to payroll, who will deduct this amount from their next salary.During jury service, officers and staff must keep their manager informed of any end dates or extensions. Where attendance at court is not required, they will be expected to return to work.When on jury service, pensionable benefits will continue to accrue as normal. Individuals must advise their local RMU so the abstraction can be recorded on GRS.MEDICAL APPOINTMENTSRoutine Medical / Dental / Ophthalmic AppointmentsOfficers and Staff should endeavour to make routine doctors, dental, ophthalmic etc. appointments on non-duty days or try to ensure that the time away from work is kept to a minimum. Where the appointment can only be achieved in working time these absences should not be recorded as sick leave and the time should be made up.Non-Routine / Specialist Appointments of less than one dayFor specialist & hospital appointments of less than one day, paid time off will be given to individuals for identification/diagnosis and preventative screening processes. Staff are expected to minimise their time away from duty and Line Managers may request sight of a letter or appointment card pertaining to the absence.Non - Routine / Specialist / Hospital Appointments of one day or moreFor non-routine hospital appointments that are likely to last a day or more, the time should be recorded as sick leave, as the individual is unavailable for duty due to reasons related to their health. However, the line manager should identify the sickness absence appropriately within the sickness absence system, i.e. if the absence is attributable to treatment related to a disability or on- going health issue.Line managers may request sight of a letter or appointment card from their staff member pertaining to this occasion of sickness absence. If the staff member or line manager believe that similar absences may be necessary for the staff member to undergo further on-going treatment, advice from the People Services Centre should be sought to ensure consistency and fair treatment.Subject to the exigencies of duty, wherever possible staff requiring such non-routine appointments should have a reasonable period between the conclusion of a tour of duty and the appointment time (i.e. unless there are exceptional circumstances they should not work a night shift prior to going direct to such an appointment)
RESERVED ARMED FORCESMembers of the reserved armed forces may use their paid annual leave entitlement to carry out their duties, provided they comply with the provisions relating to paid annual leave. Members are expected to use their annual leave before applying for further time off.Further time off relating to membership of the reserved armed forces will only be granted at the absolute discretion of the Force and there is not statutory entitlement to be paid for this leave.Individuals must advise RMU in order that the abstraction can be recorded on GRS.OTHER LEAVEUNPAID LEAVEUnpaid leave may be taken at the discretion of the Head of Department and in consultation with RMU, up to a maximum of 20 working days (160 hours) for an officer and 20 working days (148 hours) for a member of police staff (pro-rated for part-time) in any one leave year.It will normally only be authorised when the individual has exhausted their paid leave entitlement.Individuals must advise RMU in order that the abstraction can be recorded on GRS. Payroll must also be notified so that appropriate adjustments to pay can be made.Please be aware that taking Unpaid Leave will impact your pensionable service. Any period of unpaid leave will not count towards your pension. For further information please contact the Payroll Helpdesk.REMOVAL LEAVEWhere a member of staff is “required” to relocate as a ‘paid move’, either on initial appointment or whilst serving in the force, three days removal leave will be granted, exclusive of rest days. Removal leave is not available to staff who personally decide to move house.RELEASE FOR POLICE SPECIAL DUTIESWiltshire Police aim to support individuals who are Special Constables. The force will allow 10 days per year for full-time staff, pro-rata for part time staff, for training and operational exigencies associated with being a special constable.Applications should be made to an employee’s line manager for approval. Employees must provide at least 14 days’ notice of the time off requested. The force appreciates that operational emergency requirements are not always planned in advance, but in most circumstances adequate notice will be given.Any abuse of the right to take time off for these duties may result in disciplinary action being taken under the disciplinary procedures for police staff.Individuals must advise RMU in order that the abstraction can be recorded on GRS.
RELEASE FOR SPORT EVENTSParticipation in sport has huge benefits for physical and mental wellbeing and are an opportunity for staff to represent the Force with pride and meet colleagues from other Forces across the country.Line Managers may authorise paid time off to a member of staff who is representing Wiltshire Police at a sporting event up to a maximum of two days, or equivalent contracted hours, per leave year.Duties will not be changed to facilitate on-duty attendance and time off will not be granted if any overtime payments to other staff are reasonably foreseeable as a consequence.Time off for sport, whether paid or unpaid, will always be subject to the exigencies of the service and staff are expected to participate in their own time if this coincides with the day of the event. The options for shift changes or granting outstanding time off will be considered in the first instance, as with any other request for time off.All sport leave abstractions from duty strength must be recorded on GRS by the RMU and will only be entered once approved by their line manager.Please note: An injury received at any sport or game will not be regarded as an injury on duty unless the sporting activity is part of a training programme or otherwise carried out in duty time under a specific order (e.g. PSU training).RELEASE FOR COMMUNITY / VOLUNTEERING LEAVEWiltshire Police and the OPCC value the importance of volunteering, both to the community and to employees. Wiltshire Police and the OPCC are committed to actively supporting and promoting volunteering as an opportunity to contribute to the community, build and develop skills, knowledge, experience and resources, and add personal value to fulfilling activities.Wiltshire residents, community groups and public, private and voluntary and faith organisations all play important roles to work collaboratively and make a positive difference to Wiltshire’s communities. It is essential to recognise the value of these types of activities in reducing and preventing crime. Through community engagement and working together we will be able to build strong communities and use our collective resources and creativity to provide local solutions to local problems. To support this, Wiltshire Police and the OPCC promote volunteering and encourage employees to volunteer their help, time and support to make a difference to their local community. Volunteering provides a range of benefits for our employees. Employees can take a more active involvement with causes that they care about, whilst at the same time gaining experience and skills to help with their personal development. This can also help the Force raise its profile in the local community, and as a progressive employer. The main benefits include:ï Inspires employees to become more involved in their communities.ï Supports employee development in gaining new skills, knowledge and experiences.ï Provides opportunities to share skills, talents and creativity to support their local area and help build a stronger, more resilient community.ï Improves employee engagement.ï Employees take a lead in developing relationships and partnerships within the community.ï Sets a positive example to other organisations/business partners.ï Supports the health and wellbeing of the workforce.Key principlesThe volunteering activity will:ï Support the learning and development needs of the employee.ï 
ï Support the sharing of skills, talents and creativity.ï Support the Wiltshire Police Control Strategy Objectives or,ï Support the Police and Crime Plan Prioritiesï Add value/benefit to the local community.ï Be with a registered charity, recognised voluntary organisation, recognised community or youth group, or will be in response to a local crisis or need for local emergency aid.Line Managers may authorise paid time off to a member of staff who is committed to volunteering in the community up to a maximum of two days, or equivalent contracted hours, per leave year.Duties will not be changed to facilitate on-duty attendance and time off will not be granted if any overtime payments to other staff are reasonably foreseeable as a consequence.Time off for volunteering, whether paid or unpaid, will always be subject to the exigencies of the service and staff are expected to participate in their own time if this coincides with the day of the event. The options for shift changes or granting outstanding time off will be considered in the first instance, as with any other request for time off.All volunteer leave abstractions from duty strength must be recorded on GRS by the RMU and will only be entered once approved by their line manager.
Appendix ABank Holiday allocation is one fifth (20%) of weekly contracted hours multiplied by the number of Bank Holidays in that particular year.Full time working 40 hours per week = 8 (20%) x 8 (example no. of BH’s) = 64 hours. Part time working 25 hours per week = 5 (20%) x 8 (example no. of BH’s) = 40 hours.Total number of hoursallocatedPH falls on a working day?PH falls on a Rest Day?PH falls on a free day (part timeonly)Police Officer (full time)Police Officer (part time)8 hours multiplied by the no. of PH’s in the year.20% of contacted hours multiplied by the no. of PH’s in the year.e.g. 20 hourcontract = 4 hours. Length of shift worked isirrelevant.Officer is initially ‘stood down’ and full hours of shift deducted from PH account.Rest Day is re- allocated and value of re- allocated RD is deducted from PH accountHours remain in PH account for officer to choose when to use (subject to staffing)Police Staff7.4 hoursStaff member isRest DayHours remain(full time)multiplied byinitially ‘stoodis not re-in PH accountno. of PH’s indown’ and fullallocated.for staffthe year.hours of shiftHoursmember todeducted fromremain inchoose whenPH accountPHto useaccount for(subject to
Police Staff(part time)20% of weekly contracted hrs x no. of PH’s in the yearstaff member to choose when to use (subject tostaffing)staffing)AdditionalOfficer/staffThis may notInformationmember maybe enoughstill be requiredhours to taketo work andoff a wholeshown back onday if theduty. If sousual workingenhancedday is greaterpayments canthan 20% ofbe claimed. Cancontractedbe stood downhrslater
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Human ResourcesProcedure Owner/Author:	 Head of People Strategy & Policy Technical Author:	Helen MILNE-DAYSenior Officer/Manager Sponsor:	Director of People and Change.Revision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes15/11/225.0Updated to include OPCCPolice Staff and OPCC Staff leave allowances updated to reflect recent increase and clarity provided around pro rata increases at key milestones. (P5)Clarity provided regarding order of priority for authorisation of leave requests (P6)Paragraph added regarding the carrying over of leave during long term sickness. Clarity provided to their entitlement to take leavewhen off work. (P7)Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionHR Business Partner, Policy and Strategy17.11.20225.0Continuous Improvement Team23.11.20222.0JNCC23.11.20222.0Distribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEquality Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this procedure (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionUNISON / Federation / Supts Association / WEPA12/07/20225.0Implications of the Procedure: Training RequirementsNo additional training requiredIT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure required
       WILTSHIRE POLICE & POLICE AND CRIME COMMISSIONERMATERNITY & SUPPORTING LEAVE POLICY & PROCEDURE(Including IVF, ADOPTION, SUPPORT LEAVE, SURROGACY AND BEREAVEMENT LEAVE)For all members of Wiltshire Police & OPCC StaffDepartmentHuman ResourcesDate of PublicationJune 2021Review DateJune 2024Version4.0Technical AuthorNatalie Strong
CONTENTSINTRODUCTION	5Overview	5Data Protection	5Freedom of Information Act	5Legal Basis	5Equality Impact Assessment	6Monitoring, Review and Feedback	6SECTION 1 - MATERNITY LEAVE	7Maternity / Contractual rights	8Ante-natal Care	8Health & Safety - Risk Assessment	9Notification	9Leave Entitlement	9Annual Leave & Bank Holidays	10Maternity Pay – Police Officers and Staff	10Pay rises during pregnancy or maternity leave	11Maternity Pension	11Childcare	11Pregnancy Related Sickness	12Early & Late Births	12Maternity Maintaining Contact	12Keeping in Touch Days	12Maternity Return to work	13Sickness absence preventing a return to work	14Returning to Work to Attend a court hearing during Maternity Leave	14Breastfeeding: Mothers Returning to Work	14Resignation	15SECTION 2 - IVF	16IVF	17Flexibility during treatment	17Successful treatment	17SECTION 3 – ADOPTION (including Surrogacy)	18Adoption - Rights	19Adoption - Meetings	19Adoption - Notification	19Overseas adoptions	20Surrogacy arrangements	20Annual Leave	20Bank/Public holidays	20Adoption - Pay	20Adoption - Maintaining contact	21Keeping in Touch Days	21Adoption - Return to work	21Resignation	22Surrogacy Definitions	22Surrogacy Ante-natal appointments	22Foster Parents	22SECTION 4 – MISCARRIAGES & STILLBIRTH	23Introduction	24Definitions	24How a miscarriage or stillbirth may affect an individual at work	24Telling us about your miscarriage	24Telling us about your stillbirth	24
Time Off	25Practical and emotional support	25Returning to work	26Rights of partners and fathers/parents	26The role of colleagues	27SECTION 5 - PARENTAL BEREAVEMENT LEAVE	28Introduction	29Who can take parental bereavement leave	29What leave a bereaved parent can take	29Notice to take parental bereavement leave	29Changing your mind about taking parental bereavement leave	29Pay during parental bereavement leave	30Rights during parental bereavement leave	30Returning to work after parental bereavement leave	30SECTION 6 - ORDINARY PARENTAL LEAVE (OPL)	31Statement of intent - Aim and Rationale	32Introduction	32Rights	32Conditions	32Postponement of parental leave	33SECTION 7 - SHARED PARENTAL LEAVE (SPL)	34Introduction	35Definitions	35Entitlements	35Eligibility	36Notice	37Mothers notice curtailing maternity leave	37Revocation of maternity leave curtailment notice	37Individual's notice of entitlement and intention	37Variation or cancellation of notice of entitlement and intention	39Individual's period of leave notice	39Variation or cancellation of period of leave notice	39Limit on number of requests for leave	39Continuous period of shared parental leave	40Discontinuous periods of shared parental leave	40Amount of shared parental pay available	40Mothers eligibility for statutory shared parental leave	41Partners eligibility for statutory shared parental leave	41Rights during shared parental leave	41Maintaining contact	42Returning to work	42Shared parental leave as a result of adoption (incl. via surrogacy agreement)	43Definitions	43Scope of policy	43Leave entitlement	44Eligibility	44Partners eligibility	44Notice requirements	45Adopters notice curtailing adoption leave	45Revocation of adoption leave curtailment notice	46Individual's notice of entitlement and intention	46Variation or cancellation of notice of entitlement and intention	47Individual's period of leave notice	48Variation or cancellation of period of leave notice	48Limit on number of requests for leave	48
Continuous period of shared parental leave	48Discontinuous periods of shared parental leave	48Shared Parental leave Pay	49Maintaining contact	49Returning to work	50SECTION 8 – MATERNITY/ADOPTION SUPPORT LEAVE	51Rights	52Entitlements	52Eligibility	52Notification	52Support Leave	53Support Leave Pay	53Additional rights	53FURTHER SUPPORT	54DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	55
INTRODUCTIONOverviewThe Wiltshire Police Family Friendly Leave Procedure is to be applied to police staff employed by the Chief Constable, staff employed by the Police Crime Commissioner who work within the Office of the Police Crime Commissioner (OPCC) and Police Officers where not covered under the Police Regulations 2003. There are differences in certain areas under the requirements of employment law for police staff and the Police Regulations for Police Officers. Where there are differences, these are outlined in the document.The document is designed to set out as clearly as possible the rights and responsibilities of both employer and employee. This procedure takes precedence over the Police Staff Council Handbook.The People Service Centre will provide advice and guidance and will also keep the procedure under review in line with legislation and recommended codes of practice.Data ProtectionAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this procedure will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.A copy of the Forces personal data/privacy notices can be found under Accessing Personal Data/Privacy  Notices on the SharePoint People Services Pages.Freedom of Information Act 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.Legal BasisThis policy and procedure has been written in line with the following legislation:ï Work and Families Act 2006ï Children and Families Act 2014ï Civil Partnership Act 2004ï General Data Protection Regulation (2016/679 EU)ï Data Protection Act 2018ï Employment Act 2002ï Employment Relations Act 1999ï Employment Rights Act 1996ï Equalities Act 2010ï Flexible Working Regulations 2014 (SI 2014/1398)ï Maternity and Adoption Leave (Curtailment of Statutory Rights to Leave) Regulations 2014 (SI 2014/3052)ï Maternity and Parental Leave etc Regulations 1999 (SI 1999/3312)ï Parental Bereavement (Leave and Pay) Act 2018ï Parental Bereavement Leave Regulations 2020 (SI 2020/249)ï Part-time Workers (Prevention of Less Favourable Treatment) Regulations 2000 (SI 2000/1551)ï Paternity and Adoption Leave Regulations 2002 (SI 2002/2788)ï Shared Parental Leave and Paternity and Adoption Leave (Adoptions from Overseas) Regulations 2014 (SI 2014/3092)ï Shared Parental Leave Regulations 2014 (SI 2014/3050)ï Statutory Maternity Pay and Statutory Adoption Pay (Curtailment) Regulations 2014 (SI 2014/3054)ï Statutory Parental Bereavement Pay (General) Regulations 2020 (SI 2020/233)ï Statutory Shared Parental Pay (Adoption from Overseas) Regulations 2014 (SI 2014/3093)ï Statutory Shared Parental Pay (General) Regulations 2014 (SI 2014/3051)ï Police Regulations 2003ï 
Equality Impact AssessmentDuring the creation of this document, this business area is subject to an Equality Impact Assessment (EIA). Its aim is to establish the impact of the business area on all people and to also ensure that it complies with the requirements imposed by a range of legislation. This can be found within the Policies and Procedures section of SharePoint.Monitoring, Review and FeedbackThe People Service Centre or Human Resources Advisory team will provide advice and guidance and will also keep the procedure under review in line with legislation and recommended codes of practice.Feedback relating to this policy can be made in writing or by e-mail to: People Service Centre,Wiltshire Police Headquarters,London Road, Devizes, SN10 2DNE-mail:	PeopleServicesCentre@wiltshire.police.ukTelephone:	101This policy and procedure will be reviewed every three years in the light of any national policy change, procedural or employment law change or at such other times as may become necessary.
	SECTION 1MATERNITY
You may have many questions to ask, especially if this is your first baby. These procedures are designed to guide you from first notification, right through to having your baby and returning to work. If, after reading through these procedures you still have some questions, please speak to your line manager or the People Service Centre/HR Advisory team.Sections within these procedures apply to both Police Officers and Police Staff unless otherwise indicated.Police Officers’ maternity rights differ in some areas to Police Staff as you are subject to the legislative controls of Police Regulations and these are highlighted where applicable.1.1 Maternity / Contractual RightsSubject to certain conditions (as outlined below), you will have the following maternity rights, which are independent of each other:ï Time-off for ante-natal careï Request a Risk Assessment during pregnancyï The right to special protection under Health & Safety Lawï Statutory Maternity Pay (SMP) (Subject to qualification)ï Ordinary Maternity Leave (OML)ï Additional Maternity Leave (AML)ï All Maternity leave – no break in service.ï Protection from a detriment, disadvantage or unfair treatment due to pregnancyï Protection against pregnancy-related dismissalï Compulsory maternity leave of 2 weeks after the birthï Unpaid Parental Leaveï Return to workï Consideration of a flexible working requestï Time off to care for dependents in an emergency1.2 Ante-natal CareOnce you have advised the organisation that you are pregnant, you are entitled to not be unreasonably refused paid time off work to attend antenatal appointments as advised by your doctor, registered midwife or registered health visitor.To be entitled to take time off for antenatal care, you are required to produce a certificate from your doctor, registered midwife or registered health visitor, confirming your pregnancy. Except in the case of the first appointment, you should also produce evidence of the appointment, such as a medical certificate or appointment card, if requested to do so.Antenatal care may include relaxation and parent craft classes that your doctor, midwife or health visitor has advised you to attend, in addition to medical examinations.You should endeavour to give your line manager as much notice as possible of antenatal appointments and, wherever possible, try to arrange them as near to the start or end of the working day.An individual who has a qualifying relationship with you, (the co-parent of the expected child), is eligible to take unpaid time off to accompany you up to two antenatal appointments.You must ensure that your Line Manager is advised in advance of an appointment. You may be required to provide evidence of further appointments. Ante-natal time is treated as duty. Time off should be granted unless due to exigencies of duty, you may be asked to rearrange an appointment.Any time off for ante-natal appointments should not be unreasonably refused.
1.3 Health & Safety - Risk AssessmentUnder the Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999, Wiltshire Police has a duty to identify hazards and to assess and control the risks associated with those hazards to new and expectant mothers.A risk assessment must be carried out that will involve both you and your line manager. This is to ensure that your health and safety and that of your baby are not put at risk by work and working conditions.A risk assessment will be carried out using Form 906.If applicable, the organisation will provide you with information as to any risks identified in the risk assessment. If the risk assessment reveals that you would be exposed to health hazards in carrying out your normal job duties, the organisation will take such steps as are reasonably necessary to avoid those risks, such as altering your working conditions. In some cases, this may mean offering you temporary suitable alternative work (if available) on terms and conditions that are not substantially less favourable.If it is not possible for the organisation to alter your working conditions to remove the risks to your health and there is no suitable alternative work available to offer you on a temporary basis, the organisation may suspend you from work on maternity grounds until such time as there are no longer any risks to your health. This could be for the remainder of your pregnancy until the commencement of your maternity leave. If you are suspended in these circumstances, your employment will continue during the period of the suspension and it does not in any way affect your statutory or contractual employment and maternity rights. You will be entitled to your normal salary and contractual benefits during the period of your suspension, unless you have unreasonably refused an offer of suitable alternative employment.1.4 NotificationAs soon as you have had your pregnancy confirmed, you are required to notify the Force in writing in order to trigger the process.To ensure you receive your full entitlements to pay and leave during the maternity period, you are required to notify the organisation by completing the Form M1 as soon as is reasonably practicable, but no later than 28 days before you intend to start your maternity leave.To ensure you receive your full entitlements to pay and leave during the maternity period, you are required to notify the organisation by completing the Form M1 as soon as is reasonably practicable, but no later than 28 days before you intend to start your maternity leave (Regulation 33, Annex R).Longer notice is always preferable as it gives your line manager time to plan for your absence.You must provide a MATB1 certificate which is obtained from your Doctor or Midwife confirming the date your baby is expected. You may not qualify for maternity leave if you fail to produce certificate MATB1.MATB1’s are usually issued from around the 24th week of pregnancy.Once we have received your notification, we will write to you, within 28 days of receipt of this form to confirm your entitlements and the date you are due to return.1.5 Leave EntitlementAll pregnant officers/staff members (regardless of length of service) have the right in law to take up to 26 weeks' ordinary maternity leave and up to a further 26 weeks' additional maternity leave and to resume work afterwards. You are therefore entitled to a total period of 52 weeks' maternity leave. Additional maternity leave follows on immediately from the end of the period of ordinary maternity leave.ï The earliest it can commence is 6 months prior to the probable birth date.ï The latest it can end is 12 months following the stated probable birth date.ï 
ï You may take a maximum of 15 months of leave in total out of the 18 month period.The law requires all new mothers to take a minimum of two weeks of maternity leave immediately after the birth of the child. This is part of the OML period and not additional to it.Maternity Leave will commence on the day you notify the organisation that you wish it to start and no later than the date given as the probable date of birth.It will end on the day you have given as your intention to return to work and no later than the last day of the maternity period. (Up to 12 months after the birth).1.6 Annual Leave and Bank HolidaysYou will continue to accrue both statutory and any additional contractual holiday entitlement during both the 26 weeks' ordinary maternity leave period and 26 weeks' additional maternity leave period.You will be advised before you start ordinary maternity leave whether or not you have any outstanding holiday entitlement. The organisation may:ï require you to take such outstanding holiday before commencing maternity leave;ï agree in conjunction with your line manager that you should carry the leave over and take it on return to work after maternity leave; orï for holiday entitlement in excess of the statutory minimum, pay you for any outstanding holiday leave as if you were leaving.These options will be discussed with you prior to the start of maternity leave.If you decide not to return to work and have taken your full year’s annual leave, you may find that you have to repay the hours/days extra annual leave that would have accrued beyond your resignation date.1.7 Maternity Pay – Police Officers and StaffOCCUPATIONALIf you have completed 63 weeks continuous service before the EWC:You have the option of:26 weeks full pay, followed by 13 weeks SMP only, with the remaining maternity leave as unpaid.or31 weeks – 21 Weeks Full Pay followed by 10 Weeks Half Pay plus Half SMP (for weeks 22 to 31) followed by 8 weeks SMP only, with the remaining maternity leave as unpaid.STATUTORYIf you have over 26 week’s continuous service at the 15th week before the EWC but less than 63 weeks6 weeks at 90% of your average weekly earnings and:33 weeks will be paid at the standard rate of SMP or 90% of average weekly earnings, whichever is the lesser.STATUTORYIf you have less than 26 weeks continuous service at the 15th week before the EWC:You are not entitled to SMP, but you may qualify for Maternity Allowance of up to 39 weeks at the standard rate of SMP. MA is payable by the Jobcentre Plus. Form SMP1 will be sent by Payroll.For Police Officers in receipt of CRTP & Housing Allowance – this payment will continue until you go onto unpaid maternity leave when it will then cease until you return to work.
In the event that you give birth either before the intended commencement date of maternity leave or before notification has been received of your intended date to commence maternity leave, your SMP will automatically commence the day after the birth of your baby.SMP is paid through the monthly payroll directly into the individual’s bank account on the normal pay date. SMP is treated as earnings for the purposes of Tax and National Insurance Contributions.1.8 Pay rises during pregnancy or maternity leaveThe higher rate of statutory maternity pay (SMP), which is payable during the first six weeks of maternity leave, is calculated in accordance with your average weekly earnings during the period of eight weeks that immediately precede the 14th week before the expected week of childbirth.All earnings during this eight-week calculation period will be counted for the purpose of working out entitlement to statutory maternity pay, including any allowances or overtime worked during those eight weeks.If a pay rise is granted during, or backdated to, this eight-week calculation period, the increased level of pay will be taken into account when calculating SMP.Following a European Court of Justice decision, any pay rise that takes effect or is backdated to a date that falls after the eight-week calculation period but before the end of your maternity leave must and will also be taken into account when calculating the amount of SMP due to you.1.9 Maternity PensionPension contributions are paid throughout your paid maternity leave. You do not pay pension contributions whilst on unpaid maternity leave, but when you return to work, you are entitled to buy-back pension contributions in respect of your unpaid leave period. Contributions are based on the pay you would have been entitled to before you went on maternity leave. This may be the standard rate of SMP.To benefit from this facility, you must ‘buy-back’ the period of unpaid maternity leave. As officers and staff have independent pension schemes, please refer to table below:Police OfficersPolice StaffYou must opt to buy-back in writing within 3 months of returning to duty or before your last day of service.It is recommended that you make enquiries prior to the commencement of maternity leave.You must opt to buy-back in writing within 30 days of returning to work or before your last day of work.It is recommended that you make enquiries prior to the commencement of maternity leave.The 39-week maternity pay period is treated as pay for pension purposes. Superannuation contributions, based on the normal rate, will be deducted from it. After the 39-week period, continuation of payment of pension contributions for the duration of maternity leave is optional.On return to work an employee can "buy back" pension contributions in respect of unpaid maternity leave, either in a lump sum or in instalments, the Payroll Helpdesk supply information on Pension ‘’buy back’’.1.10 Maternity - ChildcareChildcare vouchers are no longer provided via Wiltshire Police through the Edenred scheme. Any individuals not currently in this scheme will need to visit; https://www.gov.uk/help-with-childcare- costs for more information in regards to childcare vouchers.
For those currently in the scheme, the Force will fund the vouchers for all individuals on maternity leave when maternity pay drops to SMP only.Individuals who are in the Edenred scheme have the option to opt out of the scheme as it will have a direct impact on your maternity pay.For further details of the Edenred scheme, please go to the maternity pages on SharePoint.1.11 Pregnancy related sicknessPregnant employees who are sick for a reason unrelated to pregnancy will be treated equally and consistently with other employees who are off sick for other reasons.Any pregnancy specific sickness absences will be discounted for the purpose of management escalation of the Organisational Attendance Management Procedures. They should however be recorded as pregnancy related sickness absence for reporting purposes.If you are absent due to a pregnancy related illness after the 4th week prior to the EWC, your maternity leave and pay will automatically commence at that point. Once your maternity leave has commenced, you will not be entitled to sickness payments as you will be receiving SMP during that time and are officially on maternity leave.If you are off work after week 36 (4 weeks before your EWC) because of a pregnancy related reason (such as police maternity leave or a pregnancy related sickness) your statutory maternity leave and pay will automatically commence at that point (but not your police maternity leave and pay. This will start on the date you have previously notified).There is no entitlement to sick pay during the period of maternity leave.1.12 Early & Late BirthsIf the notified start date of your maternity leave is the date on which your baby is due, where your baby is late this will not entitle you to postpone the start date. It must still begin on the date notified.In the unusual event of a live birth occurring before a pregnancy reaches 24 weeks, normal maternity rights, including maternity leave and pay will apply, even if the baby lives for only a short time. In the tragic circumstance of the baby not surviving early birth, you will also be entitled to statutory parental bereavement leave and pay (Please refer to section 5).1.13 Maternity – Maintaining ContactIt is important that while you are on maternity leave you do not lose contact with your department/division. Your line manager should take responsibility for maintaining contact with you while you are absent. Prior to commencement of maternity leave, you and your manager should agree the frequency and method of contact. No formal contact will be made with you during Compulsory Maternity Leave (the two weeks following the birth of your baby).1.14 Keeping in Touch DaysKeeping in Touch days have been introduced as a way to ease the return to work following a period of Maternity Leave. You can work up to and including 10 days during your period of maternity leave. You will not lose any of your SMP for working up to 10 days however, you will lose your SMP for any week in which you do any further work in addition to those 10 days.Keeping in Touch days will be paid at SMP rate, then topped up to your normal contractual pay for that day. Please note you will only be paid for the hours you work however this will still count as a KIT day.
Keeping in Touch days are optional, there is no obligation on the Force to provide these days, or on you to take them, however, these are a really good opportunity for you to:ï Meet with your line manager to discuss any key team, functional, organisational changes including how these may affect youï Join any team meetings to keep in touch with colleagues, meet new onesï Discuss any potential flexible working arrangements you would like him/her to consider prior to your return to work.ï Assess any training required prior to your returnï Discuss what a transition back to work will look likeï Sort any equipment/uniform requirements in good time for returnï Any requirements related to breastfeeding/expressingYou will need to complete a claim form for any KIT days worked which can be found on Sharepoint. The KIT day will not bring your maternity leave period to an end.Please note that employees taking a mix of maternity leave and shared parental leave are entitled to a maximum of 10 days which can be taken as KIT or SPLIT days during their maternity or shared parental leave.1.14 Maternity – Return to WorkYou are entitled to return to the same rank with terms at least as good as your previous role.Regulations require you to give 21 days’ notice of your intention to return to work (unless you are returning at the end of your maternity leave period). However, as much notice as is reasonably practical is preferred to enable managers to make necessary arrangements for your return.You can change your date of return at any time providing you give at least 21 days’ notice of the re- arranged date. You would need to complete the Form M5.If you wish to return to work early, you will need to provide Wiltshire Police with a written request giving ideally 8 weeks, but no later than 21 days’ notice of your intention to return to work before the end of your maternity leave. You would need to complete the Form M5.If you do not notify the date of your return, you will be expected to return at the end of your maternity leave period.You may return to work at any time during ordinary maternity leave or additional maternity leave, provided that you give the appropriate notification. Alternatively, you may take your full period of maternity leave entitlement and return to work at the end of this period.If you wish to return before the full period of maternity leave has elapsed, you must give at least 8 weeks' notice (but no later than 28 days) in writing to the organisation of the date on which you intend to return. You would need to complete the Form M5.You have the right to resume working in the same job if returning to work from ordinary maternity leave. If you return to work after a period of additional maternity leave, you are entitled to return either to the same job or, if this is not reasonably practicable, to another suitable job that is on terms and conditions not less favourable.Failure to return to work by the end of maternity leave will be treated as an unauthorised absence unless you are sick and can produce a current medical certificate before the end of the maternity leave period.
Prior to your return, contact should be made to discuss and ensure the precise arrangements for your return. Your manager should ensure that preparations are made ready for your return by completing the ‘preparation’ section of the Manager’s Maternity & Adoption checklist – Form M7.Preparations may include:1.14.1 Risk Assessment including the risks associated with Breastfeeding (Form 906)1.14.2 Up-dating on developments e.g. Force developments/software changes etc.1.14.3 Provisions for breastfeeding, if required and body armour requirements (if breast feeding)1.14.4 Uniform1.14.5 PDR and training needs analysis1.14.6 Officer Safety Training if applicable1.15 Sickness absence preventing a return to workIf you are ill and unable to return to work on the agreed date, your sickness absence will be treated in the same way as any other non-pregnancy/maternity related sickness and will be managed as per the Attendance Management Procedures. i.e. pay statutory and/or contractual sick pay in the usual way. The day that you should have returned to work will be the first day of a period of sickness absence.1.16 Returning to work to attend a Court Hearing during Maternity LeaveUnless a Doctor certifies that you are unfit, you must attend court if required. Attendance as a police witness is classed as duty, you should ensure that you are booked ‘on duty’ for that day.If you are required to attend court whilst on maternity leave the Force must undertake a risk assessment.1.17 Breastfeeding: Mothers Returning to WorkNew mothers (in the case specifically for Police Officers) returning to work who are still breastfeeding should be made aware that wearing ill-fitting body armour may cause mastitis or reduce milk flow.Individuals are encouraged to arrange a fitting with Stores prior to returning to work to ensure appropriately fitted body armour is worn. If you choose to continue with full duties, you should be afforded time to return to a designated station to express milk as and when necessary.The organisation is committed to providing all possible support to you having returned to work after a period of maternity leave. Your line manager must do all that is reasonably practicable to remove any risks and these should be identified having conducted a full risk assessment with you.Breastfeeding employees cannot under any circumstances be expected to perform duties for which a risk assessment has highlighted a potential risk.To assist your transition back to work and with the above considerations in mind, the organisation will seek to provide suitable space for pregnant employees and new mothers. You can use this space to:1.17.1 rest if feeling particularly tired – the space should include comfortable chairs;1.17.2 express milk; and1.17.3 breastfeed and change your baby(ies) if they are being brought to their place of work for feedingThe organisation will ensure (while also taking the needs of the business into account) that you are allowed reasonable flexibility in your working hours and rest breaks to allow you to make use of the organisation's facilities. Should you require flexibility to, for example, go home to feed your baby (if you live close to work), you should speak to your line manager. While the organisation cannot guarantee that it will be able to agree to every request for flexibility, it will give favourable consideration to requests and endeavour, within reason, to accommodate your needs and wishes.
Colleagues should be sensitive to this issue and should also adopt a supportive attitude. All members of Wiltshire Police have the right to be treated with dignity at work and this requirement is particularly relevant and important to those who are pregnant or who have recently given birth.It is a requirement of this policy that all colleagues across the Organisation respect this principle.1.18 ResignationIf you decide not to return to work, you must submit written notification to your line manager who will forward to the People Service Centre of your intention to resign, giving the appropriate notice. Should you resign during your maternity leave or within a month of returning from maternity leave then you may be required to repay the occupational maternity pay that you have received. If you would like any further details regarding this then please contact the Finance department.
	SECTION 2IVF
2.1 IVFWiltshire Police recognise that an increasing number of babies are born each year through in vitro fertilisation. The specific nature and side effects of the IVF process raise certain issues including the need for absence from work to attend appointments, exemption from confrontational duties and sickness absence.There is no legal right for time off for fertility treatment, however we recognise the emotional pressures of undergoing fertility treatment. The Organisation wish to provide support to all individuals undergoing fertility treatment or to those who have partners undergoing treatment.The type of treatment offered to couples will depend on the circumstances that have been identified, however no matter what option is taken, undergoing fertility treatment will prove to be both physically and mentally demanding.When undergoing treatment there may be a need for absence from work to attend appointments.Time off in lieu, flexi leave or annual leave should be used for appointments and where possible appointments should be made outside the core hours / duty time however, it is recognised that this is not always possible.Where it is not possible for other forms of leave to be used, up to 5 days leave (40 hours for police officers or 37 hours for OPCC and police staff), in a 12 month period (pro rata for individuals working part time) will be granted during the advanced stage of IVF treatment between the follicular puncture and the immediate transfer of the in vitro fertilised ova into the uterus (the ‘Advanced Stage’). The days can be taken in one block, separate days or in hours and medical evidence of appointments will be requested.Further time off from duty due to the side effects of treatment for a female individual should be in accordance with Attendance Management Policy and Procedure. Sickness absence associated with IVF will not be classified as ‘pregnancy related’. If an employee becomes ill as a result of infertility treatment, they will receive sick pay in the usual way.An individual whose partner is receiving IVF treatment may be granted 3 days (pro rata for individuals working part time) paid leave in a 12 month period to support their partner through the treatment. This can be taken in one block, separate days or in hours and medical evidence of appointments will be requested.The leave entitlement will be pro-rata for part time individuals according to the weekly hours worked. If more than 40/37 hours are required, then annual leave or flexi should be used.2.2 Flexibility During TreatmentIndividuals undergoing fertility treatment may require some degree of flexibility to their working patterns, in addition to the granting of time off. The options of unpaid leave, career break or flexible working hours may also be available and considered where necessary.Line managers/supervisors will be responsible for managing the flexibility required with the guidance of the HR Advisory team.2.3 Successful TreatmentAn individual undergoing IVF treatment will only receive protection relating to pregnancy once she is indeed pregnant. i.e. at the advanced stage of treatment following transfer of the in vitro fertilised ova into the uterus. It will however, still constitute sex discrimination to treat an individual at advanced stage of IVF treatment less favourably simply because they are receiving that treatment.At the advanced stage of treatment the normal Maternity, Paternity, Shared Parental Leave & Adoption Policy & Procedures will then apply.
	SECTION 3ADOPTION - (Including Surrogacy)
3.1 Adoption - RightsYou may have many questions to ask, especially if this is your first adoption. These procedures are designed to guide you from first notification, right through to adopting your child and returning to work. The legislation can be complicated, so if, after reading through these procedures you still have some questions, please speak to your line manager or the People Service Centre/HR Advisory team or refer to www.gov.uk/adoption-pay-leave/eligibilitySections within these procedures apply to both Police Officers and Police Staff unless otherwise indicated.Adoption leave and pay rules are slightly different if you are adopting from overseas or if you are having a child through a surrogacy arrangement.Leave and pay are available to individuals who adopt solely or jointly as part of a couple. This includes legal adoption as a result of a surrogacy agreement. If you are adopting jointly, you may choose which partner takes adoption leave. Your partner is then entitled to Adoption Support Leave (detailed under Paternity/Support leave section). The right entitles eligible individuals to take paid leave when the child is newly placed for adoption.To qualify for Statutory Adoption Leave and Statutory Adoption Pay, you must:ï Be the child’s adopterï Be newly matched with a child for adoption by an approved Adoption Agency (‘matched’ means that the adoption agency gives you details of the child you think is suitable for you to adopt)ï Provide documentary evidence of the adoption provided by the Adoption Agencyï Have worked continuously for at least 26 weeks before the beginning of the week when you’re matched with a childï Be dual approved prospective adopters who have a child placed with you under section 22C of the Children Act 1989 with a view to you adopting that child (this is sometimes referred to as fostering for adoption although adoption leave and pay is not available to other types of foster carers).ï Be the intended parents in a surrogacy arrangement where you are eligible for and intend to apply for a Parental Order (or where you have already obtained such an order) making you the legal parents of the child that you are having with the help of a surrogate mother.3.2 Adoption MeetingsWhen you are matched with a child for adoption on or after 5 April 2015, you will be entitled to time off work to attend up to 5 adoption appointments (of up to six and a half hours for each appointment).In the case of joint adoptions, only one of you will be entitled to paid time off work to attend up to 5 adoption appointments (of up to six and a half hours for each appointment). Your partner will be entitled to unpaid time off work to attend up to 5 adoption appointments (of up to six and a half hours for each appointment).If only one of you is officially adopting the child, only the adopter is entitled to time off to attend adoption meetings.If you are eligible for and elect to take paid time off to attend adoption appointment’s, you will not be able to take adoption support leave in relation to the adoption of that child. It is, therefore, likely that the person who takes paid time off work to attend adoption appointments will also take adoption leave and pay.The partner of an adopter is not entitled to time off work (whether paid or unpaid) to attend adoption appointments unless you are jointly adopting a child.3.3 Adoption - NotificationNotification should be received by the organisation no more than 7 days after the date you were notified of the match of a child.You should complete the Form M3 of your intention to take Adoption Leave specifying the date on which the child is expected to be placed and the date you have chosen to begin your Adoption Leave.
Adoption leave and pay do not apply to cases of adoption by stepparents and foster parents in respect of children previously living with the adoptive parents.Within 28 days of receiving notification Form M3 of your intended period of Adoption Leave, we will write to you, confirming how much Statutory Adoption Pay you will get, when it will start and when it will stop. Should you not be eligible, we will provide you with a Form SAP1 within 7 days confirming as to why you are not eligible.3.4 Overseas adoptionsYou must notify us of the date of your ‘official notification’ and when you expect your child to arrive in the UK. You must usually do this within 28 days of getting the notification. (You can only take longer if you’ve been employed for less than 26 weeks and have therefore been unable to provide the full notification).You should complete the Form M3 of your intention to take Adoption Leave specifying the date on which the child is expected to arrive in the UK and the date you have chosen to begin your Adoption Leave.Within 28 days of receiving notification Form M3 of your intended period of Adoption Leave, we will write to you, confirming how much Statutory Adoption Pay you will get, when it will start and when it will stop. Should you not be eligible, we will provide you with a Form SAP1 within 7 days confirming as to why you are not eligible.3.5 Surrogacy arrangementsIf you use a surrogate to have a baby, you must notify us of the due date and when you wish to start your leave at least 15 weeks before the expected week of birth of your child. This must be provided in writing. You will also be required to provide a written statement (‘statutory declaration’) to confirm you’ve applied or will apply for a parental order in the 6 months after the child’s birth.3.6 Annual LeaveAnnual leave will continue to accrue during your adoption leave period. It is advisable that any outstanding annual leave is taken prior to commencing adoption leave or prior to your return to work.3.7 Bank/Public HolidaysDuring your adoption leave period you will accrue a leave entitlement for any Bank/Public Holidays that fall within this period.3.8 Adoption – PayOCCUPATIONALIf you have completed 63 weeks continuous service before the date of adoption:You have the option of:26 weeks full pay (adoption pay), followed by 21 weeks SMP only, with the remaining maternity leave as unpaid. Or31 weeks – 21 Weeks full pay (adoption pay) followed by 10 Weeks Half Pay plus Half SMP (for weeks 22 to 31)STATUTORYIf you have over 26 week’s continuous service at the 15th week before the date of adoption but lessthan 63 weeks.6 weeks at 90% of your average weekly earnings and:33 weeks will be paid at the standard rate of SMP or 90% of average weekly earnings, whichever is the lesser.STATUTORYIf you have less than 26 weeks continuous service at the 15th week before the date of adoption.You will not be eligible for Statutory Adoption Pay but may still qualify for adoption leave.
Adoption leaveYou can start your adoption leave from the date of the child’s placement or from a fixed date which can be up to 14 days before the expected week of placement.3.9 Adoption – Maintaining ContactIt is important that while you are on adoption leave you do not lose contact with your department/division. Your line manager should take responsibility for maintaining contact with you while you are absent. Prior to commencement of adoption leave, you and your line manager should agree the frequency and method of contact.3.10 Keeping in Touch DaysKeeping in Touch days have been introduced as a way to ease the return to work following a period of Adoption Leave. You can work up to and including 10 days during your period of Adoption Leave. You will not lose any of your SAP for working up to 10 days however, you will lose your SAP for any week in which you do any further work in addition to those 10 days.Keeping in Touch days will be paid at SAP rate, then topped up to your normal contractual pay for that day. Please note you will only be paid for the hours you work however this will still count as a KIT day.Keeping in Touch days are optional, there is no obligation on the Force to provide these days, or on you to take them, however, these are a really good opportunity for you to:ï Meet with your line manager to discuss any key team, functional, organisational changes including how these may affect you;ï Join any team meetings to keep in touch with colleagues, meet new ones;ï Discuss any potential flexible working arrangements you would like him/her to consider prior to your return to work;ï Assess any training required prior to your return;ï Discuss what a transition back to work will look like;ï Sort any equipment/uniform requirements in good time for return.You will need to complete a claim form for any KIT days worked which can be found on Sharepoint. The KIT day will not bring your Adoption Leave period to an end.Please note that employees taking a mix of adoption leave and shared parental leave are entitled to a maximum of 10 days which can be taken as KIT or SPLIT days during their adoption or shared parental leave.3.11 Adoption – Return to WorkPrior to your return, contact should be made to discuss and ensure the precise arrangements for your return to work.If you are intending to return to work after your full adoption leave do not have to give any further notification.If you wish to return to work early, you will need to submit a written request giving ideally 8 weeks, but no later than 21 days notice of your intention to return to work before the end of your adoption leave. You would need to complete the Form M5.If you are intending to return to work after your full adoption leave, do not have to give any further notification.
If you wish to return to work early, you will need to submit a written request giving ideally 8 weeks, but no later than 28 days notice of your intention to return to work before the end of your adoption leave. You would need to complete the Form M5.3.12 ResignationIf you decide not to return to work, you must submit written notification to your 1st Line Manager who will forward to the People Service Centre of your intention to resign, giving the appropriate notice period.3.13 Surrogacy Definitions Birth MotherThe birth mother is entitled to take up to 52 weeks of maternity leave and up to 39 weeks of statutory maternity pay (if she eligible for pay) or maternity allowance even where she is not genetically related to the child that she is carrying.Surrogate ParentsWhere a couple has a parental order in relation to a surrogate child, one of the parents can be eligible for adoption leave and pay and the other can be eligible for support leave and pay.3.14 Surrogacy – Ante-natal AppointmentsThe Parental Order parents are entitled to take time off work to accompany the surrogate mother to her antenatal appointments.Both of the Parental Order parents are entitled to attend up to 5 paid antenatal appointments (of up to 6 and half hours each appointment).In the case of joint Parental Order parents, only one of you will be entitled to paid time off work to attend up to 5 antenatal appointments (of up to six and a half hours for each appointment). Your partner will be entitled to unpaid time off work to attend up to 5 antenatal appointments (of up to six and a half hours for each appointment).If only one of you is officially the parental order parent, only that parent is entitled to time off to attend antenatal appointments.If you are eligible for and elect to take paid time off to attend appointment’s, you will not be able to take adoption support leave in relation to the adoption of that child. It is, therefore, likely that the person who takes paid time off work to attend adoption appointments will also take adoption leave and pay.The partner of an adopter is not entitled to time off work (whether paid or unpaid) to attend adoption appointments unless you are jointly adopting a child.3.15 Foster ParentsFoster parents do not have rights to Parental Leave but may be able to request a flexible working pattern. Further information can be found in the Parental Leave and Flexible Working policies.
	SECTION 4MISCARRIAGES & STILLBIRTH
4.1 IntroductionWe recognise that the effects of a miscarriage or stillbirth can be extremely distressing and that many employees will regard a miscarriage as the loss of a baby, regardless of how early in pregnancy it occurs.A miscarriage or stillbirth can have significant physical and emotional consequences, which may affect an individual’s attendance or performance at work.We are committed to supporting those who are affected by a miscarriage or stillbirth and we encourage you to discuss your situation with us if you are comfortable doing so.4.2 DefinitionsThe following definitions are used in this policy:"Miscarriage" means the loss of a baby before the end of the 24th week of pregnancy. "Stillbirth" means the loss of a baby after 24 complete weeks of pregnancy."Ectopic pregnancy" means a pregnancy that develops outside the uterus, most often in the fallopian tubes."Molar pregnancy" is where a fertilised egg implants in the uterus but cannot develop because it does not contain the correct genetic material.References to a miscarriage in this document include an ectopic pregnancy and a molar pregnancy.4.3 How a miscarriage or stillbirth may affect an individual at workHaving a miscarriage or stillbirth can affect an individual in a number of different ways, which can in turn affect their work or performance. These include:ï physical symptoms, such as pain, bleeding, lactation, tiredness or a loss of appetite;ï difficulty sleeping or concentrating;ï loss of motivation;ï finding social interaction more difficult;ï mood swings, irritability or tearfulness; andï mental health problems, such as depression or anxiety.4.4 Telling us about your miscarriageYou do not have to tell us that you have had a miscarriage.However, if you would like to do so, we encourage you to tell your line manager or someone you feel able to talk to at an early stage, so that any necessary support can be put in place. You will not be treated unfavourably because you tell us about a miscarriage.Any information given to line managers and HR is confidential. Colleagues will only be told about the miscarriage if this is what you want. Your line manager will discuss your wishes with you.If you do not want to tell your line manager about your miscarriage, you can access support by approaching either the Occupational Health Unit, the Maternity Support Group or via the signposting sheet.4.5 Telling us about your stillbirthWe encourage you to tell your line manager or someone you can talk to about your stillbirth at an early stage, so that we can provide any necessary support. You will not be treated unfavourably because you tell us about a stillbirth.
Any information given to line managers and HR is confidential. Colleagues will only be told about the stillbirth if this is what you want. Your line manager will discuss your wishes with you.4.6 Time offIndividuals who have had a miscarriage may need time off work to recover from the physical and emotional consequences.Those who have had a stillbirth are likely to require time off to recover from the physical effects of giving birth.In either case, the amount of time off that is needed will vary from individual to individual.Your right to time off and the type of leave that you can take depends on whether you have had a miscarriage or a stillbirth (see Definitions).4.6.1 MiscarriageIf you are unwell and unable to attend work following a miscarriage, we will handle this under our Attendance Management Procedure. You will need to self-certify absences of up to seven days or provide a GP's fit note for longer periods of absence in accordance with the policy.Your certificate or fit note should confirm that the absence is pregnancy-related. Your right to sick pay is also covered by the procedure.You may want to consider taking a period of annual leave if you do not qualify for paid sick leave. You should request this in the usual way. We will consider any request sympathetically. We are also willing to consider requests for periods of unpaid leave. You should discuss this with your line manager.Under our Compassionate Leave Policy, individuals are also entitled to 5 days' paid leave. Further information about how to request compassionate leave is contained in the policy.4.6.2 StillbirthIndividuals who have had a stillbirth can take statutory maternity leave and (if eligible) receive statutory maternity pay. Maternity leave starts on the day after a stillbirth.If you would like to take maternity leave, you should tell us about the stillbirth as soon as possible and provide a copy of your MATB1 certificate if you have not already done so.Individuals can also take up to two weeks' statutory parental bereavement leave after their statutory maternity leave, and (if eligible) receive statutory parental bereavement pay. Further information can be found in section 7 under Parental Bereavement Leave.In addition to statutory parental bereavement leave, you may also be eligible for 5 days' paid leave under our Compassionate Leave Policy.4.7 Practical and emotional supportWe offer a variety of practical and emotional support that may be relevant to those who have had a miscarriage or stillbirth for example via Health Assured, OHU and the Maternity Support Group and our intranet also signposts employees and managers to external sources of help and support, including:ï The Miscarriage Association, which provides support and information to those affected by miscarriage, ectopic pregnancy or molar pregnancy and offers a pregnancy loss helpline;ï Sands, which provides support to anyone who has been affected by stillbirth or neonatal death;ï Tommy's, a charity that carries out research and supports those who have lost babies;ï the Mariposa Trust, a charity that provides support to those affected by baby loss and bereavement;ï 
ï Antenatal Results and Choices (ARC), a charity providing support to those who decide to terminate a pregnancy for medical reasons; andï Mind, which provides support and information to those experiencing mental health issues for any reason.4.8 Returning to workYour line manager or a friend/colleague of your choice will keep in touch with you during any period of leave after a miscarriage or stillbirth to discuss:ï what information, if any, you want to share with colleagues before you return to work and how that information should be provided;ï any additional support you need to return to work, such as a phased return/temporary changes to your duties, hours or location of work/a period of homeworking/additional breaks]; andï any adjustments recommended by a health and safety risk assessment.Your line manager will arrange a meeting with you to discuss these issues before your return to work if you would find that useful.Your line manager will also have regular meetings with you after your return to work so that we can continue to provide adequate support.4.9 Rights of partners and fathers/parentsWe recognise that the loss of a baby is a distressing experience for both parents. Therefore, the individual whose partner has a miscarriage or stillbirth, or the father or parent of the baby who has passed away, may also need support or be eligible for time off.The sources of practical and emotional support listed above are also open to fathers and partners and we encourage employees to access these. The Miscarriage Association has published guidance Partners Too, which they may find helpful. They should discuss any additional support that they need with their line manager.The right to time off for partners and fathers/parents depends on how long the pregnancy lasted.4.9.1 MiscarriageIndividuals can take a reasonable amount of unpaid time off, also known as time off for dependants, to provide assistance if their spouse or civil partner falls ill. You should us the reason for your absence as soon as possible and say how long they expect to be off work. Further details are set out in the Dependents Leave Policy.Under our Compassionate Leave Policy, individuals are also entitled to 5 days' paid leave. Further information about how to request compassionate leave is contained in the policy.4.9.2 StillbirthIndividuals can take a reasonable amount of unpaid time off, also known as time off for dependants, to provide assistance if their spouse or civil partner falls ill. Individuals should tell us the reason for their absence as soon as possible and say how long they expect to be off work. Further details are set out in the Dependents Leave Policy.In addition to unpaid time off, the partner of an employee who has a stillbirth, or the father/parent of the baby who has passed away, may be eligible for:ï either one or two weeks' statutory paternity leave and pay (further information is set out in our Support Leave policy – see section 8)ï 
ï up to two weeks' statutory parental bereavement leave and pay, which can be taken as two separate weeks or a single period of leave (further information is set out in our Parental Bereavement Leave section) and;ï 5 days' paid leave under our Compassionate Leave Policy4.10 The role of colleaguesIf a colleague is experiencing a miscarriage while they are at work, fellow colleagues should respond sympathetically and supportively.Practical steps that you can take include:ï ensuring that they have privacy and access to a toilet;ï providing a wrap or covering if they are bleeding heavily;ï arranging transport home or to a hospital as appropriate (including calling an ambulance if this is necessary and arranging for someone to accompany them);ï calling their partner or a friend to notify them of the situation, if this is what they want; andï reassuring them not to worry about work and that arrangements to cover their work will be made.We recognise that an individual whose partner is having a miscarriage or stillbirth may need to leave work at short notice and arrangements will be made to accommodate this.If a colleague has chosen to share information about a miscarriage or stillbirth, when they return to work employees should offer them sympathy and support and acknowledge their loss.The Miscarriage Association has published Supporting someone you know, which contains guidance on how to talk sensitively about miscarriage in the workplace.
	SECTION 5PARENTAL BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
5.1 Introduction to Parental Bereavement LeaveWe recognise that, while dealing with any bereavement is difficult, the death of a child is among the most devastating events that any parent can ever face.This policy sets out our commitment to supporting bereaved parents through their grief by ensuring they can take parental bereavement leave.The policy applies to any member of Wiltshire Police, both staff and Officers, who suffer the loss of a child/Children under the age of 18 on or after 6 April 2020. This includes parents who suffer a stillbirth after 24 weeks of pregnancy.5.2 Who can take parental bereavement leaveWhatever your length of service, you can take this type of leave if you are the parent of the child/children who have passed away, or if you are the partner of the child/children’s parent. In general, you can take this type of leave if you have parental responsibility for the child. This includes adoptive parents.If you have suffered a bereavement but are unsure if you are entitled to parental bereavement leave, please contact People Services or the HR Advisory Team for clarification.5.3 What leave a bereaved parent can takeYou can take two weeks of parental bereavement leave. You can take the leave as:ï a single block of two weeks; orï two separate blocks of one week at different times.You cannot take the leave as individual days.You can take the leave at the time(s) you choose within the 56 weeks after your bereavement. You might choose, for example, to take it at a particularly difficult time such as your child's birthday.If you have lost more than one child, you have a separate entitlement to bereavement leave for each child who has passed away.5.4 Notice to take parental bereavement leaveIf you need to take parental bereavement leave within the first 56 days after your bereavement, you can take the leave straight away. You do not have to provide any notice. Please let your line manager and People Services know no later than when you are due to start work on the first day on which you wish to take leave or, if that is not feasible, as soon as you can.To take leave more than 56 days after your bereavement, please give your line manager at least one week's notice.5.5 Changing your mind about taking parental bereavement leaveYou can cancel your planned leave and take it at a different time (within the 56 weeks after your bereavement). Where your planned leave was due to begin during the first 56 days after your bereavement, please let [your line manager/the HR department] know you no longer wish to take it before your normal start time on the first day of the planned leave.Where your leave was due to begin more than 56 days after your bereavement, please let [your line manager/the HR department] know at least one week in advance that you wish to cancel it.You cannot cancel any week of parental bereavement leave that has already begun.
5.6 Pay during parental bereavement leaveTo receive statutory parental bereavement pay, you must have:ï at least 26 weeks' continuous employment with us by the week before the one in which your child/children passed away (and still be employed by us on the date of the bereavement); andï normal weekly earnings in the eight weeks up to the week before your bereavement of at least the lower earnings limit for national insurance contribution purposes.If you are unsure if you are entitled to statutory parental bereavement pay, please contact either People Services or Finance, who will be able to advise you.If you qualify for statutory parental bereavement pay, you will be paid during your leave at the rate set by the Government, or at 90% of your average weekly earnings where this figure is lower. If you are not eligible, your leave will be unpaid.You need to give us notice of the weeks for which you wish to claim statutory parental bereavement pay, via a form that People Services will ask you to sign.You must normally sign and return the form to People Services within 28 days of the first day for which you are claiming. However, if that is not possible, please sign and return the form as soon as you can.5.7 Rights during parental bereavement leaveDuring your leave, all the terms and conditions of your contract [except normal pay] will continue. [[Salary/wages] will be replaced by statutory parental bereavement pay if you are eligible for it.]This means that [while sums payable by way of [wages/salary] will cease, all other/all] benefits will remain in place. For example, holiday entitlement continues to accrue. Pension contributions will continue to be paid.5.8 Returning to work after parental bereavement leaveWhen you return to work after some time on parental bereavement leave, you generally have the right to return to the same job.However, a slightly different rule applies if you return from time on bereavement leave that follows on immediately from some maternity, adoption, support leave or shared parental leave (taken in relation to the child who has passed away), and your total time on leave is more than 26 weeks.In these circumstances, you have the right to return to the same job, unless this is not reasonably practical- in which case you have the right to return to a suitable and appropriate job on the same terms and conditions.This rule also applies if your leave includes more than four weeks of ordinary parental leave (taken in relation to any child), regardless of the total length of the leave. (We have a separate policy outlining your right to unpaid ordinary parental leave, see section 6.)If you are taking parental bereavement leave, but are unsure where you stand on your return, please contact PSC@wiltshire.police.uk for clarification.
	SECTION 6ORDINARY PARENTAL LEAVE (OPL)
6.1 Statement of Intent – Aim and RationaleParental Leave enables individuals to take unpaid time off work to look after a child’s welfare, to help them balance family and work commitments and spend more time with your children.The policy applies to police officers, police staff, including staff of the Offices of the Police & Crime Commissioner (OPCC) but does not cover contractors, casual workers, and members of the special constabulary, police staff volunteers or workers employed by an agency.The aim of this policy is:a. To provide staff and officers with the full procedure and details in relation to parental leave provisions in Wiltshire Police.b. To ensure that both staff and officers are aware of and have access to information on all rights associated with parental leave.This policy applies to same sex couples, married and unmarried couples, civil partners and single parents.6.2 Introduction to Ordinary Parental Leave (OPL)Police Officers – You are entitled to take up to 13 weeks’ unpaid parental leave per child if you are the birth or adoptive parent of a child who is under 18 years of age. To qualify for ordinary parental leave, you must have completed at least one year's continuous service with the organisation.Police staff - You are entitled to up to 18 weeks' unpaid parental leave per child if you are the birth or adoptive parent of a child who is under 18 years of age. To qualify for ordinary parental leave, you must have completed at least one year's continuous service with the organisation."Ordinary parental leave" should not be confused with “Shared Parental Leave”. Shared parental leave enables mothers to commit to ending their maternity or adoption leave and pay at a future date, and to share the untaken balance of leave and pay as shared parental leave and pay with their partner, or to return to work early from maternity leave and opt in to shared parental leave and pay at a later date. (This is detailed under Section 25 of this policy document)6.3 RightsDuring ordinary parental leave, pay and most contractual benefits will be suspended, however the right to accrue statutory holiday entitlement will remain in place. Certain other terms of employment will remain in force. During parental leave, you will be entitled to the implied obligation of trust and confidence, and any terms and conditions of employment relating to:ï Notice of terminationï Redundancy compensationï Disciplinary or issue resolution proceduresYou will be bound by the implied obligation of good faith and any terms and conditions of employment relating to:ï Notice of terminationï Disclosure of confidential informationï The acceptance of gifts or other benefitsï Participation in any other business6.4 ConditionsThe organisation has adopted the default scheme for the taking of ordinary parental leave and the following conditions apply:a. You must:ï Have one year continuous service or moreï Be named on the child’s birth or adoption certificate (and be able to supply a copy of thisï 
documentation with the submitted form requesting the required leave)ï Have or expect to have parental responsibility for the childï Be taking the leave for the purposes of caring for the childb. You must give proper notice of the period of leave that you propose to take. This notice must be given to the organisation at least 21 days before the date on which leave is to start and must specify the dates on which the period of leave is to begin and end.c. Where the individual is the second parent of the child in respect of whom the leave is to be taken and he/she requests ordinary parental leave to begin when your child is born, your notice must specify the expected week of childbirth and the duration of the period of leave. The individual must give this notice at least 21 days before the expected week of childbirth.d. Where the ordinary parental leave is in respect of an adopted child and is to begin on the date of the placement, the individual's notice must be given to the organisation at least 21 days before the beginning of the week in which the child is to be placed for adoption, or as soon as is reasonably practicable thereafter. It must specify the week in which the placement is expected to occur and the duration of the period of ordinary parental leave requested.e. Staff members have up to 18 weeks they can take during the 18 year period. They may not however, take more than four weeks' leave in respect of any individual child in anyone year. For these purposes a year is the period of 12 months beginning when the individual first becomes entitled to ordinary parental leave in respect of the child in question, and each successive period of 12 months beginning on the anniversary of that date.In addition, in the case of Police staff, this annual allowance must also be taken in blocks of no less than a week (except in relation to a child who is disabled). A week is based on an individual’s normal working pattern.f. Police Officer have up to 13 weeks they can take during the 18 year period. There is however, no limit for Police Officers on the amount of time which can be taken in a 12 month rolling period and this leave can also be taken in either day or week blocks.6.5 Postponement of Parental LeaveParental leave requests immediately after the birth or adoption of a child will be approved where the correct notice has been given.With the exception of leave requests immediately after the birth or adoption of a child, the organisation can postpone parental leave requests for up to six months if it is felt that the leave may disrupt the business. Reasonable grounds could include:The period that you apply for is at a seasonal or operational peak in demand if a significant proportion of the workforce has applied for leave or would be absent at the same time if your role is such that your absence at a particular time would unduly harm the organisation’s ability to provide an effective 24/7 service to the public.In such a case, the organisation will allow you to take an equivalent period of ordinary parental leave beginning no later than six months after the commencement of the period originally requested. The organisation will give notice in writing of the postponement stating the reason for it and specifying suggested dates for you to take parental leave. Such notice will be given no more than seven days after your notice was given to the organisation.
	SECTION 7SHARED PARENTAL LEAVE (SPL)
7.1 Introduction to Shared Parental Leave (SPL)Shared parental leave enables mothers to commit to ending their maternity leave and pay at a future date, and to share the untaken balance of leave and pay as shared parental leave and pay with their partner, or to return to work early from maternity leave and opt in to shared parental leave and pay at a later date. (The organisation provides a separate policy on shared parental leave for individuals who are adopting or are intended parents in a surrogacy arrangement – see section 36).The policy applies to police officers, police staff, including staff of the Offices of the Police & Crime Commissioner (OPCC) but does not cover contractors, casual workers, and members of the special constabulary, police staff volunteers or workers employed by an agency.This policy applies to same sex couples, married and unmarried couples, civil partners and single parents.The aim of this policy is:a. To provide staff and officers with the full procedure and details in relation to shared parental leave provisions in Wiltshire Police.b. To ensure that both staff and officers are aware of and have access to information on all rights associated with shared parental leave.c. Wiltshire Police recognise that you may have questions or concerns relating to your shared parental leave rights. It is the organisation's policy to encourage open discussion with you to ensure that questions and problems can be resolved as quickly as possible. As the shared parental leave provisions are complex, if you wish to take shared parental leave, you can seek advice and guidance from: People Services, the HR advisory team, Unison or the Police Federation should you be members.Shared parental leave should not be confused with ordinary parental leave, which is unaffected by shared parental leave. Ordinary parental leave is the entitlement to up to 18 weeks' unpaid leave.7.2 Definitions"Mother" means the mother or expectant mother of the child."Partner" means the father of the child, or the person who, at the date of the child's birth, is married to, the civil partner of, or the partner of the mother. This includes someone, of whatever sex, who lives with the mother and the child in an enduring family relationship but who is not the mother's child, parent, grandchild, grandparent, sibling, aunt, uncle, niece or nephew."Expected week of childbirth" means the week, starting on a Sunday, during which the mother's doctor or midwife expects them to give birth.7.3 EntitlementsShared parental leave must be taken in blocks of at least one week. The individual can request to take shared parental leave in one continuous block (as long as you meet the eligibility and notice requirements), or as a number of discontinuous blocks of leave (only with the organisation's agreement). A maximum of three requests for leave per pregnancy can normally be made by each parent.The amount of shared parental leave to which an individual is entitled will depend on when the maternity leave period was brought to an end and the amount of leave that the other parent takes in respect of the child.There is no limit for Police Officers on the amount of time which can be taken in a 12 month rolling period.
The first two weeks following birth are the compulsory maternity leave period and are reserved for the mother. This means that the mother cannot curtail her maternity leave to take shared parental leave until two weeks after the birth and the maximum period that the parents could take as shared parental leave is 50 weeks between them. (dependent on how much maternity leave the mother took before the birth).However, the mother's partner can begin a period of shared parental leave at any time from the date of the child's birth (the partner should bear in mind that he/she is entitled to take up to two weeks' ordinary paternity leave following the birth of his/her child, which he/she will lose if shared parental leave is taken first). The mother and partner must take any shared parental leave within 52 weeks of birth.7.4 EligibilityFor individuals to be eligible to take shared parental leave, both parents must meet certain eligibility requirements.Mother's eligibility for shared parental leaveThe mother is eligible for shared parental leave if she:ï has at least 26 weeks' continuous employment ending with the 15th week before the expected week of childbirth and remains in continuous employment with the organisation until the week before any period of shared parental leave that she takes;ï has, at the date of the child's birth, the main responsibility, apart from the partner, for the care of the child;ï is entitled to statutory maternity leave in respect of the child; andï complies with the relevant maternity leave curtailment requirements (or has returned to work before the end of statutory maternity leave), and shared parental leave notice and evidence requirements.ï In addition, for the mother to be eligible for shared parental leave, the partner must:ï have been employed or been a self-employed earner in at least 26 of the 66 weeks immediately preceding the expected week of childbirth;ï have average weekly earnings of at least the maternity allowance threshold (currently £30) for any 13 of those 66 weeks; andï have, at the date of the child's birth, the main responsibility, apart from the mother, for the care of the child.Partner's eligibility for shared parental leaveThe partner is eligible for shared parental leave if he/she:ï has at least 26 weeks' continuous employment ending with the 15th week before the expected week of childbirth and remains in continuous employment with the organisation until the week before any period of shared parental leave that he/she takes;ï has, at the date of the child's birth, the main responsibility, apart from the mother, for the care of the child; andï complies with the relevant shared parental leave notice and evidence requirements.ï In addition, for the partner to be eligible for shared parental leave, the mother must:ï have been employed or been a self-employed earner during at least 26 of the 66 weeks immediately preceding the expected week of childbirth;ï have average weekly earnings of at least the maternity allowance threshold (currently £30) for any 13 of those 66 weeks;ï have, at the date of the child's birth, the main responsibility, apart from the partner, for the care of the child;ï be entitled to statutory maternity leave, statutory maternity pay or maternity allowance in respect of the child; and comply with the relevant maternity leave or pay curtailment requirements (or have returned to work before the end of statutory maternity leave).ï 
7.5 NoticeThe notices that you and your partner must give to both of your employers to be able to take shared parental leave are made up of three elements. They are:ï a "maternity leave curtailment notice FORM SPL-A" from the mother setting out when she proposes to end her maternity leave (unless the mother has already returned to work from maternity leave);ï a "notice of entitlement and intention FORM SPL-B or FORM SPL-C" from the individual giving an initial, non-binding indication of each period of shared parental leave that he/she is requesting; andï a "period of leave notice FORM SPL-D" from the individual setting out the start and end dates of each period of shared parental leave that he/she is requesting.The notice periods set out below are the minimum required by law. However, the earlier you inform your Line Manager of your intentions, the more likely it is that the organisation will be able to accommodate your wishes, particularly if you want to take periods of discontinuous leave.You can also provide more than one type of notice at the same time. For example, the mother could provide a maternity leave curtailment notice, notice of entitlement and intention and period of leave notice at the same time. Similarly, the partner could provide his/her notice of entitlement and intention and period of leave notice at the same time.7.6 Mother's notice curtailing maternity leaveBefore you as the mother or partner can take shared parental leave, the mother must either return to work before the end of her maternity leave (by giving the required eight weeks' notice of her planned return) or provide her employer with a maternity leave curtailment notice. The maternity leave curtailment notice FORM SPL-A must be in writing and state the date on which maternity leave is to end. That date must be:ï after the compulsory maternity leave period, which is the two weeks after birth;ï at least eight weeks after the date on which the mother gave the maternity leave curtailment notice to her employer; andï at least one week before what would be the end of the additional maternity leave period.The mother must provide her maternity leave curtailment notice FORM SPL-A at the same time she provides either her notice of entitlement FORM SPL-B and intention or a declaration of consent and entitlement signed by the mother confirming that her partner has given his/her employer a notice of entitlement and intention.7.7 Revocation of maternity leave curtailment noticeThe mother can withdraw her notice curtailing her maternity leave in limited circumstances. The withdrawal of a maternity leave curtailment notice must be in writing and can be given only if the mother has not returned to work. The mother can withdraw her maternity leave curtailment notice if:ï it is discovered that neither the mother nor the partner are entitled to shared parental leave or statutory shared parental pay and the mother withdraws her maternity leave curtailment notice within eight weeks of the date on which the notice was given;ï the maternity leave curtailment notice was given before the birth of the child and the mother withdraws her maternity leave curtailment notice within six weeks of the child's birth; orï the partner has died.7.8 Individual's notice of entitlement and intentionWhether you are the mother or the partner, you must provide Wiltshire Police with a non-binding notice of entitlement and intention. The notice of entitlement and intention FORM SPL-B or FORM SPL-C, which must be in writing and provided at least eight weeks before the start date of the first period of shared parental leave to be taken by the individual, must set out the following information.
If you the mother, the notice of entitlement and intention must set out:ï the mother's name;ï the partner's name;ï the start and end dates of any statutory maternity leave taken or to be taken by the mother;ï the total amount of shared parental leave available;ï the child's expected week of birth and the child's date of birth (although, if the child has not yet been born, the date of birth can be provided as soon as reasonably practicable after birth, and before the first period of shared parental leave to be taken by the mother);ï how much shared parental leave the mother and partner each intend to take; andï a non-binding indication as to when the individual intends to take shared parental leave (including the start and end dates for each period of leave).Your notice of entitlement and intention must include a declaration signed by her that:ï she satisfies, or will satisfy, the eligibility requirements to take shared parental leave;ï the information she gives in the notice of entitlement and intention is accurate; andï she will immediately inform the organisation if she ceases to care for the child.In addition, your notice of entitlement and intention must include a declaration signed by your partner:ï specifying the partner's name, address, and national insurance number;ï declaring that the partner satisfies, or will satisfy, the conditions set out above (see Mother's  eligibility for shared parental leave);ï declaring that the partner is the father of the child, or is married to, the civil partner of, or the partner of, the mother;ï declaring that the partner consents to the amount of leave that the mother intends to take; andï declaring that the partner consents to the mother's employer processing the information in the partner's declaration.If you are the partner, your notice of entitlement and intention must set out:ï the partner's name;ï the mother's name;ï the start and end dates of any periods of statutory maternity leave, statutory maternity pay or maternity allowance taken or to be taken by the mother;ï the total amount of shared parental leave available;ï the child's expected week of birth and the child's date of birth (although, if the child has not yet been born, the date of birth can be provided as soon as reasonably practicable after birth, and before the first period of shared parental leave to be taken by the partner);ï how much shared parental leave the partner and mother each intend to take; andï a non-binding indication as to when the partner intends to take shared parental leave (including the start and end dates for each period of leave).Your notice of entitlement and intention must include a declaration signed by your partner that:ï he/she satisfies, or will satisfy, the eligibility requirements to take shared parental leave;ï the information given by the partner in the notice of entitlement and intention is accurate; andï he/she will immediately inform the organisation if he/she ceases to care for the child or if the mother informs him/her that she no longer meets the requirement to have curtailed her maternity leave or pay period.In addition, your partner's notice of entitlement and intention must include a declaration signed by the you:ï specifying the mother's name, address, and national insurance number (or declaring that the mother does not have a national insurance number);ï declaring that the mother satisfies, or will satisfy, the conditions set out above (see Partner's eligibility for shared parental leave) and she will notify the partner if she no longer qualifies for maternity leave, statutory maternity pay or maternity allowance;ï declaring that the mother consents to the amount of leave that the partner intends to take;ï 
ï declaring that she will immediately inform the individual if she no longer meets the requirement to have curtailed her maternity leave or pay period; andï declaring that the mother consents to the partner's employer processing the information in the mother's declaration.Within 14 days of receiving a notice of entitlement and intention from you, whether the mother or partner, the organisation can request from you or your partner:ï a copy of the child's birth certificate (or, if the child has not been born, a copy of the birth certificate within 14 days of the birth - if the birth certificate has yet to be issued after this period, a signed declaration stating the date and location of the child's birth will suffice); andï the name and address of the other parent's employer (or a declaration that the other parent has no employer).You have 14 days from the date of the request to send the organisation the required information.7.9 Variation or cancellation of notice of entitlement and intentionYou can vary or cancel your proposed shared parental leave dates following the submission of a notice of entitlement and intention, provided that you provide the organisation with a written notice. The written notice must contain:ï an indication as to when you intend to take shared parental leave (including the start and end dates for each period of leave);ï details of any periods of shared parental leave that have been notified through a period of leave notice;ï details of any periods of statutory shared parental pay that have been notified in relation to periods where shared parental leave was not to be taken; andï a declaration signed by both you and your partner that you agree to the variation.Any indication of leave intended to be taken that you provide in a variation of notice of entitlement and intention, is non-binding until you provide a period of leave notice in relation to that period of leave. There is no limit on the number of variations of notice of entitlement and intention that you can make.7.10 Individual's period of leave noticeTo take a period of shared parental leave, you must provide the organisation with a written notice setting out the start and end dates of each period of shared parental leave requested in that notice.A period of leave notice must be given not less than eight weeks before the start date of the first period of shared parental leave requested in the notice. The notice may be given at the same time as a notice of entitlement and intention and can be a request for a continuous period of leave or discontinuous periods of leave.7.11 Variation or cancellation of period of leave noticeYou can vary or cancel your proposed shared parental leave dates following the submission of a period of leave notice, provided that you provide Wiltshire Police and your partners employer if different, with a written notice not less than eight weeks before any period of leave varied or cancelled by the notice is due to commence. The written notice can:ï vary the start date or the end date of any period of shared parental leave or cancel a request for leave;ï request that a continuous period of leave become discontinuous periods of leave; orï request that discontinuous periods of leave become a continuous period of leave.7.12 Limit on number of requests for leaveYou can provide a combined total of up to three periods of leave notices or variations of period of leave notices per pregnancy, although the organisation may waive this limit in some circumstances.
7.13 Continuous period of shared parental leaveIf you submit a period of leave notice requesting one continuous period of leave, you will be entitled to take that period of leave.7.14 Discontinuous periods of shared parental leaveYou may submit a period of leave notice requesting discontinuous periods of leave.For example, you could both request a pattern of leave from your respective employers that allows them to alternate childcare responsibilities.If you submit a period of leave notice requesting discontinuous periods of leave, the organisation, in the two weeks beginning with the date the period of leave notice was given, can:ï consent to the pattern of leave requested;ï propose an alternative pattern of leave; orï refuse the pattern of leave requested.If agreement is reached within those two weeks, you are entitled to take the leave on the dates agreed.If no agreement has been reached within that two-week discussion period, you are entitled to take the leave as one continuous period of leave. In that event, you must choose a start date for the leave that is at least eight weeks from the date on which the period of leave notice was originally given. You must notify the organisation of that date within five days of the end of the two-week discussion period. If you do not choose a start date within five days of the end of the two-week discussion period, the period of continuous leave will start on the date of the first period of leave requested in the period of leave notice.Alternatively, if your request is refused or no agreement has been reached during the two-week discussion period, you may withdraw a period of leave notice requesting discontinuous periods of leave. You can withdraw a period of leave notice at any time on or before the 15th day after the period of leave notice was given. A notice for discontinuous leave that has been withdrawn before it is agreed does not count towards the total number of requests for leave that an individual can make.7.15 Amount of shared parental pay availableWiltshire Police are offering both occupational and statutory shared parental pay for eligible parents to share between them while on shared parental leave. The number of weeks' pay available to the parents will depend on how much maternity pay or maternity allowance the mother has been paid when her maternity leave or pay period ends.A total of 39 weeks' statutory maternity pay or maternity allowance is available.As there is a compulsory maternity leave period of two weeks, this means that a mother who ends her maternity leave at the earliest opportunity could share up to 37 weeks' statutory shared parental pay with her partner and 16 weeks’ occupational pay (although this will depend on how much maternity leave the mother had taken before the birth).Any statutory shared parental pay due during shared parental leave will be paid at a rate set by the Government for the relevant tax year, or at 90% of the individual's average weekly earnings, if this figure is lower than the Government's set weekly rate.It is up to the parents as to who is paid the shared parental pay and how it is apportioned between them.For you to be eligible for statutory shared parental pay, both of you must meet certain eligibility requirements.
7.16 Mother's eligibility for statutory shared parental payAs the mother, you are eligible for statutory shared parental pay if you:ï have at least 26 weeks' continuous employment ending with the 15th week before the expected week of childbirth and remains in continuous employment with Wiltshire Police until the week before any period of shared parental pay that you get;ï have normal weekly earnings for a period of eight weeks ending with the 15th week before the expected week of childbirth of at least the lower earnings limit for national insurance contribution purposes;ï have, at the date of the child's birth, the main responsibility, apart from your partner, for the care of the child;ï are absent from work and intends to care for the child during each week in which you receive statutory shared parental pay; andï are entitled to statutory maternity pay in respect of the child, but the maternity pay period has been reduced.In addition, for you to be eligible for statutory shared parental pay, your partner must:ï have been employed or been a self-employed earner during at least 26 of the 66 weeks immediately preceding the expected week of childbirth;ï have, at the date of the child's birth, the main responsibility, apart from you as the mother, for the care of the child; andï have average weekly earnings of at least the maternity allowance threshold for any 13 of those 66 weeks.7.17 Partner's eligibility for statutory shared parental payAs the partner, you are eligible for statutory shared parental pay if you:ï have at least 26 weeks' continuous employment ending with the 15th week before the expected week of childbirth and remains in continuous employment Wiltshire Police until the week before any period of shared parental pay that you get;ï have normal weekly earnings for eight weeks ending with the 15th week before the expected week of childbirth of at least the lower earnings limit for national insurance contribution purposes;ï have, at the date of the child's birth, the main responsibility, apart from the mother, for the care of the child; andï are absent from work and intend to care for the child during each week in which you receive statutory shared parental pay.In addition, for the partner to be eligible, the mother must:ï have been employed or been a self-employed earner during at least 26 of the 66 weeks immediately preceding the expected week of childbirth;ï have average weekly earnings of at least the maternity allowance threshold [currently £30] for any 13 of those 66 weeks;ï have, at the date of the child's birth, the main responsibility, apart from the partner, for the care of the child; andï be entitled to statutory maternity pay or maternity allowance in respect of the child, but the maternity pay period or maternity allowance period has been reduced.7.18 Rights during Shared Parental LeaveDuring shared parental leave, all terms and conditions of your contract except normal pay will continue. Salary will be replaced by statutory shared parental pay or pay under Wiltshire Police’s enhanced shared parental pay scheme (if you are eligible for it).Whilst salary will cease, other benefits will remain in place. For example, holiday entitlement will continue to accrue.
7.19 Maintaining ContactWiltshire Police reserves the right to maintain reasonable contact with you during shared parental leave. This may be to discuss your plans for your return to work, to discuss any special arrangements to be made or training to be given to ease your return to work or to update them on developments at work during your absence.You can agree to work (or to attend training) for up to 20 days during shared parental leave without that work bringing the period of your shared parental leave and pay to an end. These days, which are known as "shared-parental-leave-in-touch" (SPLIT) days, are in addition to the 10 keeping-in-touch days available to an employee during maternity or adoption leave.Wiltshire Police has no right to require you to carry out any work and you have no right to undertake any work during your shared parental leave. Any work undertaken, and the amount of salary paid for any work done on SPLIT days, is entirely a matter of agreement between you and your line manager.SPLIT days are optional, but these are a really good opportunity for you to:ï Meet with your line manager to discuss any key team, functional, organisational changes including how these may affect youï Join any team meetings to keep in touch with colleagues, meet new onesï Discuss any potential flexible working arrangements you would like him/her to consider prior to your return to work.ï Assess any training required prior to your returnï Discuss what a transition back to work will look likeï Sort any equipment/uniform requirements in good time for returnAny work carried out on a day constitutes one day's work. Accordingly, if you were to attend for example a one-hour training course, this will count as one of the 20 days available.Individuals cannot insist on being able to carry out work during shared parental leave. Similarly, the organisation cannot require you to carry out work during shared parental leave.SPLIT days worked do not extend the total duration of any period of shared parental leave.Reasonable contact between an individual and their employer during a period of shared parental leave does not count as work during a period of shared parental leave.You will continue to receive pay under the enhanced shared parental pay scheme for any week during which you attend work for SPLIT days. You will also receive an additional payment for each hour that you work during a SPLIT day at your usual hourly rate.If you are only entitled to receive statutory shared parental pay for any week during which you attend work for SPLIT days, you will still receive this in the usual way. In addition, we will also pay you for each hour that you work during a SPLIT day at your usual hourly rate.You can claim payment for SPLIT days by completing FORM SPL-H and submitting it to the Payroll Helpdesk.7.20 Returning to WorkYou have the right to resume working in the same job when returning to work from shared parental leave if the period of leave, when added to any other period of shared parental leave, statutory maternity leave or statutory paternity leave taken by you in relation to the same child, is 26 weeks or less.If you are returning to work from shared parental leave and the period of leave taken is more than 26 weeks, when added to any other period of shared parental leave, statutory maternity or paternity leave taken in relation to the same child, or was the last of two or more consecutive periods of statutory leave that included a period of ordinary parental leave of more than four weeks, or a period of additional maternity leave, you have the right to return to the same job unless this is not reasonably practicable. In these circumstances, if it is not reasonably practicable for the organisation to permit a return to the same job, you have the right to return to another job that is suitable and appropriate.
Shared Parental Leave as a result of adoption (including via surrogacyagreement)This policy sets out the rights of individuals adopting a child to shared parental leave and pay. Shared parental leave enables adopters to commit to ending their adoption leave and pay at a future date and to share the untaken balance of leave and pay as shared parental leave and pay between partners, or to return to work early from adoption leave and opt in to shared parental leave and pay at a later date.Shared parental leave should not be confused with ordinary parental leave, which is unaffected by shared parental leave. Ordinary parental leave is the entitlement to up to 18 weeks' unpaid leave. See section 19 for Ordinary Parental Leave)The organisation recognises that you may have questions or concerns relating to your shared parental leave rights. It is the organisation's policy to encourage open discussion with you to ensure that questions and problems can be resolved as quickly as possible. As the shared parental leave provisions are complex, if you wish to take shared pare6ntal leave, you should clarify the relevant procedures with the People Services or the HR Advisory team to ensure that you are followed correctly.This policy applies to same sex couples, married and unmarried couples, civil partners and single parents.7.21 Definitions"Adopter" means the person with whom the child is, or is expected to be, placed for adoption, or, in a case where two people have been matched jointly, whoever has elected to be the child's adopter for the purposes of adoption leave."Partner" means the person who is married to, or the civil partner or the partner of, the adopter at the date on which the child is placed for adoption (for adoptions from overseas, at the date on which the child enters Great Britain). This includes someone, of whatever sex, who lives with the adopter and the child in an enduring family relationship but who is not the adopter's child, parent, grandchild, grandparent, sibling, aunt, uncle, niece or nephew."Matched for adoption" means an adoption agency deciding that a person would be a suitable adoptive parent for a child either individually or jointly with another person. A person is notified of having been "matched for adoption" with a child on the date on which the person receives notification of the adoption agency's decision."Placed for adoption" means placed for adoption under UK adoption laws, including placement with a local authority foster parent who is also a prospective adopter ("foster to adopt")."Official notification" means written notification, issued by or on behalf of the relevant central authority, that it is prepared to issue a certificate to the overseas authority concerned with the adoption of a child from overseas, or that it has issued a certificate and sent it to that authority, confirming, in either case, that the adopter is eligible to adopt, and has been assessed and approved as being a suitable adoptive parent.7.22 Scope of PolicyThis policy applies in relation to individuals of the organisation, whether you are the adopter or the partner. If it is the adopter who is employed by the organisation, your partner must (where relevant) submit any notifications to take shared parental leave set out in this policy to their own employer, which may have its own shared parental leave policy in place if you want to take a period of shared parental leave.Similarly, if it is the partner who is employed by the organisation, the adopter must (where relevant) submit any notifications to their own employer.You should both ensure that you are each liaising with your own employer to ensure that requests for shared parental leave are handled as smoothly as possible.
7.23 Leave EntitlementThe amount of shared parental leave to which you are entitled will depend on when the adoption leave period is brought to an end and the amount of leave that the other adoptive parent takes in respect of the child. The same rules apply for when and how you may take this leave as explained in Section 40 of this policy document.A maximum of three requests for leave per adoption placement (regardless of the number of children who are placed as part of that placement) can normally be made by each adoptive parent.You can begin a period of shared parental leave at any time from the date on which the child is placed for adoption (for adoptions from overseas, at any time from the date on which the child enters Great Britain) or, where more than one child is placed for adoption through a single placement, the date of placement of the first child (for adoptions from overseas, at any time from the date on which the first child enters Great Britain). However, you should bear in mind that your partner will lose their entitlement to take up to two weeks' paternity leave following the adoption of your child if shared parental leave is taken first.The individual must take any shared parental leave within 52 weeks of the date on which the child is placed for adoption (for adoptions from overseas, within 52 weeks of the date on which the child enters Great Britain).7.24 EligibilityFor you to be eligible to take shared parental leave, both you and your partner must meet certain eligibility requirements.7.24.1 Adopter's eligibility for shared parental leaveThe adopter is eligible for shared parental leave if you:ï have at least 26 weeks' continuous employment by the end of the week in which the adopter is notified of having been matched for adoption with the child (or by the end of the week in which you receive official notification in relation to an adoption from overseas) and remain in continuous employment with the organisation until the week before any period of shared parental leave that you take;ï have, at the date on which the child is placed for adoption (or enters Great Britain if the child is being adopted from overseas), the main responsibility, apart from the partner, for the care of the child;ï are entitled to statutory adoption leave in respect of the child; andï comply with the relevant adoption leave curtailment requirements (or have returned to work before the end of statutory adoption leave), and shared parental leave notice and evidence requirements.In addition, for the adopter to be eligible for shared parental leave, the partner must:ï have been employed or been a self-employed earner in at least 26 of the 66 weeks immediately preceding the week in which the adopter is notified of having been matched for adoption with the child (or the week in which the child enters Great Britain in relation to an adoption from overseas);ï have average weekly earnings of at least the maternity allowance threshold [currently £30] for any 13 of those 66 weeks; andï have, at the date on which the child is placed for adoption (or enters Great Britain if the child is being adopted from overseas), the main responsibility, apart from the adopter, for the care of the child.7.24.2 Partner's eligibility for shared parental leaveThe partner is eligible for shared parental leave if you:ï have at least 26 weeks' continuous employment by the end of the week in which the adopter is notified of having been matched for adoption with the child (or by the end of the week in whichï 
you receive official notification in relation to an adoption from overseas) and remain in continuous employment with the organisation until the week before any period of shared parental leave that you take;ï has, at the date on which the child is placed for adoption (or enters Great Britain if the child is being adopted from overseas), the main responsibility, apart from the adopter, for the care of the child; andï complies with the relevant shared parental leave notice and evidence requirements.In addition, for the partner to be eligible for shared parental leave, the adopter must:ï have been employed or been a self-employed earner during at least 26 of the 66 weeks immediately preceding the week in which the adopter is notified of having been matched for adoption with the child (or the week in which the child enters Great Britain in relation to an adoption from overseas);ï have average weekly earnings of at least the maternity allowance threshold [currently £30] for any 13 of those 66 weeks;ï have, at the date on which the child is placed for adoption (or enters Great Britain if the child is being adopted from overseas), the main responsibility, apart from the partner, for the care of the child;ï be entitled to statutory adoption leave or statutory adoption pay in respect of the child; andï comply with the relevant adoption leave or pay curtailment requirements, or have returned to work before the end of statutory adoption leave.7.25 Notice RequirementsThe notices that both of you must give to your employers in order to be able to take shared parental leave are made up of three elements. They are:ï an "adoption leave curtailment notice" from the adopter setting out when you propose to end your adoption leave (unless the adopter has already returned to work from adoption leave);ï a "notice of entitlement and intention" from the individual giving an initial, non-binding indication of each period of shared parental leave that you are requesting; andï a "period of leave notice" from the individual setting out the start and end dates of each period of shared parental leave that you are requesting.The notice periods set out below are the minimum required by law. However, the earlier you inform the organisation of your intentions, the more likely it is that we will be able to accommodate your wishes, particularly if you want to take periods of discontinuous leave.You are advised that, if you have already decided the pattern of shared parental leave you would like to take, you can provide more than one type of notice at the same time. For example, the adopter could provide an adoption leave curtailment notice, notice of entitlement and intention and period of leave notice at the same time. Similarly, the partner could provide your notice of entitlement and intention and period of leave notice at the same time.7.26 Adopter's notice curtailing adoption leaveBefore the either of you can take shared parental leave, the adopter must either return to work before the end of their adoption leave (by giving the required eight weeks' notice of your planned return) or provide their employer with an adoption leave curtailment notice. The adoption leave curtailment notice must be in writing and state the date on which adoption leave is to end. That date must be at least:ï two weeks after the first day of the adopter's ordinary adoption leave period;ï eight weeks after the date on which the adopter gave the adoption leave curtailment notice to your employer; andï one week before what would be the end of the additional adoption leave period.The adopter must provide their adoption leave curtailment notice at the same time they provide either their notice of entitlement and intention or a declaration of consent and entitlement signed by the adopter confirming that their partner has given Wiltshire Police a notice of entitlement and intention.
7.27 Revocation of adoption leave curtailment noticeThe adopter can withdraw their notice curtailing their adoption leave in limited circumstances. The withdrawal of an adoption leave curtailment notice must be in writing and can be given only if the adopter has not returned to work. The adopter can withdraw their adoption leave curtailment notice if:ï it is discovered that neither the adopter nor the partner are entitled to shared parental leave or statutory shared parental pay and the adopter withdraws your adoption leave curtailment notice within eight weeks of the date on which the notice was given; orï the partner has died.7.28 Individual's notice of entitlement and intentionYou, whether the adopter or the partner, must provide the organisation with a non-binding notice of entitlement and intention. Your notice of entitlement and intention, which must be in writing and provided at least eight weeks before the start date of the first period of shared parental leave to be taken by you, must set out the following information.If you are the adopter, the notice of entitlement and intention must set out:ï the adopter's name;ï the partner's name;ï the start and end dates of any statutory adoption leave taken or to be taken by the adopter;ï the total amount of shared parental leave available;ï the date on which the adopter was notified of having been matched for adoption with the child (or receives official notification in relation to an adoption from overseas);ï the date on which the child is expected to be placed for adoption with the adopter and the date of the placement, or the date on which the child is expected to enter Great Britain in relation to an adoption from overseas (although, if the child has not yet been placed for adoption or entered Great Britain, the date of placement for adoption or entry into Great Britain must be provided as soon as reasonably practicable after the placement or entry, and before the first period of shared parental leave to be taken by the adopter);ï how much shared parental leave the adopter and partner each intend to take; andï a non-binding indication as to when the individual intends to take shared parental leave (including the start and end dates for each period of leave).The adopter's notice of entitlement and intention must include a declaration signed by them that:ï you satisfy, or will satisfy, the eligibility requirements to take shared parental leave;ï the information you give in the notice of entitlement and intention is accurate; andï you will immediately inform the organisation if you cease to care for the child.In addition, the adopter's notice of entitlement and intention must include a declaration signed by their partner:ï specifying the partner's name, address, and national insurance number (or declaring that the partner does not have a national insurance number);ï declaring that the partner satisfies, or will satisfy, the conditions set out above (see Adopter's eligibility for shared parental leave);ï declaring that the partner is married to, the civil partner of, or the partner of, the adopter;ï declaring that the partner consents to the amount of leave that the adopter intends to take; andï declaring that the partner consents to the adopter's employer processing the information in the partner's declaration.If you are the partner, your notice of entitlement and intention must set out:ï the partner's name;ï the adopter's name;ï the start and end dates of any periods of statutory adoption leave or statutory adoption pay taken or to be taken by the adopter;ï the total amount of shared parental leave available;ï 
ï the date on which the adopter was notified of having been matched for adoption with the child (or receives official notification in relation to an adoption from overseas);ï where statutory adoption leave was not taken, or is not to be taken, the start and end dates of any period in which statutory adoption pay is paid or payable;ï the date on which the child is expected to be placed for adoption with the adopter and the date of the placement, or the date on which the child is expected to enter Great Britain in relation to an adoption from overseas (although, if the child has not yet been placed for adoption or entered Great Britain, the date of placement for adoption or entry into Great Britain must be provided as soon as reasonably practicable after the placement or entry, and before the first period of shared parental leave to be taken by the adopter);ï how much shared parental leave the partner and adopter each intend to take; andï a non-binding indication as to when the partner intends to take shared parental leave (including the start and end dates for each period of leave).Your notice of entitlement and intention must include a declaration signed by you that:ï you satisfy, or will satisfy, the eligibility requirements to take shared parental leave;ï the information given by the partner in the notice of entitlement and intention is accurate;ï you are married to, or the civil partner or the partner of the adopter; andï you will immediately inform the organisation if you cease to care for the child or if the adopter informs them that you no longer meet the requirement to have curtailed your adoption leave or pay period.In addition, the partner's notice of entitlement and intention must include a declaration signed by the adopter:ï specifying the adopter's name, address, and national insurance number (or declaring that the adopter does not have a national insurance number);ï declaring that the adopter satisfies, or will satisfy, the conditions set out aboveï declaring that the adopter consents to the amount of leave that the partner intends to take;ï declaring that you will immediately inform the individual if you no longer meet the requirement to have curtailed your adoption leave or pay period; andï declaring that the adopter consents to the partner's employer processing the information in the adopter's declaration.Within 14 days of receiving a notice of entitlement and intention from you, whether the adopter or partner, the organisation can request from you:ï in relation to adoptions within the UK, documentary evidence from the adoption agency of:o the name and address of the adoption agency;o the date on which the adopter was notified of having been matched for adoption with the child; ando the date on which the adoption agency expects the child to be placed for adoption with the adopter; andï in relation to adoptions from overseas, a copy of the official notification; andï whether a UK or overseas adoption, the name and address of the other adoptive parent's employer (or a declaration that the other adoptive parent has no employer).You have 14 days from the date of the request to send the organisation the required information.7.29 Variation or cancellation of notice of entitlement and intentionYou can vary or cancel your proposed shared parental leave dates following the submission of a notice of entitlement and intention, provided that you provide the organisation with a written notice. The written notice must contain:ï an indication as to when you intend to take shared parental leave (including the start and end dates for each period of leave);ï details of any periods of shared parental leave that have been notified through a period of leave notice;ï 
ï details of any periods of statutory shared parental pay that have been notified in relation to periods where shared parental leave was not to be taken; andï a declaration signed by the adopter and the partner that you agree the variation.Any indication of leave intended to be taken that you provide in a variation of notice of entitlement and intention is non-binding until you provide a period of leave notice in relation to that period of leave. There is no limit on the number of variations of notice of entitlement and intention that the individual can make.7.30 Individual's period of leave noticeTo take a period of shared parental leave, you must provide the organisation with a written notice setting out the start and end dates of each period of shared parental leave requested in that notice.A period of leave notice must be given not less than eight weeks before the start date of the first period of shared parental leave requested in the notice. The notice may be given at the same time as a notice of entitlement and intention and can be a request for a continuous period of leave or discontinuous periods of leave.7.31 Variation or cancellation of period of leave noticeYou can vary or cancel your proposed shared parental leave dates following the submission of a period of leave notice, provided that you provide Wiltshire Police with a written notice not less than eight weeks before any period of leave varied by the notice is due to commence. The written notice can:ï vary the start date or the end date of any period of shared parental leave or cancel a request for leave;ï request that a continuous period of leave become discontinuous periods of leave; orï request that discontinuous periods of leave become a continuous period of leave.7.32 Limit on number of requests for leaveYou can provide a combined total of up to three period of leave notices or variations of period of leave notices per adoption, although the organisation may waive this limit in some circumstances.7.33 Continuous period of shared parental leaveIf you submit a period of leave notice requesting one continuous period of leave, you will be entitled to take that period of leave.7.34 Discontinuous periods of shared parental leaveYou may submit a period of leave notice requesting discontinuous periods of leave. For example, both you and your partner could request a pattern of leave from your respective employers that allows you to alternate childcare responsibilities.If you submit a period of leave notice requesting discontinuous periods of leave, the organisation, in the two weeks beginning with the date the period of leave notice was given, can:ï consent to the pattern of leave requested;ï propose an alternative pattern of leave; orï refuse the pattern of leave requested.If agreement is reached within those two weeks, you are entitled to take the leave on the dates agreed.If no agreement has been reached within that two-week discussion period, you are entitled to take the leave as one continuous period of leave. In that event, you must choose a start date for the leave that is at least eight weeks from the date on which the period of leave notice was originally given. You must notify the organisation of that date within five days of the end of the two-week discussion period. If you do not choose a start date within five days of the end of the two-week discussion period, the period of continuous leave will start on the date of the first period of leave requested in the period of leave notice.
Alternatively, if the organisation has refused the request or no agreement has been reached during the two-week discussion period, you may withdraw a period of leave notice requesting discontinuous periods of leave. You can withdraw a period of leave notice at any time on or before the 15th day after the period of leave notice was given.A notice for discontinuous leave that has been withdrawn before it is agreed does not count towards the total number of requests for leave that you can make.7.35 Shared Parental leave payWiltshire Police are offering both occupational and statutory shared parental pay for eligible parents to share between them while on shared parental leave. The number of weeks' pay available to the parents will depend on how much adoption leave pay or allowance has been paid when adoption leave or pay period ends.During shared parental leave, all terms and conditions of your contract except normal pay will continue. Salary will be replaced by statutory shared parental pay or pay under Wiltshire Police’s enhanced shared parental pay scheme (if you are eligible for it).Whilst salary will cease, other benefits will remain in place. For example, holiday entitlement will continue to accrue.7.36 Maintaining contactWiltshire Police reserves the right to maintain reasonable contact with you during shared parental leave. This may be to discuss your plans for your return to work, to discuss any special arrangements to be made or training to be given to ease your return to work or to update them on developments at work during your absence.You can agree to work (or to attend training) for up to 20 days during shared parental leave without that work bringing the period of your shared parental leave and pay to an end. These days, which are known as "shared-parental-leave-in-touch" (SPLIT) days, are in addition to the 10 keeping-in-touch days available to an employee during maternity or adoption leave.Wiltshire Police has no right to require you to carry out any work and you have no right to undertake any work during your shared parental leave. Any work undertaken, and the amount of salary paid for any work done on SPLIT days, is entirely a matter of agreement between you and your line manager.SPLIT days are optional; however, these are a really good opportunity for you to:ï Meet with your line manager to discuss any key team, functional, organisational changes including how these may affect youï Join any team meetings to keep in touch with colleagues, meet new onesï Discuss any potential flexible working arrangements you would like him/her to consider prior to your return to work.ï Assess any training required prior to your returnï Discuss what a transition back to work will look likeï Sort any equipment/uniform requirements in good time for returnAny work carried out on a day constitutes one day's work. Accordingly, if you were to attend for example a one-hour training course, this will count as one of the 20 days available.Individuals cannot insist on being able to carry out work during shared parental leave. Similarly, the organisation cannot require you to carry out work during shared parental leave.SPLIT days worked do not extend the total duration of any period of shared parental leave.Reasonable contact between an individual and their employer during a period of shared parental leave does not count as work during a period of shared parental leave.
You will continue to receive pay under the enhanced shared parental pay scheme for any week during which you attend work for SPLIT days. You will also receive an additional payment for each hour that you work during a SPLIT day at your usual hourly rate.If you are only entitled to receive statutory shared parental pay for any week during which you attend work for SPLIT days, you will still receive this in the usual way. In addition, we will also pay you for each hour that you work during a SPLIT day at your usual hourly rate.You can claim payment for SPLIT days by completing FORM SPL-H and submitting it to the Payroll Helpdesk.7.37 Returning to workThe individual has the right to resume working in the same job when returning to work from shared parental leave if the period of leave, when added to any other period of shared parental leave, statutory adoption leave or statutory paternity leave taken by the individual in relation to the same child, is 26 weeks or less.If the individual is returning to work from shared parental leave and the period of leave taken is more than 26 weeks, when added to any other period of shared parental leave, statutory adoption or paternity leave taken in relation to the same child, or was the last of two or more consecutive periods of statutory leave that included a period of ordinary parental leave of more than four weeks, or a period of additional adoption leave or additional maternity leave, the individual has the right to return to the same job unless this is not reasonably practicable. In these circumstances, if it is not reasonably practicable for the organisation to permit a return to the same job, the individual has the right to return to another job that is suitable and appropriate for them.
	SECTION 8MATERNITY / ADOPTION SUPPORT LEAVE(previously referred to as Paternity leave)
8.1 RightsThis policy applies to same sex couples, married and unmarried couples, civil partners and single parents.This procedure has been formulated to advise you on the entitlements that a father, partner or nominated carer of an expectant mother or adoptive parent can expect. This procedure will ensure;The father, partner or nominated carer is able to provide support and care for the mother or adoptive parent at or around the time of birth or placement.The entitlements to Maternity and Adoption Support Leave (also known as Paternity Leave) and statutory Paternity Pay (SPP) allow you to take paid leave to care for a baby or to support the mother following birth. It also allows for you to take a period of paid leave to support an adoptive parent at or around the time of the placement of a child for adoption.8.2 EntitlementsMaternity Support Leave and pay are part of a package of entitlements designed to give support to working fathers, mothers and your partners.These entitlements apply regardless of the hours you work, providing you have 26 weeks’ qualifying service (ending with the fifteenth week before the baby is due or the week a child has been matched with you for adoption).These entitlements apply to individuals who adopt or one member of a couple adopting jointly.The entitlement is for two weeks paid at Statutory Paternity Pay (equivalent to the standard rate of SMP) (providing you have the 26 weeks’ qualifying service) However, Wiltshire Police enhance this entitlement by providing the first week of Maternity and Adoption Support Leave at full pay to all individuals regardless of your length of service.This procedure will apply to both Police Officers and Police Staff unless otherwise indicated.8.3 EligibilityTo be eligible for Maternity & Adoption Support Leave you must:ï Have responsibility for the child’s upbringingï Be the biological father of the child, the mother’s husband or partner or be a nominated carerï Be the partner or nominated carer of an adoptive parentï Be the partner of the dual approved adopter or, in the case of joint dual approved adoptions, the parent who will not take adoption leave and payï Be one of the Parental Order parents (the parent that doesn’t take adoption leave and pay).A nominated carer is the person nominated by the mother / adoptive parent as your primary provider of support at or around the time of the birth or placement for adoption. In most cases such care and support would be provided by the father; however the role may otherwise be fulfilled by a relative or someone who has a caring relationship with the mother and/or child.8.4 NotificationIn order to qualify for leave and pay, you must provide notification in writing of the week you intend your maternity & adoption support leave to start as soon as practicable, or in the case of adoption, no later than 7 days of receiving notification of being matched with a child using Form MS1. You must tell us when the baby is due / when the child will be placed with you, whether you wish to take one week or two consecutive weeks leave and when you would like this leave to start.You must also subsequently provide notification of the child’s actual birth date and confirmation of support leave dates.
NB: It is essential that all periods of Maternity and Adoption Support Leave are reported to Payroll Helpdesk and People Service Centre by way of a form 232 to enable Wiltshire Police to claim back government allowances.8.5 Support LeaveYou can take either one or two consecutive weeks’ maternity & adoption support leave at or around the time of birth or placement. It cannot be taken as odd days. Maternity & Adoption Support Leave is for each birth event or placement. e.g.: There is no right to 3 lots of leave for triplets.Leave must be taken during the period of 56 days (8 weeks) beginning with the date on which the child is born, or the first day of the expected week of childbirth, whichever is the later.In the case of adoption, you can take leave from the date of the child’s placement or from a fixed date which can be up to 14 days before the expected week of placement.8.6 Support Leave PayYou are entitled to receive full pay for the first week. Individuals who have 26 weeks continuous service at the 14th week before the baby is due (or before notification of a placement of a child for adoption) will be entitled to be paid for the second week at Statutory Paternity Pay (SPP) rate (which is equivalent to SMP)8.7 Additional RightsIf you are a new parent and your partner is returning or has returned to work, you could have the right to Shared Parental Leave. Please see the relevant sections within this policy document.
FURTHER SUPPORTORGANISATIONCONTACT INFORMATIONJobcentre PlusFor applying for Maternity Allowance.Devizes:	01380 304800Salisbury:	01722 315200Swindon:	01793 489600Chippenham: 01249 425800 Or: www.jobcentreplus.gov.ukWomen’s Health InformationAll health information (including Toxoplasmosis)www.womenshealth.co.ukPart of Direct.gov.Advice on your rightswww.tiger.gov.ukThe Maternity Alliance(Information on Maternity Services and Rights)020 7490 7638020 7490 7639www.maternityalliance.org.ukNational Childbirth TrustEnquiries:	0870 444 8707Breastfeeding:	0870 444 8708Pregnancy & Birth: 0870 444 8709 www.nct.org.ukMultiple Births Foundation0208 383 3519www.multiplebirths.org.ukAnte-natal Results and ChoicesAdvice and support to parents throughout the ante-natal testing process.Helpline 0207 631 0285 www.arc-uk.orgTommy’sInformation on causes and prevention of miscarriage, premature births and still births0870 777 30 6008707 70 70 70www.tommys.orgBLISSThe Premature Baby Charity0500 618140www.bliss.org.ukTwins and Multiple Births Association (TAMBA)Twinline (or more!) 0800 138 0509 www.tamba.org.ukMiscarriage Association01924 200799www.miscarriageassociation.org.ukSupport for Bereaved ParentsProvides a variety of support including support groups and events with other grieving parents or those who haveexperienced the loss of a childhttps://www.careforthefamily.org.uk/family- life/bereavement-support/bereaved-parent- supportDowns Syndrome Association0845 230 0372www.downs-syndrome.org.ukThe Association for Post-natal illness (APNI)020 7386 0868www.apni.orgGingerbreadOrganisation for lone parents0800 0184 318www.gingerbread.org.ukAdoption UKConnects adoptive families, provides information and signposting on a range of adoption-related issues0300 666 0006www.Adoptionuk.orgSurrogacy UKProvide information, support and networks for both surrogates and intended parentshttps://surrogacyuk.org/Carers supportProvides financial and practical advice as well as services for support0808 808 7777www.carersuk.org/support advice@carersuk.org
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	People ServicesProcedure Owner/Author:	Suzie Thompson, Head of Strategy & Policy Technical Author:	Natalie Strong, HRBP Policy & Procedure Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor:	Chris McMullin, Director of People & ChangeRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of ChangesMay 20214.0> Highlights where difference in procedure for Police Officers and Staff.> Suspension on maternity grounds> Removal of form M2 – M1 to be used for both Police Officers & Staff> Increase of Maternity Pay> Inclusion of Pay rises during maternity leave> Updated Childcare vouchers section> Amendment re: Commencement of maternity leave as a result of pregnancy related sickness and impact on statutory leave and pay for Police Officers> Police officers return to work notice amendment 21 days (not 28)> Sickness absence preventing return to work section added> Additional information regarding KIT days> Compassionate leave following miscarriage> Inclusion of IVF section> Inclusion of Overseas adoptions> Increase of Adoption pay> Inclusion of Parental Bereavement Leave – new legislationJune 20214.0Section 4 miscarriages and stillbirths re-drafted.November 20214.0Section 1.7 table: Occupation corrected to state: 26 weeks full pay, followed by 13 weeks SMP only, and 31 weeks – 21 Weeks Full Pay followed by 10 Weeks Half Pay plus Half SMP (for weeks 22 to 31) followed by 8 weeks SMP only, with the remaining maternity leave asunpaid.Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionForce Policy OfficerMay 20214.0Senior Command Team/ACC/ACO (Delete as appropriate)May 20214.0JNCC (ratified outside of formal JNCC meeting)June 20214.0Distribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)
Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this procedure (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionPolice FederationMay 20214.0Head of Maternity Support GroupMay 20214.0UnisonMay 20214.0W.E.P.AMay 20214.0Implications of the Procedure:Training RequirementsNo additional training requirements needed to implement this policy.IT InfrastructureNo additional IT Infrastructure required.
       WILTSHIRE POLICE & POLICE AND CRIME COMMISSIONERMenopause ProcedureDate of Publication: March 2022 Version:	1.0Next Review Date:	March 2024
TABLE OF CONTENTSPROCEDURE OVERVIEW	3GLOSSARY OF TERMS	3APPLICABILITY	3LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCE	3RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	3AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE	3DATA PROTECTION	4FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	4MONITORING and REVIEW	4WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDURE	4Introduction	4Aim	4Definition	4MALE MENOPAUSE	6FAMILY MEMBERS	6REASONABLE ADJUSTMENTS	6RESPONSIBLITIES OF DIFFERENT PERSONS	7Line Managers	7The Individual	8SIGNPOSTING	8DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	9
PROCEDURE OVERVIEWThis procedure sets out the rights of staff experiencing menopausal symptoms, explains the responsibilities of managers and staff, and the support available to them. We aim to facilitate an open, understanding working environment. Staff are encouraged to inform their line manager that they are experiencing menopausal symptoms at an early stage to ensure that symptoms are treated as an ongoing health issue rather than as individual instances of ill health. Early notification will also help line managers to determine the most appropriate course of action to support a staff member’s individual needs.This procedure is covered by the overarching Human Resources Policy Statement:ï Everyone is treated with fairness, respect and dignity, whatever their protected characteristics or their place in the hierarchyï Individual's health, health and safety and welfare needs are always consideredGLOSSARY OF TERMSTermMeaningEAPEmployee Assistance ProgrammeMSDMusculoskeletal DisordersOHUOccupational Health UnitAPPLICABILITYThis procedure covers all individuals under the responsibilities of both the Chief Constable and the Office of the Police Crime Commissioner (OPCC), which include: Officers, special constables, staff including apprentices, individuals on secondment (subject to the terms of the secondment) and those within the scope of any regional initiatives.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEThere are two main areas of law that may relate to the perimenopause and menopause:ï The Equality Act 2010 protects workers against discrimination. This includes because of their sex, a disability, and their age. The Gender Equality Duty (under the 2010 Act) sets out an obligation to promote gender equality and eliminate discrimination.ï The Health and Safety at Work ect. Act 1974 says an employer must, where reasonably practical, ensure health, safety and welfare at workUnder both of those areas of law, it is our duty to provide a working environment that is cognisant of issues surrounding the menopause and support those going through it in the workplace through reasonable adjustments (where applicable). .RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSEquality Act 2010Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974Wiltshire Police/OPCC Human Resources Policy StatementWiltshire Police/OPCC Attendance Management Policy and Procedure Wiltshire Police/OPCC Equal Opportunities Policy and ProceduresAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEThere are no associated Authorised Professional Practice areas at present.
DATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this procedure will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING and REVIEWThe Force will review the outcomes of any incidents or cases where complaints/concerns or issues have been made via a “Lessons learned” process. This information will assist us in evaluating the effectiveness of this procedure and will ensure we as Wiltshire Police are not in danger of missing opportunities to improve and develop as an organisation. This procedure will be reviewed bi-annually.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDUREThe Head of People Services is responsible for this procedure. All queries relating to this procedure should be directed to the People Services Centre.IntroductionWiltshire Police is firmly committed to ensuring that the workforce operates in an environment of dignity, respect and equality. As part of this ethos Wiltshire Police has a responsibility to staff of all ages; this includes those persons who are experiencing symptoms of the menopause. It is crucial that Wiltshire Police understand the potential anxiety and difficulties that can be caused by the Menopause, and that we enact training for line managers, staff and those in leadership positions.The Menopause is a completely natural stage of a person’s life, with individuals going through this change between the average ages of forty-five to fifty-five. Some will experience the menopause earlier than the average would suggest and some later, but the vast majority of people fall between these age ranges according to the NHS. For some the menopause can be a taboo topic, often for personal or cultural reasons, and the Force ultimately wants to build a culture where managers do not feel uncomfortable discussing the subject, and staff feel they can request support whenever required.Up to a third of women will experience severe menopausal symptoms that can impact on their quality of life. Because menopausal symptoms are caused by oestrogen fluctuations, these symptoms can also affect trans men and non-binary people if they keep their ovaries and do not alter their hormone profile. It is in the work context that menopausal people often report greater difficulty in managing symptoms and can feel embarrassed and unable to disclose their menopausal status, fearing they may be stigmatised for being menopausal.While men do not go through the same menopause process in the strictly medical sense; they can suffer through a process sometimes referred to as the ‘male menopause’. According to the NHS, some men go through a period of psychological and physiological difficulty in their forties and fifties. This will also be covered later within this document.AimWe recognise that the menopause affects people differently but can have physical and/or psychological ramifications for the individual. Whilst Menopause, of itself, is not a disability, severe symptoms of menopause may constitute disabilities, triggering the obligation to make reasonable adjustments, and provide protection from less favourable treatment. The purpose of this procedure is
to provide line managers, staff and those in leadership roles guidance on the menopause and the types of support availableThe procedure aims to create an environment in which personnel can discuss topics around the menopause without fear of taboo, and ensure everyone understands what menopause is, including its different stages.The procedure aims to ensure support is provided to personnel who are impacted by the symptoms of menopause in the office, in operational settings, or working from home. It aims to educate and inform managers about the potential symptoms of menopause, and how they can support their colleagues through reasonable adjustments.It also aims to ensure that individuals going through the menopause, and suffering with menopause symptoms, feel empowered and able to ask for support and any reasonable adjustments so they can continue to be successful in their roles.DefinitionThe menopause is the term given to the biological change whereby an individual is no longer producing eggs from the ovaries, and subsequently oestrogen and progesterone levels fall. This results in the individual no longer having a menstrual cycle and no longer being able to become pregnant. The onset of the menopause before the age of forty is rare and is called ‘Premature Ovarian Insufficiency’.Menopause usually occurs between the ages of 45 and 55 and typically lasts between four and eight years. However, each employee's experience will differ, and menopausal symptoms can occasionally begin before the age of 40, either naturally or as the result of a surgery such as a hysterectomy . Perimenopause, or menopause transition, begins several years before menopause. An individual may start to experience menopausal symptoms during the final two years of perimenopause.Studies show there are differences in experiences across different ethnic groups. It is crucial to keep in mind that menopause is non-selective, but it can affect people in different ways, so support provided must reflect the individual needs of all those who experience menopause.Most individuals going through the menopause will experience some of the following symptoms, though it is important to note this is by no means a definitive list, and some individuals go through no symptoms whatsoever:ï Brain fog (memory problems, poor concentration, forgetfulness).ï Irritability including feeling nervous, inner tension, feeling aggressive.ï Depressive mood (feeling down, sad, on the verge of tears, lack of drive, mood swings).ï Anxiety (inner restlessness, feeling panicky).ï Physical and mental exhaustion (general decrease in performance).ï Bladder problems.ï Digestive issues, bloating, altered bowel habits.ï Weight gain.ï Decreased confidence.ï Low motivation.ï Hot flushes and night sweats.ï Headaches, migraines.ï Joint stiffness, muscle aches and leg cramps.ï Irregular and heavy periods.ï Skin changes, brittle nails, facial hair.ï 
Whilst the menopause is primarily a physical change in the body, there can sometimes be a psychological impact which must also be taken into consideration. This can include, for some, feelings of ‘not being a real woman anymore’ due to the loss of reproductive function, concerns around the ageing process as well as one’s own mortality. Some report changes in body confidence, perception of one’s physical self and more. Again, it is important to stress that this is by no means a definitive list, and some individuals will encounter none of the aforementioned feelings.Some of the thoughts, feelings and symptoms listed above can have knock on impacts on other areas of life as well. Examples of this include a lower stress tolerance across everyday life, strain on personal relationships and heightened emotions, both positive and negative. These changes can impact an individuals home life, and for some there is a significant impact. Some also report a difficulty in ‘switching off’ and a heightened state of agitation through the day. These impactors on day to day life can of course have an impact on how the individual feels and performs in the workplace.MALE MENOPAUSEAccording to the NHS, some men in their forties and fifties go through a period of physiological and psychological change. Some men will go through some of the following symptoms (Again, not a definitive or exhaustive list):ï Increased levels of stress and anxietyï Mood swingsï Erectile Dysfunctionï Lowered libidoï Fat redistribution and other physical changes in appearanceï Lack of energyï Insomniaï Poor concentration and short-term memoryIt is important to note that these changes are not as of the result of the menopause in the medical sense. These changes are not associated with a change in hormone levels (Like the Menopause), but rather due to lifestyle factors or other psychological issues.FAMILY MEMBERSManagers should also consider the impact on an individual of a close family member experiencing menopause. Supporting a family member through menopause symptoms can put a significant strain on relationships at home, which may impact on an individual’s mental health and general wellbeing. Managers should consider options such as staff support networks, and the Employee Assistance Programme to support any member of staff experiencing such issues.REASONABLE ADJUSTMENTSReasonable adjustments for individuals impacted by the menopause will differ from person to person. Listed below are examples of reasonable adjustments which could be applied if beneficial to the individual. This is not a definitive list and Occupational Health should be consulted in conjunction with line managers on a case by case basis.Hot Flushes / Sweats = Ensuring a desk fan is on hand. Seating the member of staff by an open window. Ensure that working temperature and humidity is reasonable (Where possible). Providing a space to remove PPE / body armour at their home station during a rest break. Understanding with Line Manager that fresh air breaks will be beneficial.
Urinary Issues (frequency, urgency) = Where possible, seat the employee near to a bathroom. Ensure cold drinking water is available and at hand. Understanding with Line Manager that more bathroom breaks may be required.Irregular / Heavy and painful menstruation = Ensure washroom facilities are available and are clean and easily accessible. Ensure Line Managers are aware that a washroom break may be necessary.Muscular aches / bone and joint pain = Make any necessary adjustments through review of risk assessments   and   work   schedules/tasks   and   keep   under   review. Consider providing alternative lower-risk tasks. Follow Health and Safety Executive guidance and advice on manual handling and preventing MSDs (musculoskeletal disorders).Headaches / Migraines = Ensure that staff are trained in adjustment of screen settings on monitors/ laptops (Eye relief mode). Ensure that staff have access to a break room and that an understanding is held with Line Managers that additional breaks may be necessary.Dry Eyes = Ensure that regular breaks from screen-based work are taken. Ensure that DSE training has been completed.Anxiety / Depressive symptoms = Access to EAP (Employee Assistance Programme) is available and that the individual is signposted to this. OHU management / self-referral if necessary.Where appropriate, use of Agile Working and the Flexi Time scheme can also be beneficial.RESPONSIBLITIES OF DIFFERENT PERSONS LINE MANAGERS:In all cases managers should:ï Feel able to have open and frank discussions about the Menopause with a staff member if that individual has approached them with concerns about the Menopause. A discussion between the manager and the individual will identify where the symptoms may be causing issues at work, or at home, which may impact on the individuals mental health, affecting their ability to work.ï Avoid asking an individual directly if they are going through the menopause if the individual has not approached them, but it may be appropriate to refer them to occupational health to consider the reasons behind any symptoms.ï Be aware of the many sensitivities around discussing menopause with individuals. Therefore consideration must be given to the different circumstances involved such as surgery, or hormone therapy, as well as the ‘menstruation taboo’ in some societies which prevents discussion due to cultural and religious beliefs.ï Ensure they are familiar with menopause procedure and the definitions and symptoms of menopause. If managers are uncertain of how to proceed they must seek advice from HR regarding the interpretation of the procedure and matters therein.ï Work constructively with the individual and OHU around reasonable adjustments in the workplace.ï Ensure that the member of staff has access to, and is aware of, the relevant STAFF SUPPORT NETWORKS.ï 
ï Ensure that the member of staff is aware of, and has access to, the EAP (Employee Assistance Programme), should they find it of benefit.ï Consider an OHU referral where reasonable adjustments are not effective.ï Ensure all details are recorded confidentially in line with GDPR.THE INDIVIDUALIt is the personal responsibility of the individual to look after one’s own health. They should:ï Seek professional medical advice from one’s own GP if necessary.ï Be open and honest around communication about menopause topics with Line Managers, HR and the OHU at the earliest opportunity. This helps to avoid any misunderstandings in the workplace, and ensures suitable support can be offered.ï Be open and honest around communication about menopause topics with Unison / Fed where applicable.ï Fully support a respectful and dignified working environment – partaking in an environment free of stigma, and support colleagues who may be suffering from menopausal symptoms.SIGNPOSTINGWithin the Force we are lucky enough to have our Staff Support Networks who are accessible by any employee of Wiltshire Police or the OPCC. One of these is the MENOPAUSE SUPPORT GROUP. This group meets regularly and is an excellent resource for those wanting to learn more about the Menopause, talk about their experiences, and access support. For Line Managers who are approached by staff around Menopause topics, referring them to the Menopause Support Group would be recommended.In addition to the Menopause Support Group, there is the CONNECT women’s network. Their page contains contact information as well as joining information. They have regular meetings and you can access their ‘Plan on a Page’.Staff can also access the Occupational Health Unit by self-referral, or by management referral. If a member of staff is having issues with menopause related matters pertaining to their work or welfare, then a referral to the Occupational Health Unit could be beneficial.In addition to the OHU, staff can access the EAP (Employee Assistance Programme). This programme is accessible online, through an app and also via the telephone. This programme gives employees access to counselling services, as well as support services around stress, anxiety, and other mental health matters. Some who go through the Menopause experience mental health difficulties and the resources available through the EAP could be beneficial for those individuals.Staff are also able to access the Force CHAPLAINCY for pastoral needs. The Chaplains are impartial and able to provide counsel and support to those in need.Oskar Kilo and Police Mutual both offer advice via their websites.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Human Resources, Wellbeing Procedure Owner/Author:	SLT Suzie THOMPSON Technical Author:	Daniel PhillimoreSenior Officer/Manager Sponsor: Director of People and ChangeRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of ChangesApprovals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionForce Policy Officer04/03/20221.0Senior Command Team/ACC/ACO (Delete as appropriate)25/02/20221.0JNCC25/02/20221.0Distribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-Brief17.03.20223.0Email to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this procedure (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionUNISON, Federation, WEPA, Supt Association,21/02/20221.0Menopause Support Group, Connect Women’s Network, LGBTQ+ Network21/02/20221.0Head of People Strategy and Policy21/02/20221.0Implications of the Procedure: Training RequirementsNo additional training requiredIT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure required
Template v8WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICYMental Health and Wellbeing StatementDate of Publication: March 2019 Version:	1.0Next Review Date:	March 2022
POLICY STATEMENTThis policy defines Wiltshire Police’s approach and mission statement with regards to mental health and wellbeing in the workplace.1. IntroductionWiltshire Police are committed to creating a healthy working environment which supports the physiological and psychological wellbeing of our officers, staff and volunteers. Ultimately, the happier, healthier and more resilient Wiltshire Police officers’, staff and volunteers are, the better the organisation performs.Our embedded values and behaviours, empowered leadership style, along with our agile working and innovative technology provide our officers and staff with flexibility and choice. All of which contributes to a positive work life balance, resulting in improved wellbeing.We are also committed to developing and maintaining a police service that officers’, staff and volunteers are proud to work for because they feel safe, motivated and have a sense of belonging. Wiltshire Police support a holistic approach to wellbeing and recognise the importance of a collaborative approach, with the foundations of effective Occupational Health, Health and Safety and People Services and Development at its core.2. Background and EthosOur sense of wellbeing and mental health can be affected in many ways and, at various stages, we may all experience poor mental health. Mental health issues in the workplace are any conditions that affect employees’ state of mind. These conditions may include mild depression, stress and severe anxiety which may result in burnout and severe ill mental health.Mental health problems manifest in different ways. Some employees may suffer with no physical side effects, while others may experience physical symptoms (e.g. increased blood pressure, lethargy, changes in eating habits.) Employees may experience mental health issues for various reasons that an employer cannot control (e.g. hereditary, family conflicts, general health.) But, there are also work-related reasons for mental health problems, including:ï Job insecurity.ï Excessive pressure.ï Work-life imbalance.ï Lack of appreciation.ï Work place trauma exposuresï Hostile workplace conditions.ï Unsatisfactory job or workload.ï Unpleasant relationships with colleagues or managers.2.1 Why work is important to employees' mental wellbeing'Mental wellbeing is a dynamic state in which the individual is able to develop their potential, work productively and creatively, build strong and positive relationships with others and contribute to their community. It is enhanced when an individual is able to fulfil their personal and social goals and achieve a sense of purpose in society.Mental wellbeing at work is determined by the interaction between the working environment, the nature of the work and the individual.Work has an important role in promoting mental wellbeing. It is an important determinant of self- esteem and identity. It can provide a sense of fulfilment and opportunities for social interaction. For most people, work provides their main source of income.
Work can also have negative effects on mental health, particularly in the form of stress. Work- related stress is defined as 'the adverse reaction people have to excessive pressure or other types of demand placed upon them. Although pressure can motivate employees and encourage enhanced performance, when pressure exceeds an employee's ability to cope, it becomes a negative force in the form of stress.Working environments that pose risks for mental wellbeing put high demands on a person without giving them sufficient control and support to manage those demands. A perceived imbalance between the effort required and the rewards of the job can lead to stress. A sense of injustice and unfairness arising from management processes or personal relationships can also increase stress and risks to mental health.Stress is not a medical condition, but research shows that prolonged stress is linked to psychological conditions such as anxiety and depression as well as physical conditions such as heart disease, back pain and headache.2.2 Why employees' mental wellbeing is important to organisations' productivity and performancePromoting the mental wellbeing of employees can yield economic benefits for the business or organisation, in terms of increased commitment and job satisfaction, staff retention, improved productivity and performance, and reduced staff absenteeism.The costs associated with employees' mental health problems are significant for businesses and other organisations. These costs are associated with loss in productivity because of sickness absence, early retirement, and increased staff turnover, recruitment and training. Evidence also shows that productivity can be reduced through the lower level of performance of employees who are at work but experiencing stress or mental health problems. This is known as 'presenteeism'.3. National Strategies and InitiativesThis policy will embrace and support the implementation of related national strategies and guidance as well as a number of legal requirements regarding employment, including employers' duty of care. These are:ï The College of Policing Blue light framework 2017.ï National Police Wellbeing programme 2018.ï Health, work and wellbeing' (Department for Work and Pensions 2005; 2008).ï Dame Carol Black's review of the health of Britain's working age population: Working for a healthier tomorrow (Department for Work and Pensions and the Department of Health 2008).ï Mental health and employment strategy (Department for Work and Pensions and the Department of Health 2009 currently being reviewed 2018).ï Home Office (2018) A common goal for police wellbeing. To be achieved by 2021.ï Employment laws regarding equality, anti-discrimination, health and safety, maternity and parental leave and flexible working.ï The Health and Safety Executive's standards for managing work-related stress.4. Wiltshire Police Mental Health Mission StatementTo every extent possible, Wiltshire Police aim to create a working environment that promotes mental wellbeing and address cases of workplace pressures that contribute to mental health issues.We will:ï Commit to the Blue light pledge to reduce stigma around mental health. The Chief Constable and OPCC have re- signed the Blue Light Pledge in 2018 for reducing the stigma of mental health.ï 
ï Deliver proactive measure to help maintain and improve mental wellbeingï Deliver Mental health awareness training to line mangersï All police officers , Police	staff	and families have	access to a confidential 24 hour counsellingï Adopt the Blue light frameworkï Identify issues proactively and resolve them through a mediation process, personal risk assessment, case conference.ï Support employees who face mental health problems.ï Create pleasant workplaces in collaboration with managers, employees, staff associations and	health expertsï Create a support network that provides access to suitably trained staff to offer peer supportAs part of our integrated approach to wellness and mental health, there are numerous internal strategies, policies and guidance documents which underpin Wiltshire Police’s Mental Health Mission statement, these include our:ï People Culture and Inclusion strategyï Wellness Strategyï Agile Working Guidanceï Ageing Workforce Guidanceï Issue Resolution and Dignity at Work Policyï Flexible Working policyï Health and Safety Policyï Attendance Management policyï Occupational Health PolicyThis list isn’t exhaustive. All of these policies aim to preserve a harmonious workplace where employees can enjoy their work and balance their jobs with their personal lives. We all have responsibility to ensure adherence to these policies.In addition to the above listed strategies and policies there are also a number of Strategic Boards in place to monitor review practice and policy to enhance and improve mental well-being, these include:ï Strategic People Boardï People Intelligence Boardï Occupational Health and Safety Committeeï Strategic Wellbeing Meetingï Ethics and Culture Boardï Resource Management Panelï Strategy and Diversity Board5. Professional Mental Health ServicesAll police officers and Police staff has access to mental health provision. Proactive and reactive, a service is available and access to specialist provision, for guidance, support and early intervention this is delivered by access to a fully comprehensive Occupational Health department offering a range of services fully described within the Occupational health policy and procedures, including access to;ï Force Occupational Health Advisorï Force Mental Health Nurseï Occupational Health Technicianï Force Medical Doctorï Provision of comprehensive Risk Assessment Based Medicalsï 
ï Provision of comprehensive Health Surveillance programme.ï 24 hour Employees assistance program offering free confidential counselling and advice for police officer/ staff and families.ï Peer support servicesï Blue Light championsï TRiM practitionersï Menopausal, cancer and Maternity/ Paternity peer support and support groups.ï Chaplainciesï Online Managers Wellness tool kitï Provision of Wellbeing Plansï Effective use of Personal Risk Assessment.ï Case conferencesï Wiltshire police are part of the ‘Mindful employer’These services can be either referred to by the individuals line manager or accessed via self-referral process.6. Progress to date against the Wiltshire Police Mental Health Mission StatementWiltshire Police have made significant progress with regards to reducing stigma of mental health in the workplace, this includes;ï Adopting an organisational -wide approach to promoting the mental wellbeing of all officers, staff and volunteers, working in partnership with them. This approach integrate the promotion of mental wellbeing into all policies and practices concerned with managing people, including those related to employment rights and working conditions.ï Ensuring that our approach takes account of the nature of the work, the workforce and the characteristics of the organisation.ï Promoting a culture of participation, equality and fairness that is based on open communication and inclusion.ï Creating an awareness and understanding of mental wellbeing to reduce the potential for discrimination and stigma related to mental health problems.ï Ensuring the processes for job design, selection, recruitment, training, development and appraisal promote mental wellbeing and reduce the potential for stigma and discrimination. Employees should have the necessary skills and support to meet the demands of a job that is worthwhile and offers opportunities for development and progression. Employees should be fully supported throughout organisational change and situations of uncertainty.ï Ensuring that groups of officers and staff who might be exposed to stress but might be less likely to be included in the various approaches for promoting mental wellbeing have the equity of opportunity to participate. These groups include part-time workers, shift workers.6.1 Assessing OpportunitiesWith regards to assessing opportunities for promoting employees' mental wellbeing and managing risks. Wiltshire Police have adopted a structured approach to assessing opportunities for promoting officers, staff and volunteers mental wellbeing and managing risks. This approach involves:ï Ensuring systems are in place for assessing and monitoring the mental wellbeing of officers, staff and volunteers so that areas for improvement can be identified and risks caused by work and working conditions addressed. This includes using employee surveys and information about absence rates, injuries, investigation, grievances, Occupational health reports, staff turnover and exit interview information. Monitored through People intelligence Boardï 
ï Making officers and staff aware of their legal entitlements regarding quality of work and working conditions. Officers and staff should be made aware of their responsibilities for looking after their own mental wellbeing. For example, officers and staff need to identify concerns and needs relating to support or improvements in the working environment. Open communication to support this process.ï Using frameworks such as Health and Safety Executive management standards for work- related stress to promote and protect employee mental wellbeing.ï Adopting the Blue light frameworkï Responding to the needs of officers and staff who may be at particular risk of stress caused by work and working conditions, or who may be experiencing mental health problems for other reasons. Well-implemented policies for managing officers and staff absence are important for ensuring that those who are experiencing stress can be identified early and offered support. Support could include counselling or stress management training, fast track referral to specialist intervention provided through occupational health.6.2 Agile and Flexible workingWiltshire Police have adopted a modern and flexible approach to agile working which supports wellness; this is supplemented by our empowered style of leadership.Where reasonably practical and appropriate, Officers and staff are provided with opportunities for flexible working according to their needs and aspirations in both their personal and working lives. Different options for flexible working include part-time working, remote working, job sharing and flexitime. Such opportunities can enhance employees' sense of control and promote engagement and job satisfaction.Wiltshire Police policies and guidance have helped develop a culture that supports flexible working and addresses employees' concerns. Managers respond to and seek to accommodate appropriate requests from officers and staff for flexible working and ensure consistency and fairness in processing applications. Managers' ability to manage teams with flexible working patterns is supported through management training and managers having access to local Human resource advisors to provide support and guidance.6.3 Managers’ responsibilitiesWiltshire Police have created an environment that strengthens the role of line managers in promoting the mental wellbeing of employees through supportive leadership style and management practices. This involves:ï Encouraging a management style that promotes participation, delegation, constructive feedback, mentoring and coachingï Will ensure that policies for the recruitment, selection, training and development of managers recognise and promote these skillsï Ensuring that managers are able to motivate employees and provide them with the training and support they need to develop their performance and job satisfactionï Provide awareness and guidance of how management style and practices can help to promote the mental wellbeing of employees and keep their stress to a minimumï Provide training to ensure that managers are able to identify and respond with sensitivity to employees' emotional concerns, and symptoms of mental health problemsï Ensuring that managers understand when it is necessary to refer an employee to occupational health services or other sources of help and supportï Managers are encouraged to proactively identify mental health issues among their staff. If they perceive that a member of their staff is in a state of emotional or psychological distress, they should reach out to them. Managers have access to online management tools and signposting resourcesï 
7. Open Communications and SupportWiltshire Police believe our ongoing Wellness Communication Strategy is key to embedding our wellness culture moving forward. Wellness messages and themes are threaded though all our communications and blogs, supported by specific and targeted wellness messaging and communications.Examples include:ï Extensive use of communications and messaging from the Chief and ELT with wellness and mental health included.ï Various communications tools are also utilised to raise awareness including; effective use of the Force ebrief system for mental health wellbeing messaging.ï Active Health Promotion days and events are used to raise awareness on mental health and stress management.ï Use of Firstbeat magazine (minimum of 2 pages dedicated to Mental Wellbeing) every article.ï Developed a new promotional TRiM Video which has been communicated to all employees.ï Annual surveys to gather information about mental health in the workplace. Surveys will be anonymous.ï Actively support employees who are at risk of facing mental health issues (e.g. pregnant women, new parents, retiring employees.) For this reason, we are expanding establish the Peer support network so employees can choose to discuss their situations and seek advice.ï Often, it’s easier to reach out to a colleague instead of a supervisor or HR. We encourage colleagues to support one another when needed.8. Employee Recognition and DevelopmentOne way to prevent our employees from excessive stress is to recognize their work and invest in their personal growth. For this reason, we have established:ï Reward Recognition programsï Mentorship programsï People development programsï Talent management Board9. Compliance with the lawThe law protects employees who suffer from medical conditions (e.g. clinical depression) or mental disorders (e.g. schizophrenia.) Consistent with our non-discrimination practices, we will treat these employees fairly and we won’t oblige anyone to disclose their condition or other medical information. Instead, we will attempt to support employees who come to us with mental health issues and establish strategies that apply to everyone, and provide confidential advice / support via the Occupational health unit. We will make reasonable adjustments for people with mental disabilities.10. Evaluating OutcomesWe will test its elements to find out what works and what doesn’t. We will continuously research mental health topics and evaluate the results of our policy with managers’ help.We will develop, revise and establish policy, we need everyone’s help. We can all work to define mental health issues, their causes and seek or offer help when needed. We encourage employees to share their ideas and concerns.
References:College of Policing (2017)	Blue Light Wellbeing Framework Organisational Development and International faculty Better Professionals for Better PolicingHM Government (1996) Employment Rights Act. HM Government (2005) The Equality Act 2010 HM Government (2006) The Work and Families Act.Health and Safety Executive (2008a) Management standards for work-related stress. Health and Safety Executive (2004) Working together to reduce stress at work: a guide for employees.Health and Safety Executive (2008a) Management standards for work-related stress and Price Waterhouse Coopers (2008) Building the case for wellness.Home Office (2018) A common goal for police wellbeing. To be achieved by 2021. Home Office HP6 Risk Assessment Based Medical Policy (RABME) 2006Police Regulations Healthy Police Force Strategy (2002 2007 2010)POLICY AIMThis policy defines Wiltshire Police’s approach and mission statement with regards to mental health and wellbeing in the workplace.APPLICABILITYAll police officers and police staff, including the extended police family and those working voluntarily or under contract to Wiltshire Police must be aware of, and are required to comply with, all relevant policy and associated procedures.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCECollege of Policing Blue light framework 2017 National Police Wellbeing programme 2018Mental health and employment strategy (Department for Work and Pensions and the Department of Health 2009 currently being reviewed 2018).Home Office (2018) A common goal for police wellbeing. To be achieved by 2021.Employment laws regarding equality, anti-discrimination, health and safety, maternity and parental leave and flexible working.The Health and Safety Executive's standards for managing work-related stressRELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSPeople Culture and Inclusion Strategy Wellness StrategyIssue resolution and dignity at work policy Flexible working policyHealth and Safety Policy Attendance Management policy Occupational Health Policy Agile working GuidanceAgeing workforce GuidanceAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEThere are no directly related areas of Authorised Professional Practice linked to this Policy and Procedure.
DATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWThis policy will be reviewed every three years in the light of any national policy or procedural change or due to changes to law or Force strategy or at such other times as may become necessary.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Head of Occupational Health is responsible for this policy. All queries relating to this policy should be directed to Head of Occupational Health or the Force Policy Officer.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Occupational Health Unit Policy Owner/Author:	Penny FULLER Technical Author:Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: Chief ConstableRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes11.03.20191.0Draft v0.2 published as substantive version 1.0Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team11.03.20190.2Occupational Health and Safety Committee (CC Chair)08.03.20190.2JNCC (Not required for all policies)N/ADistribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionStrategic Wellbeing Board20/12/20180.1Supt. Conway DUNCAN, Sarah HARDING (HR), Allen LUMLEY, Steve COX, Dawn YOUNG, Deborah REID, Sarah SOMERS, Shea D’ARCY and Laurie FARQUHAR.03.01.20190.1Rev Bill CAVE, Mark ANDREWS (Federation), Helen MILNE-DAY (UNISON) and Declan McGANN (Mental Health Nurse).03.01.20190.1Implications of the Policy: Training RequirementsNo additional training requirements needed to implement this policy.IT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure required.
Template v8WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICYMental HealthDate of Publication: May 2020 Version:	1.0Next Review Date:	May 2023
POLICY STATEMENTThe purpose of this policy is to outline the way in which Wiltshire Police responds to our community and those specifically within our community who have mental health issues and / or learning disabilities. This Policy supports the intent of the Wiltshire Police Vulnerability Strategy with due consideration of the Police and Crime Plan for Wiltshire 2017-2021.This Policy document is produced alongside APP Mental Health to reflect local variations to operational practice as identified within the APP.Wiltshire Police recognises and appreciates the distinction between Mental Health and Learning Disability. These two distinct and highly important areas of business are brought together in a single policy to reflect the approach taken at national APP level.The procedures and protocols to this policy are in separate documents which provide detailed operational guidance. The following procedures/protocols need to be read in conjunction with this policy:> Section136 MHA Act 1983 - Multi Agency Under 18s Operational Policy> Section 136 Mental Health Act 1983 - Place of Safety multi agency procedure for Adults> Section 135 Place of Safety Joint Agency Protocol> Mental Health – South West Regional Mental Health Joint Protocol> Police Attendance Use of Restraint in Mental Health & Learning Disability Settings Joint Agency Protocol> Mental Health - National Escalation Process> Management of Missing Persons and Absent Without Leave Protocol> No Response and welfare check requests procedurePeople with mental health issues and/or learning disabilities should receive a quality service from Wiltshire Police regardless of their needs. Wiltshire Police recognises that mental ill health and learning disabilities have an impact across our entire scope of business delivery. As a result this policy and collection of procedural documents relates to all organisational activity. Examples of the range of contact are highlighted but not limited to those listed below:ï People suffering from mental ill health as victims of crime and those targeted as a result of their condition.ï The needs that arise firstly in a criminal justice capacity, whether the person is a victim, witness or suspect and secondly in a health care capacity.ï Acting in support to agencies dealing with someone experiencing a mental health crisis, by supporting a person until healthcare professionals are involved, or responding to members of the public who require a service from the police.ï Responding to families or carers of people with mental health issues or learning disabilities who have concerns.ï Missing people.The Mental Health Act 1983, the Mental Capacity Act 2005 and their associated codes of practice provide the Wiltshire Police with a clear framework in which to operate when delivering a service involving someone with a mental illness or learning disability.> Code of Practice (2015) to MHA 1983 for England> Code of Practice (2005) to MCA (England and Wales)> Code of Practice on (2008) MCA Deprivation of Liberty Safeguards (England and Wales).> 
In order to assist officers and staff Wiltshire Police and Avon and Wiltshire Mental Health Partnership NHS Trust will operate a Mental Health Control Room Triage (MHCRT) and LADS (CARS) schemes. All such schemes will be covered by robust service level agreements.Use of RestraintThere will be occasions where it may be necessary to restrain an individual with a mental illness. Restraint and restrictive interventions need to be seen as a last resort, although they may be unavoidable.Where a person resists the restraint in a violent, prolonged manner the physical stress on the person’s body may result in death or serious injury. Officers should not use methods of restraint on people with mental ill health or vulnerabilities unless absolutely necessary. They should reserve this for emergencies and circumstances in which the safety of the subject, the public, police officers and other professionals is at risk.Officers and staff must be aware of the heightened risks, during and post of the use of restraint, associated to Acute Behavioural Disorder (ABD) / Excited Delirium (ED). Suspected ABD / ED should be considered as a medical emergency until proved otherwise. Emergency medical aid should be provided by summoning an ambulance to take the person to an Emergency Department.The provision of such emergency medical care must take priority over the provision of mental health care. Likewise, if there is any suspicion that the person is otherwise physically ill or injured then medical care must be sought immediately.Many of the signs indicating ABD/ED are common to anyone behaving violently, therefore, it is important for officers and staff to recognise the difference between acute behavioural disorder and a violent outburst. Attention should be paid to:ï Extremely aggressive/violent behaviour;ï Excessive strength/continued struggle despite restraint;ï Insensitive to pain – including the effects of CS or Taser;ï Acute psychosis with fear of impending doom;ï Constant physical activity without fatigue;ï Hot to touch/profusely sweating/inappropriate state of undress;ï Hyperthermia;ï Tachypnoea (abnormally rapid breathing);ï Tachycardia (abnormally rapid heart rate);ï Sudden tranquillity after frenzied activity or vice versa.Being intoxicated with alcohol or drugs, substantially overweight or suffering respiratory muscle fatigue (exhaustion) are to be considered as heightened risk factorsSee also: Police Attendance Use of Restraint in Mental Health & Learning Disability Settings Joint Agency ProtocolCommunity Treatment Orders (CTO)A CTO is a power given to the Responsible Clinician under the MHA to place certain conditions on which a patient must follow when they leave hospital, instead of being discharged completely. It is meant to ensure that the right treatment is received once the patient has left hospital and means keeping in touch with the MH Trust and to keep to certain regulations. It also means that the Responsible Clinician can bring the patient back into hospital if needed. A CTO does not apply to restricted or voluntary patients, or to patients detained for assessment under S2 MHA as they are not eligible.
The option of using a CTO does not mean that the Responsible Clinician cannot use longer-term leave if that is the more suitable option, but the Responsible Clinician will need to be able to show that both options have been duly considered.If police are asked to recover a patient who is subject to a CTO, we must first determine why we are being asked to get involved. Detained patients who are AWOL, which includes a patient on a CTO, may be taken into care or custody and returned by an AMHP, any member of the hospital staff, any police officer, or anyone authorised in writing by the hospital managers.The police should be asked to assist in returning a patient to hospital only if necessary. If the patient’s location is known, the role of the police should, wherever possible, only be to assist a suitably qualified and experienced mental health professional in returning the patient to hospital.If there is sufficient risk associated with the patient’s safe return, police may be required to assist. If police are required to assist recovery of a patient who is subject to a CTO, police officers must satisfy themselves that a “recall notice” has been served. There are three ways that a CTO recall notice is served:ï If CTO recall notice served by hand – effective immediatelyï If CTO recall served by personal delivery – effective on the day after it is delivered beginning immediately after midnight following deliveryï If CTO recall served by first class post – effective two working days later, i.e. exclude weekends / bank holidays.Once satisfied that it’s been served, the power to recover such patients are derived from S18 MHA, which is a preserved power of arrest under Schedule 2, S26 PACE. Therefore if officers need to use reasonable force in the exercise of that power, they can rely on S117 PACE.S18 MHA does not come with its own power of entry. If entry is required into a private address and admission to the premises has been refused or refusal is anticipated, a S135 (2) MHA warrant is required.Mental Health Services should attend the venue with Police Officers. If admission to premises has been refused or refusal is anticipated, Mental Health Services should apply for a S135 (2) MHA warrant; just because a patient has been recalled does not provide a power of entry into private premises.The recall power is intended to provide a means to respond to evidence of relapse or high-risk behaviour relating to mental disorder before the situation becomes critical and leads to the patient or other people being harmed. The need for recall might arise as a result of relapse, or by a change in the patient’s circumstances giving rise to increased risk. The responsible clinician does not have to interview or examine the patient in person before deciding to recall them.Warrants under s42 MHA 1983Section 42 MHA 1983 allows a patient who has been or is subject to a criminal justice process, who has been detained on a restricted hospital order (section 37 or section 41 MHA 1983), to be conditionally discharged to receive community care, sometimes with conditions and restrictions attached.During this period of conditional discharge, patients are liable to be recalled to hospital by the Secretary of State who may issue a warrant under section 42(3) MHA ordering the recall. Given that conditionally discharged patients were by definition thought to previously have posed a risk of serious harm to the public, police would usually be involved in the execution of the warrant.
However, a warrant under this section is not a warrant of arrest for the purposes of Section 17 PACE, and therefore where entry needs to be forced in connection with this recall, a warrant under section 135(2) MHA is required unless grounds exist under PACE.POLICY AIMWiltshire Police are committed to provide the best, most appropriate and timely service, for people living with mental health conditions; and we are committed to reduce repeat demand from people in crisis living with mental health conditions.We will:ï Ensure members of the Force recognise, record and deal with incidents relating to mental health and learning disabilities.ï Recognise that these potentially vulnerable persons may need further assistance and support.ï Ensure Safeguarding investigations are carried out in accordance with the locally agreed Multi Agency Safeguarding Policy and procedures.ï Ensure appropriate support is given to victims and witnesses who maybe suffering with Mental Health issues and or learning disabilities and endeavour to reduce the risk of repeat victimisation.ï Ensure appropriate action is taken against offenders who maybe suffering with Mental Health issues and/or learning disabilities. Where appropriate this may include prosecution or diversionary measures.ï Promote Safeguarding ‘Adults at Risk’ as a mainstream policing activity.ï Ensure information is made accessible to persons with mental health issues and learning disabilities. This may be by providing current documents in the easy read format.ï Ensure persons are supported when it comes to reporting an incident. Again with support from staff and easy read reporting forms.ï Ensure dealing with people with Mental Health issues is acknowledged as part of core policing business whilst accepting, in order to provide the best service, we must work in partnership.We will support our partners with their response to mental ill health in our community. We will provide a policing service which is responsive to the needs of anybody with a learning disability, mental ill health or is suicidal.We will work with the community to provide a service, which responds to their needs by:ï Engaging with community and advocacy groups to ensure a service is guided by the community for the community;ï Partnering with health and social care professionals to offer the best possible policing response to their needs;ï Ensuring Police contact with those who are unwell or in crisis is proportionate, legal, ethical and necessary;ï Collaborating with academic establishments to ensure our work is externally scrutinised and our delivery reflects world class research.ï Suicide prevention requires work across different settings. Together we have expertise and resources from the public, private and voluntary sector to support not only people who at risk of suicide but bereaved by suicide too.We will support health and social care services in delivering their responsibilities, performing our legal duties under the Mental Health Act to the best of our capability. This will ensure the response to mental ill health and learning disability crisis remains health led with a minimum of contact with the Criminal Justice System.
APPLICABILITYAll police officers and police staff, including the extended police family and those working voluntarily or under contract to Wiltshire Police must be aware of, and are required to comply with, this policy.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEThis policy and supporting procedure take account of requirements under ECHR 1951, The Human Rights Act 1998, Equal Opportunities legislation, Mental Health Act 1983 (amended 2007), Mental Capacity Act 2005, the Health and Safety Act 1974, Data Protection Act 2018 and General Data Protection Regulations, the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 and other relevant criminal legislation.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSSection136 MHA Act 1983 - Multi Agency Under 18s Operational PolicySection 136 Mental Health Act 1983 - Place of Safety multi agency procedure for Adults Section 135 Place of Safety Joint Agency ProtocolMental Health – South West Regional Mental Health Joint ProtocolPolice Attendance Use of Restraint in Mental Health & Learning Disability Settings Joint Agency ProtocolMental Health - National Escalation ProcessManagement of Missing Persons and Absent Without Leave Protocol No Response and welfare check requests procedureUse of Force PolicyAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEMental HealthDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document will be assessed for suitability for public release when final draft adopted.MONITORING AND REVIEWThe Partnership Sergeant for Mental Health will be responsible for ensuring the implementation, ongoing effectiveness and for any review of this Policy.This policy will be will be reviewed every three years in the light of any national policy or procedural change or due to changes to law or Force strategy or at such other times as may become necessary.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Head of Improvement and Change and the Partnership Sergeant for Mental Health are responsible for this policy. All queries relating to this policy should, in the first instance be directed to the Partnership Sergeant for Mental Health or the Force Policy Officer.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Improvement and Change Department Policy Owner/Author:	Sonja LEITH / Michael HUGHES Technical Author:	Andrew IRVINGSenior Officer/Manager Sponsor: Director of People and ChangeRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes27.05.20201.0Draft v0.3 published as substantive version 1.0.Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team27.05.20200.3Director of People and Change25.05.20200.3JNCC (Not required for all policies)N/ADistribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionImplications of the Policy: Training RequirementsNo additional training requirements.IT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure required.
Template v8WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICYMISSING PERSONSDate of Publication: September 2022 Version:	4.0Next Review Date:	September 2024
POLICY STATEMENTAs per the APP for Missing Persons, the definition of ‘missing’ is as follows:Anyone whose whereabouts cannot be established will be considered as missing until located, and their wellbeing or otherwise confirmed.Going missing should be treated as an indicator that the individual may be at risk of harm. The safeguarding of vulnerable people is paramount and a missing person report should be recognised as an opportunity to identify and address risks. The reasons for a person being missing may be complex.Three key factors should be considered in a missing person investigation:- Protecting those at risk of harm;- Minimising distress and ensuring high quality service to the families and carers of missing persons;- Prosecuting those who perpetrate harm or pose a risk of harm when this is appropriate and supported by evidence.The Risk Assessment Table should be used to guide the appropriate level of police response to a missing person report. The National Decision Model (NDM) should also be used in conjunction with this.Low RiskMedium RiskHigh RiskThe risk of harm to the subject or the public is assessed as possible but minimal.The risk of harm to the subject or the public is assessed as likely but not serious.The risk of serious harm to the subject or the public is assessed as very likely.Proportionate enquiries should be carried out to ensure that the individual has not come to harm.This category requires an active and measured response by the police and other agencies in order to trace the missing person and support the person reporting.This category almost always requires the immediate deployment of police resources – action may be delayed in exceptional circumstances, such as searching water or forested areas during hours of darkness. A member of senior management must be involved in the examination of initial lines of enquiry and approval of appropriate staffing levels.Such cases could lead to the appointment of an Investigating Officer (IO) and possibly an SIO, and a police Search Advisor (PolSA).There should be a press/media strategy and/or close contact with outside agencies. Family support should be put in place where appropriate. The MPB should be notified of the case without undue delay.Children’s Services must also be notified immediately if the person is under 18.
Risk of serious harm has been defined as:A risk which is life threatening and/or traumatic, and from which recovery, whether physical or psychological can be expected to be difficult or impossible.Wiltshire Police is dedicated to taking a multi-agency approach when receiving and investigating reports of missing and absent persons, to evaluate and assess risk and to investigate all safeguarding and welfare concerns identified. This may include the investigation of safeguarding or other criminal reasons as to why the person is missing, and what safeguarding or criminal risk they may pose to themselves or others whilst missing.The primary role for Wiltshire Police in missing cases is to protect life and prevent and detect crime by adequately resourcing staff to locate the missing person. This cannot be done by the police alone, and therefore requires work with statutory and non-statutory agencies to achieve a successful conclusion. With regard to children under the age of 18 years and vulnerable adults, Wiltshire Police will share and discuss all such missing person incidents with partner agencies.Prevention Interviews (previously Safe and Well Checks) are conducted with returned children in order to build relationships with them and to identify, where possible, the reasons for their missing episode. Particular attention will be given to those who regularly go missing, with a view to reducing or eliminating future missing episodes, to identify those at risk of Exploitation, and to provide additional support to them and their families.ExpectationsLegal DutyThe European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) places a positive obligation on police officers to take reasonable actions, within their powers, to safeguard the rights of individuals who may be at risk.The ECHR articles that may be relevant to missing persons are:ï Article 2 – Right to lifeï Article 3 – Right not to be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatmentï Article 4 – Right to prohibition of slavery and forced labourï Article 8 – Right to respect for private and family lifeï Article 10 – Freedom of expression, including freedom to receive informationJoint and Strategic ResponsibilityFollowing a person being classified as missing, as per the definition, the police will initiate a missing person investigation. Those involved in the care of children and vulnerable adults also have a safeguarding duty and responsibility, and may hold vital information that could help to locate the missing person.Parents, carers, and staff acting in a parenting role in care homes, can be expected to undertake reasonable actions to try and establish the whereabouts of the individual. Children who are breaching parental discipline should not be dealt with by police unless there are other risks. Parents may need police support if they are very distressed, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to undertake enquiries. In such circumstances, it may be appropriate to make a referral to the local authority to ensure all caring needs of the child are being met.Individuals whose whereabouts are known will not be considered as missing but may require other police activity in order to ensure their welfare.
At the point of a person being reported as missing, all agencies will:ï Share information in a timely and lawful mannerï Base decisions and actions on the risk assessment madeï Make referrals to appropriate agenciesï Work jointly to share information and intelligenceAn individual should be referred to social care when there is concern that the person requires extra help from social services, beyond those services routinely available to the general public. Where there is concern about an individual’s welfare, a referral via a Public Protection Notice (PPN) will be made, ensuring a multi-agency assessment takes place.      Roles and Responsibilities Strategic Lead for MissingHead of PPDTactical Lead for MissingDetective Inspector of the Sentinel TeamMissing Detective InspectorA Detective Inspector will carry out reviews of missing persons as per the review timetable. The purpose of each review will be to quality assure the investigation, review the level of risk, ensure outstanding actions are being completed and provide investigative advice.The reviews will be carried out by the duty Missing DI, this is not an on-call facility, any DI support outside of standard working hours, including weekends will be provided by the on call SIO.All high-risk missing person investigations will have SIO oversight, this will normally be the Duty Missing DI unless determined by the Duty Superintendent within the DMM process.Missing Person Operation Support (MPOS)The MPOS will engage with partner agencies, care providers and frequently missing children to reduce instances of missing and safeguard individuals from harm.Missing Person CoordinatorThe missing person coordinator role will ensure that all missing cases have received an effective response and work with partners to coordinate the sharing of information. The coordinators are not investigators; however, they do support investigations by sharing knowledge and strategic awareness.The missing person coordinators also assist with improving the forces response to missing people by working with partners and implementing strategic initiatives to improve outcomes and increase awareness.Any reports of a crime in action, kidnap and extortion, child abduction, or immediate child protection issue WILL NOT fall under this procedure. Such cases must be considered a crime in action and Child Protection procedures will apply and supersede this process.
POLICY AIMThis policy provides information and advice for officers and staff responding to reports of persons who are reported missing.The policy has been designed in consultation with the APP. The National Decision Model (NDM) and the Risk Principles must be considered when making decisions when dealing with missing persons, and rationales must be recorded appropriately.GLOSSARY OF TERMSTermMeaningAPPAuthorised Professional PracticeNDMNational Decision ModelRELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSMissing Persons ProcedureManagement of Missing Persons and AWOL Protocol Modern Slavery Policy and ProcedurePan Wiltshire Missing From Home and Care Protocol Collection of Missing Persons DataAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEMissing Persons NDMChild ProtectionChild Sexual ExploitationDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection App 2018, General Data Protection Regulations, and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWThis procedure will be monitored by the Detective Inspector responsible for the Missing Portfolio and will be reviewed every two years.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Head of PPD and the Detective Inspector responsible for the Missing Portfolio are responsible for this procedure. All queries relating to this procedure should be directed to them.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Public Protection Department Policy Owner/Author:	Supt Ben MANT / DI Eirin MARTIN Technical Author:	Sophie ROGERSSenior Officer/Manager Sponsor: ACC Crime and JusticeRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes25/05/20182.0Data Protection section amended to reflect implementation of GDPR and new DPA.25/10/20183.0Version 2.0 reviewed at 12 months and amended in line with updated APP guidance. New s14 Radicalisation added.04.09.20224.0Policy and Procedure section revised and split into two separate documents.Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionD/Supt Ben Mant, Head of PPD25.08.20224.0ACC Deb Smith, ACC Crime, Justice, and VulnerabilityContinuous Improvement Team04..09.20224.0Distribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-Brief06.09.20224.0Email to relevant affected Staff/Officers05.09.20224.0Other: Aide Memoire05.09.20224.0Equality Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionImplications of the Policy: Training RequirementsNo additional training requirements.IT InfrastructureNo additional IT Infrastructure required.
POLICY STATEMENT.Automatic Number plate Recognition (ANPR) technology is used for law enforcement purposes, to help detect, deter and disrupt criminality at a local, force, regional and national level. This includes tackling travelling criminals, Organised Crime Groups and terrorists. By definition, ANPR provides lines of enquiry and evidence in the investigation of crime.The National ANPR Standards for Policing and Law Enforcement (NASPLE) defines the standard required for the development and use of ANPR systems by Law Enforcement Agencies (LEA). The procedure for the management and use of ANPR systems within Wiltshire Police is consistent with NASPLE and is applicable to all officers and staff who have authorised access to the system.The National ANPR capability (NAC) enables LEA to benefit from operational use of ANPR. The NAC comprises:The National ANPR Service (NAS) comprising standardised functionality to enable use for operational response, investigation and intelligence purposes as well as a single national store of data;any other national store of data provided for law enforcement purposes relating to terrorism and serious criminal offences and where necessary and proportionate for other law enforcement purposes.local ANPR systems to enable use for operational response, investigation, and intelligence purposes, andthe National ANPR Infrastructure (NAI) which is a network of ANPR cameras, communications links, firewalls and other related supporting components.This Policy relates to the access, management and use of ANPR data including provisions for audit of the NAS.Glossary of Terms.AcronymDescriptionANPRAutomatic Number Plate RecognitionANPR systemA collection of cameras, readers & components linking to NASAudit StandardsNational Standards for Compliance and Audit of Law Enforcement ANPRCameraThe device used to capture an ANPR readCommunications LinksThe connections between the camera, any local infrastructure and the NASControllerThe competent authority who alone or jointly with others determines the means and purposes of the processing of personal data. (Part 3 DPA 2018)CPIACriminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 and the CPIA Code ofPractice
AcronymDescriptionDPAData Protection Act 2018FOIFreedom of Information Act 2000UK GDPRUK General Data Protection RegulationsGSCPGovernment Security Classifications PolicyICO CodeICO Code of Practice for Surveillance Camera SystemsLEALaw Enforcement Agency – includes Police forces and other agencies undertaking law enforcement activitiesMoPIManagement of Police InformationNACNational ANPR CapabilityNAINational ANPR InfrastructureNASNational ANPR ServiceNASPLENational ANPR Standards for Policing and Law EnforcementNPCCNational Police Chiefs’ Council.Personal DataAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual. See DPA 2018READThe interpretation of a VRM by an ANPR systemRIPARegulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000VRMVehicle Registration Mark1. Access.Data Access Management.Any access to data must be for national security, counter terrorism, investigation and enforcement purposes as defined in Annex B of NASPLE or for the purpose of audit.Authorised Wiltshire Police users may access and use data within the NAS for these stated purposes providing they are compliant with applicable data protection legislation in the circumstances of each case - this would be without further authorisation unless required within the terms of NASPLE.ANPR Password Policy.Password requirements for access to NAS is based on national Cyber Security Centre guidelines and is applicable to all roles within Wiltshire Police granted access to the NAS.Authorised users will be allocated individual accounts that may only be accessed using a password in a format approved by the National Accreditor to requirements detailed in Appendix A of NASPLE.Provisions for Data access.Authorised users will be provided with least privilege access necessary to carry out their role.Data Access provision when NAS is unavailable.Data held within the local components of the NAC (Section 9.9.4 of NASPLE) can only be accessed by authorised users in circumstances where the NAS or communications to the NAS have become unavailable.Vetting Requirements for access to ANPR data. Recruitment Vetting (RV)Authorisation of Staff Access.The ANPR Specialist is accountable for the authorisation of staff who may access ANPR data. They can be contacted through ICT via HALO.Role Based Access and Training.
Authorised users will only be granted access to ANPR data to an extent that is necessary and proportionate to their role. The ANPR Specialist will ensure that authorised personnel have completed all required training and are fully aware of the provisions within NASPLE.Authorised users will have individual access accounts and permissions.2. Data Management.Data provision by non-LEA.For Data captured or gathered using shared collection equipment owned and managed by a non-LEA entity but received by NAS via Wiltshire Police then the Data Controller for Wiltshire Police will manage and process (including the provision of access and sharing) this data without seeking authorisation or approval from the Data Controller of the non-LEA entity.Compliance.If Wiltshire Police receives data from a non-LEA organisation for submission onto NAS, a written Data Processing agreement detailing the appropriate arrangements made to ensure compliance with NASPLE must be in place with the owner of the camera and any other components of ANPR infrastructure.Data Extraction from NASWhere Wiltshire Police accesses data within the NAC, the Chief Constable becomes controller for any data extracted from the NAC as a result of that access: Management of all data that is extracted must be in accordance with the provisions within NASPLE All reports or other documents that include data from NAC must be marked in accordance with the requirements of the Government Security Classifications Personal data must only be processed in accordance with Data Protection and other applicable LegislationANPR Account ManagementAuthorised users with approved access to NAC (as both a user and for administrative purposes) will be allocated a separate account. Each account must be used for its intended purpose. Accounts will be reviewed, suspended or terminated in the following circumstances: An account will be suspended if it is not accessed for a period of 90 days. The need for access will be reviewed within the subsequent 7 days. The account may then be reactivated or deleted as appropriate  Access permissions will be reviewed within 7 days of a person changing role An account will be terminated within a maximum of 48 hours of a person leaving Wiltshire policeThis will be overseen by the ANPR Specialist.Records of Authorised StaffWiltshire Police will maintain a list of authorised users and ensure that authorisation is revised or cancelled as appropriate when they change role or leave the organisation.This list will be maintained by the ANPR Specialist.Record Retention and DeletionANPR READ records will be deleted 12 months after their initial capture unless retained under provisions of CPIA or RIPA. Records may also be retained for longer than 12 months following a review that identifies a continuing policing purpose for those items of data under provisions of MoPI.These records will be retained and managed in accordance with those provisions.
This will be managed by the ANPR Specialist or the Decision Makers of the Records Management Department, dependant on the Line of Business Application (for example Niche RMS) in which the data is processed.3. Use.Disclosure and Evidential Use of Data.Data held within or obtained from the NAC may not be used or disclosed for any purposes except those as authorised within NASPLE.Disclosure schedules.Where ANPR data obtained is retained as material within the meaning of the CPIA in preparation of disclosure schedules, information relating to ANPR methodology, tactics and camera locations will be recorded on the Schedule of Sensitive Material and may be disclosed to prosecution authorities.Restrictions on personnel in disclosure of ANPR and in production of evidential materials.Statements of evidence in respect of data within the NAC may only be provided by the ANPR Specialist or ANPR Data Officer as they are the only staff authorised within Wiltshire Police and have current access permissions within NAC for that purpose. Authorised staff may provide a statement of evidence for any data held within the NAC except for the locations of static ANPR cameras (as detailed in the Provisions to safeguard location of ANPR infrastructure below).Provisions to safeguard the location of ANPR infrastructure.To safeguard the national ANPR infrastructure, apart from data obtained from a Mobile ANPR system, the precise location for an ANPR read obtained from a camera will not be disclosed during an investigation nor included in evidence. The ANPR Specialist or ANPR Data Officer (who have responsibility for the camera that recorded this data) must be consulted and provide written consent for that disclosure or evidence to be provided. This includes the production of a map or other document that discloses the precise location of the camera.Evidential Use of Data.Evidence of an ANPR read will only be included where it is of specific relevance to an investigation and is of material value to any judicial proceedings.Information to be included in evidential disclosure.The location of a read will be described in the following decreasing order of preference:1. The general area of the location (e.g. Town, District, Metropolitan Borough)2. The postcode (following consultation with the controller of Wiltshire Police who has responsibility for the camera that recorded the data, in circumstances where this will identify the precise location of the camera)3. The name of the road (following consultation with the controller of Wiltshire Police who has responsibility for the camera that recorded the data, in circumstances where this will identify the precise location of the camera)4. The precise location (following consultation with the ANPR Specialist or ANPR Data Officer who has responsibility for the camera that recorded the data)Disclosure of ANPR data for non-evidential purposes.Unless permitted within section 10.7 of NASPLE, core ANPR read data and any supporting imagery as defined by section 8.3.5 of NASPLE is not to be transferred (to other Line of Business Applications nor disclosed to any third party (including staff from an organisation that is not listed in Annex A of NASPLE). Data may only be disclosed to the data subject in accordance with procedures for dealing with
DPA enquiries. Data may be shared with an organisation that is not listed in Annex A of NASPLE with the express written authority of the Data Controller (who has the responsibility for the camera that recorded that data).Disclosure to non-Approved OrganisationsIf Wiltshire Police has an active role in collaboration with another LEA not listed in Annex A of NASPLE then, in the conduct of an investigation and in circumstances consistent with the provisions of Schedule 2 DPA, the results of a search of ANPR data may be disclosed to that other LEA with a requirement that it is not further disclosed without the express written authority of the Data Controller for Wiltshire Police.Representations re Disclosure of Camera Locations.In addition to the above, the Data Controller (who owns and/or controls the camera that captures ‘read’ data) will be provided with a specific opportunity to make representation to any court that is to consider an order for information to be disclosed regarding the location of a camera.Recording of Disclosure.In all circumstances where data is disclosed, a record (to include the identity of those disclosing and receiving the data and the reason for and any authorisation of that disclosure) must be maintained.Storage of ANPR Data other than in NAS.Data must not be stored outside the NAC unless for the purpose of retention in accordance with section10.6.1 of NASPLE or in accordance with section 10.9 of NASPLE below where those requirements cannot be met within the NAC, or it has been extracted as a result of a court order or other lawful authority for the provision of the data.Record Amendment.Records that are identified as incorrect for any reason must either be corrected or deleted at the time that they are found to be incorrect.Transfer to local systems for basic user accessData may not be transferred to any local systems external to those required for connection to NAC to facilitate basic user access to ANPR data.4. Audit.Audits must be conducted in accordance with the National Standards for Compliance and Audit of Law Enforcement ANPR by Wiltshire Police staff who have the appropriate security clearance.Wiltshire Police will support the national auditor in the monitoring and audit of access to the NAC and will provide relevant information on requestThe Wiltshire Police Integrity Auditor will audit the access to NAC by Wiltshire Police authorised users in accordance with Audit Standards and maintain a record of all audits that are undertaken. The details of these audits will be made available to supervisory authorities and regulatory bodies (for example but not necessarily limited to the Information Commissioner’s Office, the Surveillance Camera Commissioner and the National Auditors) on requestPOLICY AIM.The aim of this Policy is to ensure the access, management of data and use of the NAS by employees of Wiltshire Police is consistent within the standards and requirements set out in NASPLE and meets the
criteria for audit as set out in the National Standards for Compliance and Audit of Law Enforcement ANPR.APPLICABILITY.This Policy applies to all Wiltshire Police Officers and Staff who have access to the NAS; either as a direct user or requester of information from the system.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCE.ANPR data from Wiltshire Police is police information within the meaning of The Code of Practice on the Management of Police Information 2005 (MoPI) made under the Police Act 1996 and Police Act 1997.It may be shared between LEAs in accordance with the provisions of that Code or any other document which applies similar standards in its place, including the National Crime Agency’s (NCA) Statement of Information Management Practice (SIMP).Access to and the retention and management of ANPR data obtained by Wiltshire Police must be compatible and consistent with their relevant legal obligations, these include but are not limited to:The Data Protection Legislation (i.e. the UK General Data Protection Regulations (UK GDPR) and the Data Protection Act 2018);ICO Code of Practice for Surveillance Camera Systems (ICO Code); Part 2 of the Protection of Freedoms Act 2012 (PoFA);The Surveillance Camera Code issued under Part 2 of PoFA.Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 and Code of Practice issued under Part II of that Act (CPIA);RELATED DOCUMENTS and Authorised Professional Practice.Data Protection PolicyCollege of Policing Approved Professional Practice – Information Management.DATA PROTECTION AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION.Any information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, UK General Data Protection Regulations and the Data Protection Policy.This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUALITY IMPACT.This policy has been drafted to comply with the principles of the Human Rights Act 1998 and Equality Act 2010. Members of Wiltshire Police administering this policy are responsible for ensuring that in its application, those to whom the policy applies, shall not receive less favourable treatment because of
their age, colour, disability, ethnic or national origin, gender re-assignment, marital status, nationality, race, religion, sex or sexual orientation.This policy has been subject to an equality impact assessment and has been graded Low Impact. A full Equality Impact Assessment can be found on the Equality Impact Assessment SharePoint page.?	Revision HistoryVersionDateSummary of Changes3.013.09.2024Policy adapted onto the new SharePoint policy template.
Template v7WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICYNational Investigators Exam – Failures and DeferralsDate of Publication: June 2020 Version:	2.0Next Review Date:	June 2022
POLICY STATEMENTThis policy seeks to clarify the process around unsuccessful entrants of the National Investigators Exam (NIE), and explain Wiltshire Police’s stance in relation to deferrals of the exam.This policy is aimed at both police officers and police staff members enrolled on to the Initial Crime Investigators Development Programme (ICIDP).This policy must be read in conjunction with the College of Policing National Investigators’ Examination Rules & SyllabusThe policy is divided into the following sections:ï Procedureï Exam Failuresï Sicknessï Withdrawals and Absencesï Exceptional CircumstancesProcedureAny police officer or police staff member who is inducted onto the ICIDP process will be required to sit the National Investigators Exam. It is the case in Wiltshire Police that the NIE can only be taken by someone inducted on the ICIDP.Induction to the ICIDP process is required when a police officer or police staff member occupies a role in which they are required to be PIP 2 accredited. In all cases this will be where the police officer or police staff member is in a position where they are required to investigate serious or organised crime, such as PPD, CID, SCD.Police officers and police staff members cannot request to take the NIE without being enrolled on the ICIDP.It is the personal responsibility of the inducted officer/staff member to register themselves for the NIE by the required date as specified by People Development department.Failure to register for the exam will result in the police officer/police staff member being removed from the ICIDP unless they can provide exceptional circumstances to the Detective Superintendent Head of Crime as to why they were unable to complete the registration on time.Once registered for the exam all candidates will have a minimum period of 14 weeks before they are expected to sit the national investigators exam.Exam FailuresWiltshire Police will adopt the changes to the College of Policing rules:If a candidate fails the NIE a second time then a development meeting MUST take place to identify any issues, consideration by both parties given to whether the process is the right pathway at that time for that individual. Candidates can be withdrawn or entered for a further NIE.If a third fail is registered then management intervention is required.
Police OfficerPolice officers will be provided with a support plan following their second unsuccessful attempt at the exam. This will detail the personal responsibility of the officer and the supportive commitments of the line manager in order that the individual improves their performance and/or completes the specified element of the ICIDP programme.If a police officer is unsuccessful on their third attempt of the exam then management intervention will occur. This may result in the candidate going to the Resource Management Panel (RMP), following a discussion between them and their line manager for reposting in line with the current terms and conditions of RMP.Removal from the ICIDP will not automatically mean that the police officer is subject to an Unsatisfactory Performance Process (UPP), but it will be considered dependent on circumstances on a case by case process.Police staffIf a police staff member meets the criteria set out for removal from ICIDP then they will follow the Capability Procedure. Police staff members will be required to attend a stage 1 capability meeting in the following circumstances: their second unsuccessful exam attempt.A possible outcome from stage 1 is a support plan which will detail the individuals’ and management’s responsibilities to gaining the ICIDP qualification. Discussion will also take place as to the individuals’ suitability to remain on this pathway or to look for an alternative role.It is key to highlight that the capability process is not meant to be punitive, but is to provide a structured approach to supporting progress with performance. The support plans, whether informal or formal, are there to provide the member of staff with clarity on expectations of what and how. The managers will work closely with the member of staff to support them achieving the requirements of their role.Individuals looking for alternative roles would need to be competent in that role through a selection or skills match process. If agreeable, individuals would be redeployed into an alternative role if it is vacant.Escalation to stage 2 capability hearing would occur if an individual is unsuccessful for a third time. This would be a breach of their stage 1 and possible outcomes from stage 2 include dismissal.Both Officers and StaffIf an individual refuses to undertake any elements pertaining to the ICIDP qualification then the reasons for this refusal will be explored and consideration will be given for having this refusal and the reasons for doing so assessed through the conduct process. Appropriate action may then be taken either through the conduct, capability or performance procedures.SicknessAs per the National Investigators Exam Rules & Syllabus section 11.If a candidate fails to disclose that they have a medical condition that will impact on their ability to sit the NIE then this will not count as evidence of exceptional circumstances should they fail the exam.Where candidates report sick on the day of the exam a doctor’s note will be required.If the candidate fails to attend the exam due to two separate incidents of sickness then the matter will be bought to the attention of the Head of Crime Superintendent who may decide that the candidate be removed from the ICIDP.
Withdrawals and AbsenceThe College of Policing National Investigators Exam Rules & Syllabus section 10 will apply.If candidates withdraw from the exam at any stage they must inform the Crime Training Sergeant and provide the reason why they have withdrawn. A heavy workload or lack of protected study time are not deemed appropriate reasons for withdrawal.Supervisors should acknowledge their responsibility to provide candidates with the protected study time afforded to them and make every effort for them to have this.A withdrawal will count as an unsuccessful attempt at the exam.In all cases it will be the discretion of the Head of Crime Detective Superintendent as to whether the candidate will be allowed to resit the exam.All candidates will only be allowed one authorised withdrawal at the discretion of the Head of Crime Detective Superintendent. The candidate must sit the next suitable available exam as decided by the Learning and Development department.If the location of this exam is not local then it is the responsibility of the candidate to make sufficient travel arrangements. Location will not be allowed as an excuse to not sit an exam.Candidates should consult the Business and Travel procedure for details of entitlements.DeferralsCandidates are only able to defer the exam in exceptional circumstances (see exceptional circumstances section below).Candidates should give appropriate notice to the Crime Training Sergeant and Head of Crime Detective Superintendent of their intention to defer the exam and provide a clear written rationale. All cases that are deferred will need to be agreed by the Head of Crime Detective Superintendent who will make representation to the College.Candidates will not be allowed to retrospectively defer, in these circumstances failure to attend the exam will count as a withdrawal (see withdrawal section above).Candidates will only be allowed to defer from the exam on one occasion after which they will be expected to sit the next exam they are registered for.Exceptional CircumstancesWhat constitutes an exceptional circumstance will be decided at the discretion of the Head of Crime Superintendent but it may include long term serious illness, and pregnancy.Where exceptional circumstances apply the candidate will be expected to record the circumstances in a written report to the Sergeant of Crime Training and the Head of Crime Detective Superintendent. This must be done as soon as practicable once the reason for the deferment has come to notice.
POLICY AIMThe aim of this policy is to make the procedure for participating in the national investigators exam clear so that any failures or deferrals are dealt with fairly and impartially regardless of whether the candidate is a police officer or police staff.APPLICABILITYThis policy applies to police officers and police staff who will be sitting the national investigators exam.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCECollege of Policing National Investigators’ Examination Rules & SyllabusRELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSCollege of Policing National Investigators’ Examination Rules & SyllabusAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEInvestigation > Introduction > National structureDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWThis policy will be reviewed every two years or as appropriate in conjunction with any updates provided by the College of Policing.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Head of Crime Detective Superintendent is responsible for this policy. All queries relating to this policy should be directed to the Head of Crime or the Force Policy Officer.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Head of CrimePolicy Owner/Author:	D/Superintendent Sarah ROBBINS / DS Sarah CHAMPION Technical Author:Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: ACC Crime and JusticeRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes13.06.20181.0Draft v0.9 published as substantive version 1.0.06.06.20191.0Scheduled review – no changes made. Next review date reset to June 2022.25.06.20202.0Exam failure section amended. 2nd failed attempt changed to initiation of a support plan and management intervention.Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team13.06.20180.9JNCC(Not required for all policies)11.06.20180.9Distribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionUNISON17.04.20180.9Police Federation17.04.20180.9Implications of the Policy: Training RequirementsNo training requirements required to implement this policy.IT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure required.
OFFICIAL
Template v5
WILTSHIRE POLICENICHE RMSMINIMUM DATA QUALITY STANDARDSDate of Publication: March 2021 Version:	2.0Next Review Date:	March 2023
CONTENTSSection 1: Purpose	3Section 2: Aim	3Section 3: Applicability	3Section 4: Principles	3Section 5: Information Recording Systems	4Section 6: Crime/Incident Recording	5Section 7: Corrective Activity	5Section 8: Data Quality Performance Management	5Section 9: Roles and Responsibilities	7Section 10: Legal Basis and Driving Force	8Section 11 – Links to External Documents/Compliance	9Annex A: Data Quality Standards	10ï 1.1.1 Entity - Personï 1.1.2 Entity - Objectï 1.1.3 Entity – Location (Address)ï 1.1.4 Entity - Eventï 1.1.5 STORM Command and ControlAnnex B: Data Quality Standards – Detailed Standards	16ï 2.1.1 Person Recordsï 2.1.2 Person - Otherï 2.1.3 Telephone/Email Recordsï 2.1.4 Vehicle Recordsï 2.1.5 Property Recordsï 2.1.6 Address Recordsï 2.1.7 Business Recordsï 2.1.8 Occurrencesï 2.1.9 Custody RecordsAnnex C – ‘How to’ Guide – Process Standards	23ï 3.1.1 Linkingï 3.1.2 Flags / Warningsï 3.1.3 Searching in Nicheï 3.1.4 Gender / Gender Titleï 3.1.5 Business addressesï 3.1.6 Incorrect / Incomplete addressesï 3.1.7 Linking/updating existing person recordsï 3.1.8 Updating personal informationï 3.1.9 Telephone Recordsï 3.1.10 Vehicle Recordsï 3.1.11 Creating an Occurrence4.1 Extreme Errors and Overwrites	29Annex D: 5.1 Do’s and Don’t’	30DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	31
Section 1: PurposeOf fundamental importance to the use of police information is that the information itself is of an acceptable quality. Without accurate data, there is a risk that critical decisions are based upon unreliable information, that important information cannot be retrieved, or that significant relationships between different items of information are not linked.The purpose of these standards is to support the consistent and accurate recording of police operational information and data in the Niche Records Management System (RMS) ensuring that information is accurately recorded and adheres to the requirements of the General Data Protection Regulations (GDPR), the statutory Code of Practice on the Management of Police Information (MoPI) and the Authorised Professional practice (APP) Information Management.Section 2: AimThis document includes a set of Minimum Data Standards (Annex A) aligned to the National Data Quality Standards and organised around P.O.L.E (Person, Object, Location, Event) entities. It will identify the minimum required standard and flag any required formatting.It also includes a How To’ Guide (Annex C), a set of ‘Do’s and Don’ts’ (Annex D), data validation criteria and data quality impact/enforcement information.This document will enable Wiltshire Police to measure, monitor and improve data quality and meet the requirements in relation to legislation and national guidance. It will outline the approach to regulate, control and improve the quality of police information for which the Force is responsible.Section 3: ApplicabilityThis document applies to all police officers and police staff (including the extended police family and those working voluntarily or under contract to Wiltshire Police) who are users of Niche RMS and must be aware of, and are required to comply with, this document.Section 4: PrinciplesA key principle of recording police information is ‘right first time, every time’. Information retrieved from police systems is only effective and of use if it is of a high quality, accurate and complete. The aim is to prevent the generation of poor quality data in the first instance, rather than having to mass check and correct after initial creation.All police information must conform to data quality principles. It must be:AccurateSpecifically:ï capture once and close to point of activityï spelt correctly or if numerical, then formatted correctlyï be factualï know the source and clarify accuracy with themï consider standards and legislation (i.e. APP Information Management)ï correct inaccurate information as soon as practicableï make checks for duplicate recordsï make links, where appropriate, to existing recordsAdequateSpecifically:ï be sufficient for purposesï 
ï clear meaning for others – current and future use of the informationï clear rationale for decision makingï consider standards such as National Intelligence Model (NIM), MoPI and legislation such as the Data Protection Act (DPA)RelevantSpecifically:ï a policing or other business purpose must be establishedï be necessary and proportionateï not excessiveï be reviewed and, where appropriate, disposedï opinions clearly distinguished from factï valid across all relationshipsTimelySpecifically:ï recorded in the appropriate format, as soon as practicableï in line with local and national standards such as National Crime Recording Standard (NCRS) and National Standard for Incident Recording (NSIR)ï make information available to others particularly consider the visibility of potential risks as soon as possibleCompliance with these principles is the responsibility of everyone who enters new data or updates existing data in Niche RMS.Section 5: Information Recording SystemsThere are many different information recording systems across Wiltshire Police, such as STORM Command and Control, Niche Record Management System (RMS) and legacy databases such as Crime, Intel etc (searchable via FDS).Niche RMS is the largest live database and holds information relating to several different business areas:ï Public Protection (child protection, domestic abuse, safeguarding adults and missing persons)ï Intelligenceï Case and Custodyï Crime and Incidentsï Justice Trafficï FirearmsAlthough this document is aimed specifically at Niche RMS, users of all police systems have a responsibility to ensure the quality of data recorded on both electronic systems and in paper format is of a high standard and in accordance with set policy/procedure.Information uploaded to the Police National Database (PND) is taken directly from Niche RMS, therefore it is vital that every effort is taken to ensure that the information recorded is accurate, correct and free from duplication. The Data Quality Standards include the details required for information to be uploaded from Niche RMS to PND. It is important that all records are updated to include additional information as it is made available, such as adding driver licence details, linking associates and updating contact information.Table of Contents
Section 6: Crime/Incident RecordingWiltshire Police complies with the National Crime Recording Standard (NCRS), the Home Office counting rules (HOCR) and the National Standard for Incident Recording (NSIR) when recording crimes and incidents. Each Force has a Crime and Incident Registrar (FCIR) who acts as the final arbiter for the interpretation of the NCRS, HOCR and NSIR, and for the quality assurance process. Any questions on crime and incident recording or closure compliance should be directed to the FCIR.Section 7: Corrective ActivityWhere it is identified that data is inaccurate or unreliable, all staff have a duty to amend the data accordingly either by direct input (where permission levels and/or training allow) or by ensuring that the appropriate department is notified to carry out the amendment on their behalf. In relation to Niche RMS, the Data Quality Team carry out most corrective actions (see Roles and Responsibilities section 9).Section 8: Data Quality Performance ManagementUsing appropriate methods, the DQT will extract data from Niche RMS to produce Data Quality Reports on a monthly basis. The reports provide performance data in relation to data quality and identify patterns and trends in data quality.These reports are distributed to designated individuals within different business areas and filtered down to team supervisors and can help to identify where an individual may benefit from additional support or training. Training will be offered and provided on a one to one basis by the DQT.The Senior Information Risk Owner (SIRO - DCC) has directed that the following 6 month process will be followed when police officers/staff are identified as repeatedly inputting incorrect or inaccurate data into Niche RMS and are, therefore, not compliant with the set of data quality standards detailed later in this document.If an officer/staff member begins to lapse in improvement after being removed from the below 6 month process, they will retrigger Step 1.Step 1 - Once a significant* amount of errors have been created within a single month, the Data Quality team will email the officer/staff and include their first line Supervisor with advice, guidance and the offer of one to one training relating to that specific type of error. It is the personal responsibility of the officer/staff member to ensure that any advice, guidance or training offered is undertaken.*Significant errors include 10 or more ‘Other’ errors, 5 or more duplicate records of any type or 1 ‘High Impact’ error.‘High Impact’ errors will be reported to the individual as soon as they are found at any stage of this process so that they can be accurately corrected as a matter of priority.The review period for Step 1 will last for three months during which time officer/staff can engage with the Data Quality team who will provide guidance as appropriate. At the end of each review month error rates will be reported to Departmental SPOC’s and officer/staff should approach their supervisor to request sight of this information. If required the Data Quality team can provide more detailed information.Table of Contents
After the review period has been completed the Data Quality team will analyse the officer/staff members errors over the previous three months. This will take into account any and all error types, the number of errors created and also previous sanction history to identify whether enough improvement has been made for them to be removed from the sanctions process. If no significant improvement has been made and/or officer/staff failed to engage with the team during this time, they will progress to Step 2.Step 2 – If a second trigger* point is hit during the 1st review period, the Data Quality team will email the officer/staff member and include their first line Supervisor, specifiying the errors and offering further advice, guidance and one to one training. It will be the responsibility of the first line Supervisor and officer/staff member to ensure that any advice, guidance or training offered is undertaken.*The 2nd trigger point will be a continuation of the same errors initially made and/or the reporting of more serious errors based on the previous month/s.The review period for Step 2 will last for two months during which time officer/staff can engage with the Data Quality team who will provide guidance as appropriate. At the end of each review month error rates are reported to Departmental SPOC’s and officer/staff should approach their supervisor to request sight of this information. If required the Data Quality team can provide more detailed information.After the review period has been completed the Data Quality team will analyse the officer/staff members errors over the previous two months. This will take into account any and all error types, the number of errors created and also previous sanction history to identify whether enough improvement has been made for them to be removed from the sanctions process. If no significant improvement has been made and/or officer/staff failed to engage with the team during this time they will progress to Step 3.Step 3 – If a third trigger* point is subsequently hit during the 2nd review period, the Data Quality team will escalate to the Supervisor and Department Head and copy in the officer/staff member. The Supervisor and Department Head will be responsible for identifying any underlying issues and should consider management of the individual through suitable and appropriate methods. One-to- one training with the Data Quality team will be mandatory if Step 3 is reached.*The 3rd trigger point will be a continuation of the same errors initially made and/or the reporting of more serious errors based on the previous month/s.The review period for Step 3 will last for one month during which time officer/staff can enage with the Data Quality team who will provide guidance as appropriate. At the end of each review month error rates are reported to Department SPOCs and officer/staff should approach their supervisor to request sight of this information. If required the Data Quality team can provide more detailed information.After the review period has been completed the Data Quality team will analyse the officer/staff members errors over the previous month. This will take into account any and all error types, the number of errors created and also previous sanction history to identify whether enough improvement has been made for them to be removed from the sanctions process. If no significant improvement has been made and/or officer/staff failed to engage with the team during this time, they will progress to Step 4.Table of Contents
Step 4 – If during the final month of this 6 month process, there is little improvement (or failure to attend training) and additional duplicates and/or continued errors are created, the Data Quality Team will update the Supervisor, Head of Department, Records Manager and Head of Information Management and Assurance, highlighting the severity of the issues found. They will recommend the amendment of Niche permissions or complete removal of the Niche role, pending additional training. This is seen as a last resort only and should be a rare occurrence if the offer of training is taken.The final decision for the removal/amendment of Niche permissions rests with the Head of Information Management and Assurance, as Information Asset Owner for Niche RMS.Section 9: Roles and ResponsibilitiesThe SIRO will support and promote the benefits of data quality having overall responsibility for ensuring staff adhere to best practice in relation to the information they gather, submit and record in line with standards.Business Area Leads/Departmental ManagersBusiness area leads/Managers are accountable for the standard of data quality in their Command or business area, by extension their business areas held within Niche RMS. They are:ï responsible for ensuring that there is a commitment within their areas of responsibility to the appropriate use of Niche RMS and to prescribed data quality standardsï responsible for producing, publicising and disseminating clearly worded procedures, rules and conventions to help each person in that business area who submits, inputs and reviews police information to be aware of the correct procedures and operate in accordance with the APP on Information Management, GDPR and the Force Records Retention Schedule. In respect of data quality, these documents should indicate the minimum requirements as set out in the APP on Information Management and (in more detail) this document, for the collection and recording of information and include measures to validate and audit data quality on a continuous basisï required to nominate an individual within their business area to receive Data Quality reports from the DQT (see below). That individual will:- provide feedback to users responsible for inaccuracies- undertake training / guidance as required and- liaise with the DQT in relation to any emerging issues, trends or potential solutionsFirst Line SupervisionFirst line supervisors must ensure that:ï staff under their supervision receive appropriate training and are familiar with this document in order that they may fulfil their role effectivelyï all staff are fully aware of the need to record information accurately and the impacts of not doing soï they regularly dip sample the information submitted, recorded and reviewed in their business area to ensure it meets acceptable standards of quality, that it has been recorded in the appropriate Force format/system and that it has been reviewed for retention/disposal in accordance with the Force Retention Scheduleï they provide appropriate feedback and take necessary action for non-adherence where required.Table of Contents
All Officers/Police StaffIt is the responsibility of all officers and staff to:ï be aware and adhere to the data quality standards detailed in this document, the APP on Information Management, requirements of GDPR and the Force Retention Schedule when collecting, recording and reviewing informationï ensure that sufficient and accurate information is obtained when gathering, submitting and recording informationï provide a timely response to requests for clarification in relation to information submittedï where information is identified as being inaccurate or incomplete, ensure that the appropriate steps are taken to rectify and improve the standard of informationï record information in the appropriate formatData Quality Team (DQT)The Data Quality Team undertake detailed research and analysis in order to carry out corrective action in Niche RMS and carry out a range of non-technical activities to support the use and development of Niche RMS on behalf of the Force.Their standard service features include, notably but not exclusively:ï the merging of duplicate data,ï correction of poor data entries,ï identifying and rectifying overwritten data,ï deletion of inaccurate informationï providing feedback/training in data qualityï ensuring Access Control Levels (ACL) are applied correctly, reviewed and removedï application, review and removal of temporary permissionsï provision of Data Quality Reportsï the application of ‘deceased’ markers (dependent on source of information provided)ï User Support/Trainingï A range of non-technical system administrative activitiesPlease note - the quality checks performed by the DQT go some way to improving accuracy but responsibility sits with the originator of the information being input.The DQT can be contacted via -ï Email - DataQualityTeam@wiltshire.police.ukï Task – via unit ‘DQT’ï Microsoft Teamsï Telephone - DQT Hunt Number 77461012When contacting the DQT please make sure that all relevant information regarding your request is included, i.e. occurrence numbers, nominal names and DOB etc, with a precise explanation of what action you would like taken. Please include any reasoning or evidence you may have to help to make an informed decision and so your request can be dealt with efficiently. This is especially important when requesting a record is merged or deleted, or when a request is time sensitive.Section 10: Legal Basis and Driving ForceKey drivers for this document and the need for a consistent approach are legislative (particularly the principles of GDPR) and the College of Policing (COP) Authorised Professional Practice (APP) Information Management. A failure to record information appropriately may constitute a breach and, ultimately, result unsatisfactory criminal justice outcomes, undermine public confidence and enforcement action from regulatory bodies / supervisory authorities.
Section 11: Links to External Documents/ComplianceNiche Gazetteer Address Guide Address Grid Reference Finder Single Point Aligned Assets Post Office Address FinderFast Address Client - Please contact ICT on 01380 861200 to have this installed and refer to the Fast Address Client User Guide which will be included as part of this installRELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSThis document has been drawn up within the context of:ï Code of Practice on Management of Police Information (MoPI)ï Authorised Professional Practice (APP) on Information Managementï Force Information Strategyï Information Review, Retention and Disposal Procedural Guidance (RRD)ï Force Information Sharing, Disclosure and Dissemination Policiesï Force Information Management Policyï National Intelligence Model (NIM)ï National Crime Recording Standard (NCRS)ï National standard for incident recording (NSIR)ï Home Office counting rules (HOCR)ï Wiltshire Police Data Protection PolicyAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICECollege of Policing APP Information Management.DATA PROTECTION LEGISLATIONThese standards are compliant with the Data Protection Act 2018/GDPR and the Force Data Protection PolicyFREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This Policy is available under the Freedom of Information Act 2000.PROTECTIVE MARKINGSGSC: OFFICIALIMPLEMENTATION STRATEGYThis document will be made available via the intranet within the Policy and Procedure library. It will also be circulated for the attention of all staff.MONITORING AND REVIEWThis document will be monitored and reviewed by the Records Manager every two years or sooner where change in relevant practice or legislation occurs.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS DOCUMENTForce Records ManagerTable of Contents
Annex A: Data Quality Standards1.1 Minimum Data StandardsThis section specifies the minimum data standard that must be completed when creating either a new entity or updating an existing entity on Niche RMS. The Standards are aligned to the P.O.L.E entities (Person, Object, Location, Event) entities and National Data Quality Standards.It is appreciated that there may be circumstances when it is not practical to obtain full details before creating or updating a record in Niche but it is the record creators personal responsibility to ensure that every effort to obtain the missing data is made as soon as practicable after the fact, and the relevant record in Niche RMS updated accordingly:ï Contact OIC or handling unitï Contact RP or witness directly when possible and appropriateWhere the expected standard of data creation/amendment is not achieved, steps 1-4 detailed in section 8: Data Quality Performance Management will apply.Standard - Before creating any new entity on Niche RMS the user MUST conduct a comprehensive search of the system to ensure that the information is not already held within Niche RMS. This is essential to ensure no records are duplicated and critical to maintaining a high level of data quality. Erroneous data will be identified, reviewed and corrected via daily report functionality.It is the inputter’s responsibility to ensure the information they are entering is accurate, valid and relevant. Users should validate any information given and query any inaccurate information before adding/updating any record in Niche.Never create a record using information you know to be inaccurate or incomplete beyond what is outlined in the Standards. Inaccurate or partial information should be added to the body of the report or as an OEL entry instead of creating a record of no use and no valid policing purpose.Remarks as to why a record has not been created should be added so the information is still recorded somewhere.1.1.1 Entity - PersonAll newly created person records must have the below:ï Surnameï Forename (full name no abbreviations or nicknames)ï Date of Birth (dd/mm/yyyy)ï Gender/Self defined/Verifiedï Linked contact information such as home address (preferred), telephone or email addresso Please refer to the relevant standards for each standards type (P.O.L.E)               * Person / Object / Location / Entity Police officers and staffPolice person records are to be linked when an officer or staff are involved in an incident whilst on duty (found via collar number). These records must only ever contain work related information. Never link personal information to an officer or staff record.Table of Contents
If a member of Wiltshire police is involved in an incident outside of their working hours then a separate person record must be created and linked accordingly. This record should follow the standards above for ‘Person’.Additional information may also be required depending on the classification of the personSee Annex B for the detailed Data Quality Standards - 2.1.1 Person Records and 2.1.2 Person - Other also see Annex C - 3.1.4 Gender / Gender Title, 3.1.7 Linking/updating existing person records and 3.1.8 Updating personal information.1.1.2 Entity - Object Telephone – LocalAll telephone numbers should have a minimum of ten numeric digits including a dialling code (most local numbers will have 11 digits)ï Use the remarks box of the record link to provide any information regarding extension numbers or access codes as appropriate.Telephone – InternationalAdd the last 11 digits to the phone number field and add the full number (including the country name and international dialling code) to the remarks box of the record.ï Use the remarks box of the record link to provide any information regarding extension numbers or access codes as appropriate.ï Make sure the correct record type is selected from the ‘Type’ drop down menuEmail addressesï All email addresses must contain an “@” symbolï Make sure the correct record type is selected from the ‘Type’ drop down menuWeb Addressesï All web addresses much begin and end with the correct domain format (www. / .co.uk / .com/ .org or other as appropriate)ï Make sure the correct record type is selected from the ‘Type’ drop down menuUnique Referenceï Passport numberï Driving Licence numberï CRO IDï PNC IDï National Insurance NumberSee Annex B for the detailed Data Quality Standards - 2.1.3 Telephone/Email Records also see Annex C - 3.1.9 Telephone RecordsVehicleAll vehicles must contain:ï A VRMï Makeï Modelï Colourï Typeï 
But may contain:ï A VIN Numberï A chassis numberï Engine size in CC (Cubic Centimetres)All stolen vehicles must have either a VRM, VIN or Chassis Number and:ï Makeï Modelï Colourï TypeSee Annex B for the detailed Data Quality Standards - 2.1.4 Vehicle Records also see Annex C -3.1.10 Vehicle RecordsProperty (Physical item)All property checked into stores and linked in Niche must have the following:ï A Unique Property reference number (P number)ï Classificationï Exhibit referenceï Details of time and take seizedï Detailed descriptionï Unique IMEI format for mobile phonesStolen property is only checked into stores if recovered and seized as evidence and recorded as above.Lost and Found property is no longer recorded in Niche, the only exception to this is property recovered and seized as evidence and drugs marked for destruction.See Annex B for the detailed Data Quality Standards - 2.1.5 Property RecordsCustody and Other ImagesAll images must be in .JPEG format and added via an Occurrence > Involved and include:ï Forenameï Surnameï Date of Birthï Date of Photographï Offence to which image is linked / relatedï ASN number where appropriateï Image size resolution should be no less than 50k and able to be used for facial recognition1.1.3 Entity – Location (Address)All addresses should be verified using the Gazetteer on Niche RMS. If the address is not available on the Gazetteer the below fields must be manually added:Postal addresses Residential:ï House number or nameï Street nameï TownTable of Contents
ï Countyï Postcodeï Four Beat codesBusiness addresses:ï A business name that corresponds to the current business (a new business address should be created every time a new business moves into a premises)ï Building number, name, unit number (as appropriate)ï Street nameï Townï Postcodeï Four Beat CodesNon-postal addresses (streets, parks etc)ï Street nameï Townï Four Beat codesï The ‘Common name’ field can be populated with concise and relevant information such as the park name, play area name etc. Please keep details to a minimum.International addresses:The same general standards apply to all international addresses, however the postcode box should be left empty. Any postal codes / zip codes outside of the UK can be added to the ‘District’ field.Businessesï All businesses must have the registered businesses name.ï They must be linked to an address that also has the same business name recorded in the common name or premises name fieldSee Annex B for the detailed Data Quality Standards - 2.1.6 Address Records and 2.1.7 Business Records also see Annex C - 3.1.5 Business addresses and 3.1.6 Incorrect / Incomplete addresses1.1.4 Entity - Event Niche OccurrenceEvery Niche occurrence should contain the following:ï Occurrence numberï Occurrence Addressï Person entity linked to occurrences as appropriateï Person entity linked to intelligence should be as appropriate e.g. Subject, Source, Victim, OtherIn addition to the above a crime occurrence should contain the following:ï Home Office crime classificationï Resolved outcomeï Valid Statusï Correctly applied qualifiers – Local and NICLï Date and time of offenceï MO/Summary of at least 20 charactersï Linked Officers, Staff and Units as appropriate (OIC, Reporting officer, Supervising officer etc.)Table of Contents
Admin OccurrencesIn addition to the above it is vitally important to complete the following to ensure the management of this occurrence type:ï Creation Rules – when an Admin occurrence is created, a task/workflow is required to be sent to the relevant unit/team/responsible person to ensure the occurrence is regularly reviewed for intelligence/crime (which should be stored elsewhere). If the occurrence is created on behalf of another user, ensure that the requestor is linked in the Officer tab and/or details added in the OELï File and Finalise – one this type of occurrence has been completed it is required to be filed and finalised by the creator/responsible person. If permissions do not allow users to do this, please task the CCCï Retention – these types of occurrences will be disposed of 6 years from the finalisation date without manual review. Any users requiring the continued retention of an Admin occurrence beyond 6 years, will need to contact the Records Management TeamAudit – These occurrence types will be audited every 3 months to ensure the above is completed.Admin occurrence types include:Action Fraud, Cancel/exit/error, Complaint against Police, Contact Record, CSODS Application, Duplicate, DVDS Application, Horizon, Lost/Found property / Found person, Messages, OCG Management, OCG Operation, Police Generated Resource Activity, Possessing Alcohol – OOPPA, PPD – Single Agency Non Police, PPD Offender Management, Pre-Planned event, Problem Solving, Sec 35 Dispersal Order, SWITCH Offender Management, Targeted Patrols, Test/Training and VRA Action Plans.See Annex B for the detailed Data Quality Standards - 2.1.8 Occurrences also see Annex C - 3.1.11 Creating an OccurrenceCustody Recordsï Person information (section 2.1.1)ï Occurrence numberï PNC ID and CRO number where appropriateï AS Numberï Offenceï Reason for arrestï Arresting officerSee Annex B for the detailed Data Quality Standards - 2.1.9 Custody RecordsOther Identifying Imageso Must be linked to a person record via an Occurrence or Intel report > Involvedo Include date photograph was takeno Must be in .JPEG formato Size resolution should be no less than 50k and able to be used for facial recognitiono Must be of an adequate qualityo Single person, cropped to head and shoulders compositionStop Searcho Person information (section 2.1.1)o Including place of birth and addresso Nature of stopo 
o Date and place of birtho Locationo Ethnicityo Self-defined and officer definedo Officer conducting searchSafeguardingo Personal details of victimo Personal details of suspecto Repeat victim or repeat offendingo Add flags and markers as appropriateo Incident locationo Incident addresso Details of any children presento PPD to be completed where appropriate and tasked to MASHIndecent/Distressing ImagesPlease note that Niche RMS is not an appropriate storage area for indecent images and you me be committing an offence by uploading them. For advice on where to store such images obtained in the course of an investigation, you must contact the relevant investigatory team (i.e. CIET, FCIU, CSI).Niche RMS may not be the most appropriate storage area for distressing images either. Before adding an image to Niche, you must consider other appropriate storage areas (for example is it something that should be stored by South West Forensics?).If there is a requirement to store a distressing image on Niche, you must consider whether that image would cause upset/distress to other users. If so, you must ensure that the document name contains a warning and you add a warning to the first page of the document so when opened it clearly states “distressing/upsetting images are contained within this report”.If you are in doubt about where/how to store your image, please contact the Data Quality team.1.1.5 STORM Command and Control Incidento Call Origino Type Codeo Incident Descriptiono Location (grid reference; BCU; sector)o Gradeo Qualifierso NSIR opening and closing codeso Person information (section 2.1.1)o Addresso Date and timeSourceo Forename and Surname – no abbreviationso Address (grid reference, postcode)o Date of Birtho Telephone numbero Gendero Ethnicityo 
Annex B – Data Quality Standards – Detailed Standards2.1 Additional Information Required and Ownership2.1.1 Person Records – Detailed Data Standards – Entity PersonStandardOwnershipNotesNo person should be created if another person record exists with the same:ï Forenameï Surnameï DOBPlus either address, phone number, email, PNC ID etcCreator/ LinkerIf a duplicate record is created before an existing record is found please contact the DQT for review and possible mergingEvery person’s filename must contain a forename and a surname. The surname must be greater than 1 character in lengthCreator/ LinkerEvery persons filename must contain a DOB (this must not be a future date)CreatorA DOB can be added to a record at a later date (contact the DQT for advice on this).DOB must follow the correct date format of dd/mm/yyyyEvery Persons filename must contain a Gender/TitleCreatorHeight when knownAllHeight must either follow the correct format of feet and inches separated with ” (5”3) or be added in total centimetres (160). Adding a height without ” automatically reverts the format to centimetresAll people linked to an occurrence should have an appropriate classification. All suspects must have a finalising classification charged/NFA/eliminated etc)CreatorPlease refer to the drop down menu and list of available involvement options when linkingA person record can be created using only a description only when it relates to an Unknown Suspect or Missing Person – see belowCreatorIn deviation from the APP IM – WP will create person records based on the minimum of 4 of the following descriptive: height, build, ethnicity, hair and clothing. May also include identifying features such as accent, eye colour, scars or birthmarks, tattoos etc.Table of Contents
2.1.2 Person - OtherClassificationRequired Information (in addition to above minimum standards)Known Victim (Aggrieved)Address, telephone number, ethnicityKnown SuspectAddress, ethnicity, descriptionUnknown SuspectDetailed description (minimum of four including: height (correct format), build, ethnicity, hair and clothing). May also include identifying features such as accent, eye colour, scars or birthmarks etc)Suspect/OffenderAddress, ethnicity, place of birth, PNC ID & CRO (if appropriate)WitnessAddress, telephone numberVulnerable Child or AdultAddress, linked associate (e.g. NOK or Parent/Guardian)Missing PersonAddress, detailed description (at time of disappearance) photographDeceased PersonSudden death/ victim/suspicious/No Crime/Non-suspiciousVerification of death (including date and time)Unknown VictimTo record a crime with an unknown victim (as per NCRS 3.6i) approval should be sought from a supervisor and have the oversight of the Force Crime Registrar.Victim – State basedUse only ‘The State’ and no variant ofKnown person of interestNickname or alias if applicableUnknown person of interestPhysical descriptionUnbornNo record to be created. Information for an unborn child to be linked via the mother’s record and in the body of the OEL/report only. This is Wiltshire Police local practice and deviates from the National Standard.Involved PartyFollow guidelines for Person record (section 2.1.1)AssociationsFollow guidelines for Person record (section 2.1.1)Officer or staff - on dutyLinked via collar number. No personal details to be added to this recordOfficer or staff - off dutyNew or existing person record to be linked. Follow guidelines for Person record (section 2.1.1)Person reporting/organisationFollow guidelines for Person record (section 2.1.1) or Business record (section 2.1.7). Person records should be linked to the corresponding business address record as ‘Works at’Person reporting/general publicFollow guidelines for Person record (section 2.1.1)Anonymous callerNo record to be createdTable of Contents
2.1.3 Telephone/Email Records – Detailed Data Standards – Entity ObjectStandardOwnershipNotesAll telephone numbers must contain at least 10 numeric characters including area codeCreatorLocal numbers are more likely to contain a minimum of 11 digitsFor all international telephone numbers: the last 11 characters must be added to the number field and the full number added to the remarks box below (this should include the international dialling code)Creator2.1.4 Vehicle Records – Detailed Data Standards – Entity ObjectStandardOwnershipNotesNo vehicle should be created if there is an existing record with the same VRM, Make, Model and ColourCreator/LinkerNo Vehicle should be created without a VRM, Make, Model and ColourCreatorIf available all vehicles should also have a VIN or Chassis numberCreator/LinkerIf a vehicle is a “cherished transfer” a note should be made on the remarks boxCreator/Linker2.1.5 Property Records – Detailed Data Standards – Entity ObjectStandardOwnershipNotesAll property items checked into stores must have a unique property reference numberCreatorThis is an auto-generated ‘P’numberAll property items must have a detailed descriptionCreatorAll property items must have an appropriate classificationCreatorThe date and time that the property item was seized/received must be completed. This cannot be a future dateCreatorAll property items must be linked to an occurrenceCreator/LinkerAll exhibit items must have an exhibit reference numberAll property items must be labelled with the correct occurrence numberThis will need to be manually updated on the physical property label if the property is ever moved to a new occurrence on Niche
2.1.6 Address Records – Detailed Data Standards – Entity LocationStandardOwnershipNotesNo address should be created if the same address exists on Niche. To be considered a match, addresses should have the same: Building name, building number, flat numberor unit number, postcode and businessCreator/LinkerIf a duplicate record is created before an existing record is found please contact the DQT for review and possible merging / deletionAll new addresses should be searched for on the Niche Gazetteer and verified if available. Addresses should only be created as non-standard as a last resort if the address isn’t on the GazetteerCreatorIf an address isn’t on the Gazetteer then the full address must be manually completed (including four beat codes)CreatorAll business and residential addresses must have a valid postcodeCreatorIf a new business moves into a premises a new address record must be created and then linked toa business record of the same nameCreator/LinkerIf a business address verifies but includes a historic business name please refer to the ‘BusinessAddresses’ section of the ‘How to’ guide (section 3.1.5)No address should ever be changed. This includes changing the business nameLinkerPlease refer to the ‘Business Addresses’ section of the ‘How to’ guide (section 3.1.5)All email addresses must contain @ symbolCreator2.1.7 Business Records – Detailed Data Standards – Entity LocationStandardOwnershipNotesEvery business/organisation must be created as a business record not a person recordCreatorNo business/organisation should be created if a record with the same name already exists at the same addressCreator/LinkerAll businesses must be linked to an address with the corresponding business nameCreator/LinkerFollow address standard for new business address recordsCreator/Linker
2.1.8 Occurrences - Detailed Data Standards – Entity EventStandardOwnershipNotesAll crime occurrences should have an aggrievedCreator/Linker/ OICAll crime occurrences should have a reporting personCreator/Linker/ OICThe only exception is if the reporting person/caller wants to remain anonymous. Follow guidelines for Person record (section 2.1.2)Crime occurrences should not have more than one aggrieved linked unless this is an offence of Exposure.Creator/Linker/ OICA separate occurrence will be required for any additional aggrievedEvery occurrence must have an occurrence type and a crime classificationCreator/Linker/ OICCrime classification must be added immediately on report or within 24 hours.Every occurrence must have an OICCreator/Linker/ OICEvery crime/incident occurrence must be linked to a valid occurrence addressCreator/Linker/ OICEvery suspect should have a finalising classification (charged/NFA/eliminated etc) before the occurrence is closedOIC/Crime Standards Compliance OfficerAll missing persons should be marked as located before theoccurrence is closedOICAll occurrences must have an occurrence date. For Crime/Incident occurrences this must not be a future date. The end date must not be before the start dateCreator/Linker/ OICAll occurrence summaries (MO) must contain at least 20 charactersCreator/Linker/ OICThis must be as concise as possible and only contain accurate and relevant informationAll crime occurrences must have an appropriate finalising stats classificationOIC/Crime Standards Compliance OfficerTable of Contents
2.1.9 Custody Records - Detailed Data Standards – Entity EventStandardOwnershipNotesThere must be sufficient occurrences created and linked to the Arrest / offences tab of the custody record to reflect the number of crimes/occurrences under investigation.OICWhen a sequence of crimes between the same IP and suspect are reported to the police at the same time only one crime should be recorded as per the HOCR - finished incident rule.The principal crime rule is then applied which means the most serious crime of the sequence reported will be recorded and classifiedThe correct offence must be selected in the “reason” field of the Arrest / offences tab.CustodyAn Arrest Summons Number must be created after the completion of a PNC names check/Live IDCustodyAn ASN must be created in relation to custody records for recordable offences at the earliest possible opportunity.CustodyAll descriptive details must be accurately recorded.CustodyBirthplace/country/nationality must be accurately recorded.CustodyResidential addresses of nominal must be verified.CustodyOld residential addresses must be end dated.All staffEach occurrence attached to a custody record must have a disposalCustodyCase files must be created with the correct Criminal Justice Unit and CPS office.OICThere must be sufficient case files created to correctly accommodatethe number of disposals being applied.CustodyDisposals must be linked to the appropriate case file.CustodyWhere applicable, defendants must be bailed to the correct courtCustodyWhere applicable, multiple defendants in a case must be bailed to the same court date.Custody
The following information will be up- loaded to PND:- Detainee details- Custody location- Offence details- PACE Bail details- Released under Investigation- Pre-Court Disposal details- In case of a non-reportable custody record only the Detainee details will be uploaded to PNDTable of Contents
Annex C – ‘How to’ Guide3.1 Process Standards3.1.1 LinkingStandardOwnershipNotesAll involved people, addresses, vehicles, businesses and telephone numbers should be linked to the involvements tabLinkerIf a member of staff is on duty when they are involved in an incident then their staff record can be used. If they are off duty a person record MUST be used insteadLinkerNo personal information should ever be linked to a staff recordIf any member of staff identifies or creates a duplicate record they must inform the DQT ASAPAll staffAll records not linked directly to an occurrence via the involved tab must reference the occurrence to which the relate in the record linkThis helps identify potential orphan records (records which are not directly linked to an occurrence and have no policing purpose to be on Niche). An example of this could be the registered keeper of a vehicle where only the vehicle is directly involved*Please note the following process for Flags/Warnings is correct at date of publication, however this is currently under review.3.1.2 Flags / WarningsStandardOwnershipNotesWhen creating Flags / Warnings in Niche RMS, the user should review current Flags / Warnings and update accordingly. This is critical to maintain a high level of data quality and ensure information remains accurate and relevant.Inputter- Creator / LinkerAll mental health warnings created on a person record as a result of self- diagnosis must be validated or removed within 7 days of creation.InputterThe person applying the flags or warning is responsible for the accurate creation.InputterAny flag linked to a person/address must have a related occurrence linked.Inputter
BOLO flags must only be used in cases where no other Niche flag is appropriate.InputterEvery flag created on Niche must have the “notify on expiry” selected with a valid unit or individual linked. (Warning markers do not currently have this option available).InputterNiche warning signals must be created where evidence exists to support such action.OIC / CustodyPNC must be notified when warning signals are created on Niche.InputterAll flags and warnings created on Niche will have an agreed retention and disposal period. This will be on acase by case basis and reviewed as appropriate.Inputter / PNC/ DQTFlags / Markers will be uploaded to PND when associated against: - Person (suspects) - Flags & Markers- Addresses - Flags & Markers - Vehicles - Flags & Markers - Business/Criminal Organisation - Flags & Markers - Property - Flags & Markers - Intelligence - Flags only - Occurrence - Flags onlyInputter3.1.3 Searching in Nicheï Using “Fast Find” address can be useful to help find addresses more easily as it searches in multiple fields. Information isn’t always found in the most obvious or logical fieldï Never search for generic addresses, or addresses for parks, playgrounds etc. by using a postcode. Existing addresses may not have a postcode and the postcode added via Gazetteer verification may not be correctï When information drops into Niche from the CAD Log (Storm Log) it may be in the incorrect format or wrong field (e.g. contracted street names such as RD (road), ST (street), AVE (avenue) or beat codes and house names in wrong fields). Always make sure the information on the address is correctly formatted before searching in Nicheï Some house numbers may be found in the premises or flat field instead of the house number field. Additional searches using just the postcode or street name may be requiredï Businesses and motorway marker posts can be found in either the premises name or the common name. Always check bothï If a new business moves into a premises then a new address record must be created. If the business name is just changed on the existing record then the wrong information could be linked to other records/arrests/case files etcï Try multiple variations/spellings of names (e.g. Catherine might be on the system under Kate or Katie, Steven as Steve and Stephen, Claire as Clare or Clair etc) – see wildcardsï Using wildcards (*) can be useful to help account for variations in records, especially if the spelling of a name is unclear. For example, searching for SMITH, C* will return all records for the surname ‘SMITH’ which have a forename beginning with ‘C’o Wildcards can also replace letters in the middle of wordso 
3.1.4 Gender / Gender TitleEvery Person record must include a gender, from the drop down menu select one of the following:ï Male – must include title of ‘Mr’, this is not specific to someone’s ageï Female – Must include title of Miss (if under 16), Ms, Mrs as appropriateï Unknown – leave the title blank as this by definition will also be unknownï Othero Dro PCo Lord* Never add one of these ‘other’ titles to a name fieldEach person record has a name ‘Type’, the following options are available from the dropdown menu:ï Filenameï Aliasï Alternative spellingï Former nameï Maiden nameï Nicknameï PNC filenameThe ‘filename’ should always be the current and legal name of the person in question.3.1.5 Business addressesThere should be a separate address record created every time a new business takes over a premises. If an address with the correct business name does not exist on Niche always create a new record - NEVER change an existing record.Creating/ Verifying new business addresses:ï Do all you can to confirm an existing record isn’t already on Nicheï Make sure that the full address (including unit, building name or number, postcode, street name etc) is correctï If the address on the Gazetteer doesn’t include the business name or the business name is incorrect then verify as the appropriate premises name (including exact unit/building name or number) and then manually change the business name on the Niche address record and tick the ‘Non-standard’ boxo In this case ALWAYS email the DQT to advise them so the Gazetteer can be updatedVerifying existing business addresses:This can include historic or current businesses.ï Before verifying make a note of the exact business name on the existing recordï If the address on the Gazetteer doesn’t include the business name or the business name is incorrect then verify as the appropriate premises name (including exact unit/building name or number) and then manually add or change the business name to what it was originally and tick the ‘Non-standard’ boxo Always email the DQT to advise them so they can check the address and arrange for the Gazetteer to be updated as appropriateTable of Contents
3.1.6 Incorrect / Incomplete addressesThese records are commonly created because the address or postcode has been misheardï Confirm the address with the RP/requesting officerï Check the address using Fast Address Client/ Hopewiser/ verification Gazetteer or the Post Office address finder website (section 11)ï Google isn’t always correct so don’t always trust the first result you findo It’s often best to visit the company website where availableï Missing beat codes – for any address that does not verify via the Gazetteer (‘Non- standard) all four beat codes will need to be manually addedo Always use F3 in one of the beat code fields to search for and auto-populate3.1.7 Linking/updating existing person recordsï Having a matching DOB isn’t enough to confirm a record is the correct person. Always confirm a person’s identity or ensure there is other corroborating evidence linked or referenced on Niche (such as the same associate/family member/address/telephone number/place of work). If you are unsure always create a new record and email the DQTo We would rather merge a duplicate record than correct an incorrectly linked oneï Quite often there can be more than one person at an address with the same forename/surname (father and son for example). Do not link a person based solely on their address. Always confirm their identity or ensure there is other corroborating evidence linked or referenced on Niche. If unsure always create a new record and email the DQTo In this situation having the same phone number isn’t sufficient as people often share phones. It must be a more unique identifier (family relationship, approx. age etc)ï If a person’s DOB is missing or inaccurate always ensure they are not linked to more than one occurrence before updating or adding it. Changing a person’s information can impact existing investigations. If they are linked to multiple occurrences be 100% sure the information is correct and that they are the correct person before updating any part of a recordo Missing DOB can be added to their filenameo When adding the correct DOB to a person linked to multiple occurrences this must initially be added as a new ‘Alias’ and then changed to the ‘Filename’, amending the original ‘Filename’ to ‘Alias. This means we can still search on both* If the person is linked to multiple occurrences always inform the DQT of any DOB changesï For updates to a person’s name or gender please refer to the “Updating personal information” section below3.1.8 Updating personal informationSelf-Identification and gender reassignmentEvery Person record filename must match that of the current and legal name and gender of the person in question.A filename can only be updated to a new name and gender when the following criteria are met –Scenario 1 - Self NotificationPNC: The subject has a different gender identity, notifies the police of their reassigned gender and provides one document from Group A and one document from Group B below:Group Aï Statutory Declarationï Deed Pollï 
ï Official medical letter / report concerning the subject’s gender identityGroup Bï Driving licence in the reassigned genderï Passport in the reassigned genderï Birth certificate in the reassigned genderNiche:The subject has a different gender identity and notifies the police of their reassigned gender -ï Deed Poll confirmation onlyThe Force (PNC Bureau) will then arrange for the Home Office department responsible to change the PNC file name and gender.Niche amendments will be made by the Data Quality Team.Scenario 2 – Force NotificationThe Force becomes aware that the subject recorded on Niche or PNC record is living in an acquired gender (i.e. different from that which was assigned at birth). Police (PNC Bureau usually) email the Home Office and request an information marker – either ‘Police notified – living as female’ or ‘Police notified – living as male’. The record filename and gender (that which was recorded at the point of PNC or Niche record creation) is retained.In this instance the Data Quality Team will create an alias record in Niche including the full name and preferred gender title and remarks stating that this is how the person would like to be referred to. The filename will remain as it is until official legal documentation is provided confirming any changes.Former / Married NamesIf an amendment of surname is found or requested due to a change in marital status this can be updated without any legal confirmation of such. The original Niche record will remain as an appropriate alias (‘Maiden name’ / ‘Former name’ etc) with the new details added as a new ‘Filename’.Never overwrite an existing filename unless it is one you have only just created yourself.When a person is found to have or advises us of any other legal change in full name or part thereof (forename or surname only) we require confirmation of this via Deed Poll before adding a new filename. Until this change is confirmed any additional details will be recorded as an alias only.3.1.9 Telephone RecordsAll telephone numbers should have a minimum of ten numeric characters including a dialling code. The ‘Phone #’ field should contain the full telephone number with the ‘Remarks’ field used for full International telephone numbers or any relevant notes.ï With International telephone numbers use the ‘Phone #’ field for the last eleven digits of the telephone and the ‘Remarks’ field for the full number including area/dialling codeï Make sure the ‘Telephone type’ drop down field is selected with one of the following:o Landlineo Mobileo FAXo 
o Other where appropriateï When linking to a person make sure the appropriate link type is selected:o Residenceo Subscriber ofo Works ato User ofo Other where appropriate3.1.10 Vehicle RecordsWhen creating a vehicle record the ‘Type’ field will generate a pre-populated list of options where a variety of options are available for the following:ï Busï Carï Farm equipmentï Goods vehicleï Motorcycleï Plant equipmentï Trailerï Vanï OtherYou then need to make sure the following field are populated:ï VRMï Makeï Modelï Colourï TypeOptional fields are:ï VIN / chassisï Engine size in CC (Cubic Centimetres)ï Secondary informationWhen a VRM has been legally transferred to a new make and model vehicle please update the ‘Remarks’ field with the comment ‘CHERISHED TRANSFER’.Make sure any link types are accurate, some common options are:ï Driverï Hirer ofï Insured toï Registered toï Involved in offenceï Involved in accidentï Damaged3.1.11 Creating an OccurrenceAll crime/incident occurrences must have the following within 24hrs of the report being taken:ï Occurrence numberï Occurrence Summary (which must contain at least 20 characters and be as concise as possible, containing only relevant and key information)ï Occurrence Typeï Crime classificationï Occurrence addressï 
ï Reported time and dateï Occurrence time and date or between times and dates (no future dates)ï Any known people linked as appropriateo RPo Aggrievedo Witnesso Suspect etcï A linked OIC (Officer in Case) oro Linked Unit – where a unit has been identified for tasking purposes, as soon as an OIC is identified the record must be updated. The unit (as OIC) end dated.ï A task to OIC or appropriate Unit / Teamo Please be aware that the addition of certain documents may require an additional departmental task, one such example is when a PPD is linked and MASH advised4.1 Extreme Errors and OverwritesThe General rule is to never change an existing record, unless you have just created it yourselfOverwrites can have serious implicationsOverwrites are often caused by initially linking the wrong existing record in error, and then either changing it in some way, or trying to delete the link to a person/business incorrectly (via quick entry) resulting in the deletion of the name field entirelyNever change an addressIf a new business/organisation takes over an address a new address record should be created with the current business name - never change an existing record. Doing so means that every occurrence, person, vehicle etc previously linked to the historic business will now linked to the current one.Be 100% sure before linking any recordï The DQT would rather you create a new record which can be merged or deleted further down the line should it be found to be a duplicateTable of Contents
Annex D: 5.1 Do’s and Don’tsDo:ï Always include a gender and title (titles are not automatically added through the CAD (Storm) link). Select ‘Unknown’ (or local alternative) and no title for unknown genderso Be sensitive to cultural change relating to gender identification and refer to local practice when dealing with transgender and self-identificationï Use wildcards when searching for person records and be mindful of abbreviations and alternative spellingso Steve / Steven / Stephen etcï Make sure you search Niche thoroughly before creating any record to avoid creating a duplicate. Duplicate records can pose a risk to public and officer safety.o If you find a duplicate, please email the DQTï Make sure all required fields are populated and contact your DQT should there be any uncertainty rather than leaving a record incompleteo Make sure that all of the information has been added to the correct field and in the correct formatï Always ask for the information you need to meet the minimum data quality standard either at the time or after the fact. This may require going back to the reporting person, witness, officer or member of staff where appropriate.o Do not be afraid to ask for clarification if you believe the information you have been given is incorrect.ï Make sure to be 100% sure that you are linking to the correct existing recordo If you are uncertain or do not have enough information to match an existing record, you may create a new record but if you think you have created a new duplicate, you must contact the DQT so they can investigate furtherï Only use well known Wiltshire Police acronyms and abbreviations in OEL entries, reports and statements. Make sure your audience will understand themï Create a new business address for each new businessï Create an alias for alternative spellings, nicknames and hashtags (online names etc)ï End-date all contact information which has been confirmed as no longer up to date or relevant, this includes address records, telephone numbers, email addresses etc.Do not:ï Set up a partial or unknown addresso Including information which is known to be inaccurate, such as misspelled street names and unconfirmed postcodes.ï Create an ‘Unknown’ or ‘Anonymous’ record when we have little to no informationo Refer to the 4+1 standard where possible and local practice for suspectsï Create a record for ‘Unborn’ children. (This deviates from the National Standards but is Wiltshire Police practice)o Documentation and flags are to be linked to the motherï Add titles such as ‘Doctor’ or ‘Sergeant’ to the forename field, these should always be selected from the options available in the drop down title menuï Change or try to delete information from an existing record unless you have just created it yourself, doing so has serious implications for data quality and data audito Be particularly mindful of this when a new business moves into an existing address on Niche, always remembering to create a new address record for itï Create a business or organisation as a personï Use local landmarks and/or local references to populate address/location informationï Populate records with local vernacular and abbreviations as this makes it very difficult to understand the context of a record when shared with partner agencies or when uploaded to the Police National Database (PND)ï Use special characters in a name field – exceptions are hyphens and apostrophes.ï 
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Information Management and Assurance (IM & A) Document Owner:	Head of IM & ATechnical Author:	Leonie Calland Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: ACCRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of ChangesJuly 20191.1Data Quality Standards addedJan 20201.4Update to step 1, to include the supervisorJan 20211.5Amendments made to Section 8 to provide greater clarity, Addition of Admin Occurrences and Indecent/Distressing ImagesMarch 20212.0Version 1.5 published as substantive version 2.0Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team24.03.20212.0SCT/ACC/ACO**(Delete as appropriate)   N/A minor amendments onlyJNCC(Not required for all policies)   N/A minor amendments onlyDistribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionData Quality TeamJan 2021V1.5Force Crime and Incident RegistrarSept 2019V1.3Police FederationJan 2021V1.5UnisonJan 2021V1.5Table of Contents
       WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICY and PROCEDURENotifiable AssociationsDate of Publication:	 May 2023 Version:	3.0Next Review Date:	May 2025
TABLE OF CONTENTSPOLICY STATEMENT	3POLICY AIM	3APPLICABILITY	3LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCE	3RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	4AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE	4DATA PROTECTION	4FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	4MONITORING AND REVIEW	4WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICY AND PROCEDURE	4NOTIFIABLE ASSOCIATION PROCEDURE	51. AIM OF PROCEDURE	52. EXPLANATION OF AN ASSOCIATION REQUIRING DECLARATION	53. CRITERIA FOR AN ASSOCIATION REQUIRING DECLARATION	64. DEFINITIONS	65. INFORMATION SECURITY	86. REPORTING OBLIGATION	87. REPORTING PROCESS	88. OBLIGATION RE. CHANGES IN CIRCUMSTANCES	99. THIRD PARTY REPORTING	910. ASSESSMENT PROCESS	911. AGREEMENT REVIEWS	1012. RIGHT TO APPEAL	1013. NON-COMPLIANCE	10DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	11
POLICY STATEMENTThe purpose of this policy is to safeguard the integrity of Individual officers and Staff, and to prevent actual or perceived compromise to operations or intelligence belonging to Wiltshire Police or other law enforcement agencies.Wiltshire Police recognises that identifying associations between members of Wiltshire Police and the public is a key measure in protecting the integrity of the Force, preventing corruption and the opportunity for corruption. Public confidence relies on the integrity of the Force and is linked directly to one of our organisational principles that we will build upon public approval and confidence in Wiltshire Police, as well as our stated Force values of Integrity and Impartiality.Wiltshire Police expects its entire staff to maintain the highest standards of professional conduct. It is therefore the responsibility of all staff to declare associations, with individuals or groups, that may impact upon public confidence, be perceived to compromise their integrity or adversely affect the ability of staff to carry out their duties in a manner that is lawful, fair and impartial.This policy underpins the Notifiable Association Procedure which identifies the circumstances and process in which a member of Wiltshire Police is required to report an association.POLICY AIMThis policy is intended to:ï Lay out an ethical framework for all Wiltshire Police employees and third parties, which clearly identifies inappropriate associations and relationships, outlines staff responsibilities relating to intelligence, enforcement and prevention and gives clear guidance and support.ï To highlight to all employees and third parties the risks involved in becoming improperly beholden to those outside the organisation and the vulnerability such associations pose.ï Manage the risks presented to and prevent the compromise of individuals and the organisation by inappropriate associations.ï Identify deliberate attempts by criminal elements who would benefit in any way from corrupting, manipulating or placing unnecessary or unwarranted pressures on members of Wiltshire Police and to protect members of Wiltshire Police from those criminal elements.ï Protect the most vulnerable people in society from inappropriate behaviour by Wiltshire Police employees.ï Maintain high standards of professional behaviour with employees who act with honesty and integrity, thus protecting the reputation of Wiltshire Police and the confidence the public have in it.ï To preserve the operational effectiveness of Wiltshire Police.APPLICABILITYThis policy applies to all Police Officers, Police Staff, Special Constabulary and Volunteers. While this policy may not apply to third Party personnel, they should be made aware of their responsibility to comply with the principles enshrined in the Code of Ethics.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEThis policy is aligned to the College of Policing Code of Ethics and HM Governments UK Counter- Corruption Strategy 2017-2022. These have highlighted that one of the main threats to the organisation in terms of corruption is that of criminal association leading to disclosure of intelligence. This in turn causes vulnerability to wider corruption, operational compromise and a loss of public confidence.
This policy and the procedure takes its legal basis from the following principles:ï Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015 (s26)ï The Police (Conduct) Regulations 2020 for Police Officers.ï The conditions of employment for Police Staff.ï The principles of ECHR namely; legality, legitimacy, proportionality, necessity and accountability.ï Code of Ethicsï Vetting Codes of PracticeRELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSWiltshire Police ValuesCollege of Policing Code of EthicsNPCC Abuse of Position for a Sexual Purpose strategy Acceptable Use of Force Systems PolicyBusiness Interests Policy Information Security PolicyGifts and Hospitality Policy and Procedure Reporting Wrongdoing PolicyEthical Interviews ProcedureAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEProfessional Standards > Counter CorruptionDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy and procedure will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWThe Counter-Corruption Unit will maintain data in relation to members of Wiltshire Police and individual’s subject of this policy and associated procedure. This will be treated confidentially, stored securely in line with the Data Protection Act 2018/General Data Protection Regulations and Data Protection Policy and will not be available on the Force wide system.Feedback on the content of the policy from policy users, will be used to monitor the efficiency and effectiveness of the policy and associated procedure.This Policy and Procedure is owned by the Professional Standards Department. The Head of the Professional Standards Department will ensure that this policy is reviewed every two years.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICY AND PROCEDUREProfessional Standards are responsible for this policy. Contact can be made with the department by the following means – Email: ProfStand@wiltshire.police.ukTable of Contents
NOTIFIABLE ASSOCIATION PROCEDURE1. AIM OF PROCEDUREThis procedure is a preventative and supportive measure for all members of Wiltshire Police and places an obligation on all staff to question the appropriateness of relationships with certain defined individuals, groups or organisations that MAY be perceived to compromise the individual staff member’s integrity, impact on operational effectiveness or otherwise damage the reputation of Wiltshire Police.Wiltshire Police relies on the honesty and integrity of its staff. As public servants, all members of Wiltshire Police are expected to observe the highest standards of professional conduct, in both their private lives and their employment. The community must have trust and confidence in Wiltshire Police to conduct its duties and execute its powers fairly and impartially without the pressures of external influence or bias and to protect the most vulnerable in our society.The Notifiable Association Policy underpins Wiltshire Police’s commitment to the Code of Ethics and Standards of Professional Behaviour which clearly define the high standards expected by the public of the whole police family.There is a mandatory obligation to declare any personal relationships with a member of the public that develops as a result of initial contact made during the course of operational policing (or any other work conducted on behalf of Wiltshire Police), that could be perceived as an abuse of position or effect impartiality. Staff should disclose any such relationships to their manager or CCU without delay so that an assessment can take place.In practice, the vast majority of staff behave with complete integrity; however, it is recognised that there is a risk of some members of Wiltshire Police associating with inappropriate persons, groups or organisations or initiating or encouraging inappropriate relationships with vulnerable individuals.It is important that everyone understands the policy and procedure to protect members of the public and ensure that no doubt is cast on the integrity of the individual or Wiltshire Police.2. EXPLANATION OF AN ASSOCIATION REQUIRING DECLARATIONOnly associations where you have a personal relationship with an individual or group require declaration. This would include a person you are related to, a person you would regard as a friend or someone you have planned social meetings with on a regular basis.It should be noted that an association need not necessarily involve face to face meetings. A personal relationship where contact is made using the internet (online) or telephony system in the form of conversation, written messages and/or pictures (whether moving or still images) will still constitute an association.An association does not include a chance meeting. This is defined as an unplanned meeting with an acquaintance who you will only acknowledge, albeit this may be a regular occurrence.An association also does not include individuals with whom the officer or staff member has a purely professional, on duty relationship; or personal relationships with other serving members of the Police Service.Table of Contents
3. CRITERIA FOR AN ASSOCIATION REQUIRING DECLARATIONYou MUST report an association with an individual or group where you know or reasonably believe that the person(s) concerned fall into the following categories;ï Known to have a criminal conviction(s) (Non recordable offences – for example: speeding, do not apply).ï Charged with a criminal offence and subject of a current prosecution.ï Known to be subject to a criminal investigation, whether arrested or not but not yet charged.ï Subject of criminal intelligence or subject of an interest marker.ï Have been dismissed following disciplinary proceedings or required to resign from a police service or other law enforcement agency. The obligation under this category does not apply to representatives of Staff Associations who have contact with the dismissed person as a legitimate part of their role as a Staff Representative.ï Former police officers or other law enforcement officers who are working in a related field of employment outside the organization or other law enforcement agency: for instance a former Police employee who has resigned or retired from the Police Service and obtained a position within a law firm.ï Private investigators, regardless of any specialism or whether they are licenced and/or registered. This includes individuals or groups acting as vigilantes (claiming to act in the public interest for no monetary gain), for instance an OCAG (Online Child Sexual Abuse Activist Group).ï Personal relationships with representatives or other employees of any legal firm or independent legal representatives, regardless of specialism in civil or criminal law.ï Personal relationships with media representatives, with the exception of media contact that can be reasonably be expected as a normal part of your job description.ï Intimate relationships with any members of the public where contact was established for a policing purpose or on police business (even where the contact for a policing purpose has now ceased). This would include situations where a member of Wiltshire Police forms a sexual relationship or a close friendship that could be seen as sexually motivated, with a current or former informant, a case officer with a victim or witness in a current or closed case or a Family Liaison Officer with a member of the deceased’s family.There is no definitive list of Notifiable Associations; however, this policy gives numerous examples throughout.The criteria used is whether it would it be obvious to a reasonable person that an association requires reporting.It is a matter for the individual viewing this policy to decide whether they should disclose information whilst bearing in mind the duty imposed upon all members of Wiltshire Police in this regard. If in doubt or if further guidance is required, contact should be made with CCU as soon as practicable: CCU@wiltshire.police.uk4. DEFINITIONSPersonal Relationship - A close friendship or intimate relationship with a member of the public which develops above and beyond what is necessary as part of the role as a representative of Wiltshire Police.Table of Contents
This could include meeting or uniting for a common purpose, keeping company or being familiar with, being an ally, confederate, partner or colleague, having a friendship, intimacy or connection, being a member of a group, organisation or society which is formed for the promotion of a common objective or aim.Inappropriate Association - Any association will be deemed inappropriate if the personal relationship or involvement with an individual, group or organisation has the potential or is likely to:ï Compromise the individual member of Wiltshire Police, orï Compromise the operation of Wiltshire Police, orï Compromise the reputation of Wiltshire Police, orï Undermine public confidence in Wiltshire Police.There is no definitive list of associations which will be deemed inappropriate; this is a matter for the individuals following the procedure to determine.An association with persons with criminal convictions (including convictions for criminal offences under the Road Traffic Act) and / or where intelligence exists relating to current or recent criminal activities, may be considered as inappropriate and so, must be disclosed. There will be a greater emphasis on unspent convictions and each will be considered on a case by case basis.Staff should be aware that any intimate relationships formed with members of the public after initial contact was made for a policing purpose could be seen as an abuse of position of trust or authority and therefore could be deemed inappropriate, in particular if the member of the public is vulnerable.Vulnerability - There is no exhaustive list of vulnerabilities; this is a matter for the individuals following the procedure to determine. However, with regard to a member of public, vulnerability could be temporary or short term, long lasting or permanent and may include:ï Mental or physical disability and illnessï Learning disabilityï Addiction issuesï Ageï Victim, witness or suspect in crime or crime related incident (in particular domestic abuse)ï Recent bereavementGroup or Organisation - There is no definitive list of groups or organisations deemed inappropriate. This is a matter for those following the procedure to determine but will include Membership of the Combat 18, the National Front and the English Defence League as prohibited by force policy.In addition, this could include:ï Membership by a police officer of any political party where membership involves the officer playing an active part in politics in contravention of Police Regulations (to play an ‘active part’ in a group or organisation, would involve an individual assisting (or attempting to assist) in furthering the group or organisation’s political aims by way of words or acts. One would ordinarily have to do more than simply ‘follow’ a political person, group or organisation on social media).ï Association with groups or organisations involved in law breaking or criminal activity such as certain animal rights groups, football hooligans, etc.Table of Contents
ï Association with groups or organisations which would bring the force into disrepute. This could include, but is not limited to, racist groups, activist groups or extremist groups with aims which contravene the statement of common purpose and values of the Police Service or the intent or effect of any relevant legislation or policies governing Wiltshire Police.ï Association with groups or organisations which advocate either active or passive non- compliance with the law.Compromise – In the context of this procedure, compromise includes the likelihood or potential of both actual and/or perceived risk to the individual staff member, operations or reputation of the force and can include the following:ï Place in a position of difficulty or dangerï Expose to risk of failure; frustration or disgraceï Cast doubt on one's integrityï An increased risk of corruptibilityAn example of compromise could be leaking of information, whether deliberate or not, that would ‘tip off’ a criminal individual or organisation prior to the execution of a search warrant.A further example would be the disclosure of personal or private lifestyle details of other members of Wiltshire Police to outside individuals or organisations that may allow targeting of officers and staff by way of assault, harassment, fraud, extortion, or public humiliation.5. INFORMATION SECURITYThere is NO EXEMPTION under the Data Protection Act 2018/UK GDPR, Data Protection Policy or Wiltshire Police Information Security Policy in relation to assessing information to determine whether an association requires declaration.Officers and staff must never access or disclose any information that is not in the proper course of police work including if their own partners also work for Wiltshire Police. Employees who undertake checks on associates using force wide computer systems are liable to prosecution under the Data Protection Act and may face disciplinary action for gross misconduct.6. REPORTING OBLIGATIONIt is the responsibility of all members of Wiltshire Police to declare notifiable associations to Wiltshire Counter-Corruption Unit (CCU) at the earliest opportunity. This applies irrespective of whether these associations have previously been declared as part of any security clearance or vetting procedures.Employees that have concerns about an association they have should always seek advice from either their line manager or CCU.7. REPORTING PROCESSSubmissions should be made electronically using the Notifiable Association Notification form which is available on the PSD Portal page or from CCU. Prior to completion, staff should, as a minimum, inform their Line Manager without delay via email that they intend to submit a Notifiable Association Notification form. In doing so, an auditable email trail is formed that allows the Line Manager to follow up with CCU to ensure the form has been submitted correctly.Table of Contents
Once complete, the Notifiable Association Notification form should be sent as soon as practicable via email to the CCU@wiltshire.police.ukWhere the association is believed to fall under the remit of this policy, the contact with the individual should be kept to an absolute minimum until it has been reviewed by CCU and appropriate control measures agreed.A declaration of a notifiable association will not necessarily prohibit any particular associations but will require a determination as to the threat and suitability of such an association.It must be stressed that the policy only applies to those associations that could reasonably have been known to the individual.Nothing in this policy endorses checks or enquiries to be made into the status of possible associations (including through the CCU) in order to establish if this policy applies.Under no circumstances should the individual concerned use police systems to check their associates or ask or seek to coerce their colleagues into doing so on their behalf.8. OBLIGATION REGARDING CHANGES IN CIRCUMSTANCESAny changes to existing notifiable associations in terms of frequency, type of contact and the changes in the activities of the associate should be reviewed and reported to CCU as soon as practicable via the Notifiable Association Notification form after the individual has notified their line manager by email.Notifiable associations should be discussed with Line Managers on a routine basis as part of the PDR process and one-to-ones as part of an ‘Integrity Health Check’.9. THIRD PARTY REPORTINGWhere a member of staff becomes aware of, or suspects, an association or inappropriate relationship between another staff member and an individual, group or organisation, which may be inappropriate, they should report this to CCU either directly or via their supervisor or a staff association / trade union.A report can also be made anonymously through the Crimestoppers Police Integrity Line.10. ASSESSMENT PROCESSAny report will be received and assessed by the Counter-Corruption Unit.Having conducted an initial assessment, there MAY be a requirement for CCU to conduct an Ethical Interview. This is not a disciplinary interview and Police Officers and staff are encouraged to consult with their respective staff associations or trade union to alleviate any concerns they may have.If deemed appropriate, CCU will complete a Notifiable Association Agreement that will be forwarded electronically to the member of staff concerned. The member of staff will be invited to acknowledge receipt and agree the terms of the said Agreement.Table of Contents
11. AGREEMENT REVIEWSAll Notifiable Associations subject to an Agreement should be reviewed on an annual basis or upon notifications of change of circumstance. The PDR process for all staff should also include a discussion with Line Managers about notifiable associations.It is the responsibility of the staff involved to notify their line manager of any change in circumstances and forward any new information to CCU at the earliest opportunity via a Notifiable Association Notification form.12. RIGHT TO APPEALIndividuals should be informed that they have a right to appeal the decision made by CCU. Appeals against the decision should be submitted in writing within 14 days to the Head of Professional Standards. While an appeal decision is made, the individual should comply in the interim with the CCU decision directions.13. NON-COMPLIANCEAll non-compliance matters should be referred as soon as practicable to CCU.Where advice has been given that such an association must cease yet it persists or the restrictions are not being observed, then the conduct will be considered under the Police (Conduct) Regulations 2020 or as a disciplinary matter in respect of police staff in accordance with the Wiltshire Police Staff Discipline Procedure.The Head of Professional Standards will consider the matter and decide on the most appropriate course of action. In the assessment of such breaches aggravating factors and mitigation will be considered and addressed on a case by case basis.Table of Contents
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Professional StandardsPolicy Owner/Author:	Supt Steve Cox / SSO Sarah Husband Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor:	 Deputy Chief ConstableRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes25.05.20182.0Data Protection section amended to reflect implementation of GDPR and new DPA.09.01.20192.0Reference in s3 under ‘Private investigators’ to paedophile hunters’ changed to OCAG (Online Child Sexual Abuse Activist Group)15.03.20212.0Revised to reflect changes to CCU and Police (Conduct) Regulations 202002.05.20183.0Revised to reflect changes locally and nationally. Change of policy title to Notifiable Association.Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionForce Policy Officer10.05.20233.0Supt Steve Cox Head of Professional Standards02.05.20233.0JNCC(Not required for all policies)   N/A minor amendments onlyDistribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: Professional Standards PortalDiversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc.):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionUNISONJanuary 20181.9Police FederationJanuary 20181.9ACU DIJanuary 20181.9Implications of the Policy: Training RequirementsNo training requirements have been identified in relation to this procedure.IT InfrastructureNo IT input is required to implement this procedure.Table of Contents
NOT PROTECTIVELY MARKED/UNCLASSIFIED       WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICY and PROCEDUREOccupational Health Unit ProceduresEffective from:	25/05/2018 Version:	2.0Next Review Date: 25/05/2021NOT PROTECTIVELY MARKED/UNCLASSIFIED
TABLE OF CONTENTSPOLICY STATEMENT	3POLICY AIM	3APPLICABILITY	3DATA PROTECTION	3FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	3LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCE	4RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES AND OTHER DOCUMENTS	4AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE	4MONITORING AND REVIEW	4WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICY AND PROCEDURE	4PROCEDURE	51. PRE-EMPLOYMENT	52. OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH APPOINTMENTS AND SUPPORT	52.1 Health Promotion	52.2 Vaccinations	52.3 Counselling	52.4 Health Surveillance	62.5 Risk Assessment Based Medicals Procedure (RABM)	62.6 Health Assessment/Medicals for Specialist Roles	62.7 Treatment	62.8 Physiotherapy	62.9 External Referrals	63. SICKNESS ABSENCE AND MEDICAL CONSULTATIONS	63.1 Management Referral	63.2 Self Referral	73.3 Joint Referral	73.4 Staff Undergoing Suspension / Investigation / Complaints	73.5 Selected Medical Practitioner (SMP)	73.6 Independent Medical Review (Check staff Retirement)	73.7 Appointments	73.8 Refusal to attend the OH Unit	73.9 Requesting GP/Specialist Reports	74. OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH REPORTS	84.1 Consent to the Release of a Management Report	84.2 Disabilities	84.3 Medical Confidentiality	84.4 Medical Records	84.6 Third Party Access to OH Records	84.7 Legal Representation – Solicitors	8DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	9
POLICY STATEMENTWiltshire Police recognises that the health, safety and well-being of it’s employees is critical to the Force’s ability to deliver the services that the community needs and expects. We are firmly committed to the provision, so far as is reasonably practicable, of a safe and healthy working environment for all personnel.The Occupational Health Unit (OHU) provides support to the organisation and staff by providing occupational health specialist services to support the needs of the service. It seeks to reduce the incidence of illness and injury caused at work, and ensures that all staff are able to achieve their full capabilities at work.In order to accomplish this and obtain specialist Occupational Health/Medical advice and guidance, there may be a need to refer employees to Occupational health. The aim of the OH unit is to:ï advise on	pre-employment checks/screening in line with	current legislation and organisational policy;ï reduce the incidence of work-related ill health;ï improve work opportunities for people with ill health or disabilities;ï use the work environment to promote the maintenance of good health in all police officers and staff;ï help people whose disability, illness or injury is impacting on work to remain at work, to return to work and/or full performance;ï assist line management and HR to manage cases of ill-health more effectively;ï aim to reduce the number of medical retirements.The OHU monitors and advises on the effects of work on health and health on work. To achieve this aim, certain activities are undertaken, such as: health assessments, vaccinations, return to work strategies and case conferences, external referrals and Trauma Risk Management (TRiM) http://firstpoint/deptinfo/peopleservices/occhealth_pages/TRiM.aspxThis service is achieved through supporting all employees and their line managers by providing a professional, confidential, impartial and advisory Occupational Health service.POLICY AIMThe purpose of this policy is to give an outline of the role the Occupational Health Department has in supporting People Services, line managers, Unison, the Federation and the employees of Wiltshire Police in all matters of health; in particular how work may impact on health and ill health may impact on the ability to work.APPLICABILITYThe Policy applies to all staff and officers. It does not apply to volunteers or contractors.DATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy and procedure will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.
LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEHealth and Safety at Work Act 1974Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 192 amended 1999 Medical Records Act 1988Equality Act 2010National Medical Recruitment Standards (2004) for entry to the Police Services and Fitness for Winsor Report 2012Fitness for Work (2007) Faculty of Occupational HealthNursing and Midwifery Council (2008) Standards of conduct, performance and ethics for nurses and midwives London NMC.Other legislation may be relevant to the issue of Occupational Health and the above list is not exhaustive.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSRecruitment Policy, Attendance Policy, Health and Safety Policy,Officer Safety Training Policy Substance Misuse Policy & ProcedureForms: Health Questionnaire (Police Officer and Special Constable)AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE:There are no associated APP areas at presentMONITORING AND REVIEWThe Occupational health Policy will be monitored and reviewed on an annual basis by the Force Occupational Health Manager. The policy will also be reviewed in light of legislative change or best practice.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Head of People Services and the Occupational Health Manager are responsible for this policy and procedure. All queries relating to this policy or procedure should be directed to:Penny Fuller, Occupational Health Manager – 01380 734073 / ext: 7202327
PROCEDUREThe unit owe a duty of confidence not only to staff in employment but also job applicants. Any contact with the OHU or attendence to the unit is always in line with and is under pinned by our confidentiality statement.1. Pre-employmentThe force expects all Police Officers at the point of recruitment to be fit to perform the core competencies. All Police officers and Special Constables are required to undertake pre employment medical screening.Police Community Support Officers (PCSO) and Detention Officers, are required to undertake pre employment screening.Police staff are required to complete an Employment Functional Health Questionnaire, to identify any health issues that maybe affected by the proposed job role.The outcome will be communicated in writing to the Human Resources Department (Recruitment).2. Occupational Health Appointments and Support2.1 Health PromotionOne of the most important strategic aims of the OH unit is to promote the improvement of general well-being. Blood pressure checks, cholesterol tests and psychological screening is offered as part of the OH unit RABM and Health Surveillance programme.The Health and Wellbeing group meets regularly and all areas of the Force are represented. The group provide guidance and support on a range of health related matters.2.2 VaccinationsThe OHU will provide all staff with the relevant information regarding occupational immunisation which is appropriate for their occupation or work needs.All Police Officers, Special Constables, PCSO’s or any staff requiring immunisations will be provided with a Blood Borne Viruses Aide Memoir.Following a perceived exposure, a clinical member of staff will contact The Great Western Hospital for post exposure advice to establish if post exposure intervention is required. OH will support and advise the Force and staff where necessary.2.3 CounsellingAll staff have access to the 24 hour independent counselling and support telephone helpline 0800 243 458 provided by Workplace Options. www.workplaceoptions.comWhere a formal request for counselling has been arranged following consultation with Occupational Health a record of the request will be kept within the OH file. Staff may be signposted to Workplace Options following consultation in Occupational Health, this will be recorded in the client’s clinical notes.
2.4 Health SurveillanceHealth Surveillance is a requirement of Health and Safety Legislation for individuals who may be exposed to hazards to health, where identified through risk assessment. Other forms of health surveillance are undertaken as good practice, such as baseline health assessment prior to initial training or deployment to a specialist police role. The frequency of monitoring is reviewed regularly. Individuals working within one of these high risk areas must attend.2.5 Risk Assessment Based Medicals Procedure (RABM)Risk Assessment Based Medicals is a Home Office initiative supported by Wiltshire Police. It is an opportunity for individuals to have a health assessment on a voluntary basis.RABM’s have been deemed mandatory for certain roles by the organisation; this is outlined in the Health Surveillance and Risk Assessment Based Medical Procedure2.6 Health Assessment/Medicals for Specialist RolesHealth assessment/medicals are required for individuals carrying out specialist roles.The Line Manager will initiate the first referral to the OH unit before the appointment of the officer/staff member to the post.Thereafter the OH unit will liaise with the specialist units to invite officers/staff for their medicals.The line manager may refer between these periods if there is any cause for concern in line with Management Referral process.2.7 TreatmentThe OH Unit does not provide First Aid. This is the responsibility of First Aiders.2.8 PhysiotherapyPhysiotherapy is provided either in-house or externally for staff meeting the referral criteria.2.9 External ReferralsThere are occasions that the clinical staff may refer Police Officers/staff for an external assessment using the fast track criteria to enable information regarding “fit for purpose” or the need for adjustments.3. Sickness Absence and Medical ConsultationsLine Managers are responsible for maximising attendance and managing absence, with advice from HR Managers, OH unit, and Health and Safety specialists.3.1 Management ReferralA referral form (128) will be completed by the Line Manager with the full knowledge of the employee using the 128 referral process.http://firstpoint/Docs/Templates/101-200/128_Occupational_Health_Unit_Referral.dot
3.2 Self ReferralAll staff are able to self refer to Occupational Health by contacting the unit directly.3.3 Joint ReferralStaff working within safety critical roles can self refer to the unit, as standard however the joint referral process will be established.3.4 Staff Undergoing Suspension / Investigation / ComplaintsPeople Services or a Line Manager will complete a Management Referral as deemed appropriate for any member of staff undergoing suspension, investigation or subject of a complaint. Staff suspended from work are permitted to attend Occupational Health in compliance with their suspension instructions.3.5 Selected Medical Practitioner (SMP)In Police Officer cases where there is need for consideration of Ill Health Retirement, Injury On Duty Awards or confirmation of restrictions, People services will complete a Management Referral instructing Occupational Health to commence the formal SMP process.3.6 Independent Medical Review (IRMP)In Police Staff cases, where there is a need for consideration for access to the Pension scheme, People Services will complete a Management Referral instructing Occupational Health to commence the formal process.3.7 AppointmentsStaff referred to the unit via Management Referral will be informed of appointments by e-mail or letter within forty-eight hours of the unit receiving the referral.Staff self referring to the unit will be informed of appointments by e-mail, letter or telephone.Officers and staff will be expected to attend appointments at the OH Unit unless an alternative location is advised by a clinical member of staff.3.8 Refusal to attend the OH UnitIn the event of a Police Officer/Police staff member not attending their appointment the referring Manager and HR will be informed. (Only in the case of a Management Referral).Where either a police officer or a member of police staff fails to co-operate either by attending an appointment or refusing to liaise with Occupational Health the referring line manager and HR will be informed3.9 Requesting GP/Specialist ReportsThe Occupational Health Unit may request specialist advice from a consultant, the individuals GP, or in the case of Police Transferees, Occupational Health records from the home force.
4. Occupational Health Reports4.1 Consent to the Release of a Management ReportAny report generated following a consultation with Occupational Health is subject to the requirement to obtain the consent of the individual prior to being sent to HR and the referring manager.4.2 DisabilitiesA Police Officer or member of Police staff may disclose a disability in confidence to a member of OH staff. The OH professional will advise regarding the advantages and disadvantages of disclosing a disability. The only circumstances where a disability can be revealed without consent is in expceptional circumstances, ie: for the health and safety of the individual member and others.4.3 Medical ConfidentialityConfidentiality is a major consideration when handling personal and medical information, verbally or written. All information either written or held by computer is maintained in a confidential manner and is not divulged without the consent of the individual. There may be occasion to breach confidentiality but these are very rare.4.4 Medical RecordsInformation held in a police officer’s/member of police staff’s Occupational Health notes is held in accordance with the Medical Records Act 19984.5 Access to Medical RecordsA request by a police officer/member of staff for a complete copy of their Occupational Health notes can be obtained with a signed written consent.Individual Request to View OH RecordsAll police officers and police staff have the right to view the medical information held within their own Occupational Health file.      4.6 Third Party Access to OH Records Management/UnionsManagement or Staff Associations do not have the right to view any Occupational Health files or obtain medical information. In the event that a police officer/member of police staff wishes their manager or their representative to have a copy of their medical file this will be authorised with their explicit consent. In most cases the file would be forwarded to the individual concerned who can then arrange disclosure themselves.4.7 Legal Representation – SolicitorsIn the event that a police officer/member of police staff wishes their legal representative to have a copy of their medical file this will be authorised with written consent by the individual.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnershipDepartment Responsible:	Occupational Health UnitPolicy Owner/Author:	Penny Fuller, Head of Occupational Health Technical Author:	Angie Tinker, Occupational Nurse Advisor Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: DCC Paul MillsRevision HistoryEffective From:	25/05/18Next Review Date:	Three yearly or when significant changes in work activity,process or procedure occurs.Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes23/09/20141.025/05/20182.0Data Protection section amended to reflect implementation of GDPR and new DPA.ApprovalsThis document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team24.09.20141.0Health & Safety CommitteeJNCC(Not required for all policies)10.09.20141.0DistributionThis document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersDiversity Impact Assessment
ConsultationList below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionUNISONApril 20140.2Police FederationApril 20140.2Staff Association BoardApril 20140.2Implications of the Policy Training RequirementsAny perceived training requirements needed to implement this policy should be identified here.IT InfrastructureState here whether implementation of this policy requires any input from IT, adaption and/or addition to any IT systems or packages?
       WILTSHIRE POLICE & POLICE AND CRIME COMMISSIONEROvertime Policy (Working Time Tracking) ForWiltshire Police & OPCC StaffDate of Publication: May 2021 Version:	2.0Next Review Date:	May 2024
CONTENTSSummary	3Scope	3Principles	3Overtime ‘Triggers’	3Limit ‘Triggers’	4Responsibilities	4Individuals	4Line Managers	5Senior Leadership Teams (SLT)	5Payroll/Finance	5Working Time Tracking	6Overtime Usage Review	6Overtime Data	6Management of Overtime	6Compliance	7Glossary of Terms	7Related Policies, Procedures and Other Documents	7Law Relating to this Document	8Data Protection	8Freedom of Information Act 2000	8Monitoring and Review	8Who to Contact About This Procedure	8DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	9
Overtime and Working Time Tracking Policy and ProcedureSummaryWiltshire Police (WP) will ensure that where working overtime is deemed to be essential, that necessary cover is provided in the most cost effective manner.Overtime may be given in cases such as to maintain a specific level of service or complete a specific task, whilst also meeting standards. However, the use of overtime should always be minimised with other options first considered, factors such as business need, health and safety, cost and wellbeing should also be taken into account by managers. This policy is compliant with the Working Time Regulations 1998 and it ensures that expenditure on overtime is properly authorised, controlled and reviewed.ScopeThis policy and procedure applies to all Police Officers and Police and OPCC Staff.PrinciplesGeneralï Police officers can be directed to work overtime.ï Police staff cannot be directed to work overtime, they can only volunteer.ï Authorisation is required before officers or staff work any overtime. Only in exceptional circumstances will overtime which has not been authorised in advance be justified and approved for payment.ï When spontaneous overtime is needed time given must be limited to the amount necessary to complete the required task.ï Planned and duty planning overtime will always have an agreed time allocation, after which further authority must be sought. NB This may require SLT approval.ï Police officers will be compensated for overtime in accordance with Police Regulations and police staff in accordance with their Terms and Conditions.ï Only in exceptional circumstances will unauthorised overtime, which occurs when officers or staff work longer than their rostered hours without prior line manager authorisation, be approved.ï When police staff work additional hours in a lower grade post, this overtime will be paid at the highest spinal column point of the lower grade. This spinal column point must be at least 1 below the staff members pay point in their substantive role.ï For police staff working additional hours in a higher grade post, this will be paid at the lowest spinal column point of this higher grade.Overtime ‘Triggers’Overtime ‘Triggers’There are different triggers which will require officers and staff to work overtime and therefore the provisions of this policy will apply. Planning and authority given for overtime will depend on the circumstance.ï Spontaneous events can occur during the course of the individual’s usual shift,e.g. an arrest or incident, which may require their retention on duty to be beyond the expected end of that tour. Line managers must authorise an overtime in these cases.ï Pre-planned operations are events planned in advance which will have explored all opportunities to authorise the use of overtime during their planning.ï 
ï Authority for pre-planned overtime will be made centrally by Force Operations or locally in a hub/department by the senior leadership team (SLT) or delegate.ï Duty planning events can only be scheduled in the short and medium term, e.g. attending training courses. An Inspector or above will authorise this type of overtime, but officers and staff must be aware that they will explore other opportunities other than overtime prior to authorization.Limit ‘Triggers’To ensure officers and staff maintain a healthy work/life balance and receive suitable time away from the work environment, limit triggers on overtime worked have been introduced. These are:ï An officer or staff member cannot work more than 20% of their contracted hours in overtime per yearï Any officer or staff member that works more than an average of 48hrs within a 17 week period, will be flagged at PIB. Their line manager will be required to feedback to the individual seeking to review their health and wellbeing and instigating remedial action to reduce excessive hours. Consideration of completing a Working Time opt out should be taken and recorded. (Period 1)ï If, following a further 4 week period, an officer or staff member continues to work an average of more than 48hrs within a 17 week period, their line manager will be invited to attend PIB and justify. Confirming what feedback has been given to the individual regarding their health and wellbeing and what remedial action is in place to reduce excessive hours. Consideration of completing a Working Time opt out should be taken and recorded.(Period 2)ï If, following a further 4 week period, an officer or staff member continues to work more than an average of 48hrs within in a 17 week period their SLT member should be invited to PIB to justify. Confirming what feedback has been given to the individual regarding their health and wellbeing and what remedial action is in place to reduce excessive hours. Consideration of completing a Working Time opt out should be taken and recorded. (Period 3)ResponsibilitiesIndividualsIndividuals are responsible for:ï Obtaining authorisation before working overtime. Only in exceptional circumstances will overtime which has not been authorised in advance be justified and approved for payment.ï Having the following information available for the authorising officer:o The exact reason to work overtime, including specific details of the required task(s);o The approximate length of time required to complete the specific task(s); ando Any details of their duties on the next working day. In particular if their next working day is a rest day or a period of leave, as this has financial implications.ï Ensuring all overtime, whether for payment or TOIL (time off in lieu), is claimed following the completion of the overtime or when they next book onto duty, but within a maximum 14 day period or by the 4th of the month whichever is soonest. (This is essential to ensure data is accurately recorded and an accurate working time analysis)ï Obtaining retrospective authority from their line manager after undertaking unauthorised overtime, as soon as practicable.ï 
Line ManagersLine Managers are responsible for:ï Ensuring that overtime is used in the most efficient and effective manner possible, targeting prevailing demand and addressing local policing issues;ï Considering all other options, such as waiting till the next tour of duty, and arranging a handover to someone who is working, before authorising overtime;ï Not authorising overtime unless all other alternatives have been considered first;ï Taking into account staff wellbeing and health and safety when considering overtime, especially when this falls on a rest day or period of leave;ï Ensuring, unless in exceptional circumstances, that overtime is authorised before the individual works it;ï Giving as much notice as is possible when overtime working may be required;ï Identifying and covering any known absence as far in advance as possible in order to minimise the need for overtime;ï Ensuring overtime is not used for the completion of administrative tasks;ï Ensuring that staff adhere to the Working Time Regulations, and that the need for overtime is compliant with the Police Regulations 2003 and Police Staff Terms and Conditions;ï Ensuring effective supervision takes place during the overtime period;ï Considering whether there is the budget available for allowing overtime;ï Verifying the exact need to work, including the specific nature of the task and the amount of time required to do it;ï Recording the authority for the overtime to be worked on GRS and checking GRS to ensure all overtime is accurately recorded and promptly submitted for payment or TOIL;ï Investigating claims for unauthorised overtime including the reasons for it occurring. Updating (GRS) where the request needs authorising, but referring the matter to the responsible SLT member for consideration if there is no reasonable explanation; andï Authorising overtime worked in a lower grade for police staff, through (Overtime system)	and emailing (Payroll) including the name and employee number of the staff member as well as details of the overtime worked and the scale the overtime should be paid at.ï Officers on leave (including those who volunteer to work overtime while on leave) must not be considered as a planned overtime option unless all other options (including recalling to duty an officer on rest days) have been exhausted. This must be authorised by a member of SLT and RMU/Finance informed by the SLT member.Senior Leadership Teams (SLT)SLT are responsible for:ï Considering claims for unauthorised overtime where the line manager has found no reasonable explanation for the officer or staff member failing to obtain authorisation; andï Approving exceptional planned and RMU overtime as appropriate within hub/command/department.Payroll Department/FinancePayroll/Finance have responsibility for:ï Verifying claims by checking the GRSï Making manual adjustments in the Agresso to accommodate overtime payments.ï 
Working Time TrackingWiltshire Police fully supports the implementation of tracking procedure as part of its duty of care and general obligations to ensure the health and safety of all staff.Although overtime may be required and offered in cases such as to maintain a specific level of service or complete a specific task, whilst also meeting standards, the use of overtime should always be minimised with other options first considered, factors such as business need, health and safety, cost and wellbeing should also be taken into account by managers.Overtime Usage ReviewWith this in mind and to ensure officers and staff are not exposing themselves to detrimental levels of overtime, the monthly review of overtime use will take place where full consideration to the requirements for and the amount of overtime utilised in the preceding month will be reviewed.Overtime DataOn a monthly basis the Resource Management Department (RMU) will produce the following data on 5th of the month which will include:ï Departmental OT (Hrs. and Cost) both collective and individual (Officers and Staff)ï Departmental OT (Cumulative for Year) both collective and individual (Officers and Staff)The data will provide monthly and cumulative views of departmental and individual OT exposure, and will enable both DLT’s and SLT’s to focus on current and prolonged OT exposure.RMU coordinators will produce WT data each month (or as required) for utilisation at each monthly, collating and escalating as appropriate in line with the triggers detailed below.This data will also be provided to relevant HR advisors and HR Managers as appropriate for early intervention of excessive OT use.Management of OvertimeTo ensure officers and staff maintain a healthy work/life balance and receive suitable time away from the work environment, limit triggers on overtime worked have been introduced.These are:ï An officer or staff member cannot work more than 20% of their contracted hours in overtime per yearï Any officer or staff member that works more than an average of 48hrs within a 17 week period, will be flagged at PIB. Their line manager will be required to feedback to the individual seeking to review their health and wellbeing and instigating remedial action to reduce excessive hours. Consideration of completing a Working Time opt out should be taken and recorded. (Period 1)ï If, following a further 4 week period, an officer or staff member continues to work an average of more than 48hrs within a 17 week period, their line manager will be invited to attend PIB and justify. Confirming what feedback has been given to the individual regarding their health and wellbeing and what remedial action is in placeï 
to reduce excessive hours. Consideration of completing a Working Time opt out should be taken and recorded.(Period 2)ï If, following a further 4 week period, an officer or staff member continues to work more than an average of 48hrs within in a 17 week period their SLT member should be invited to PIB to justify. Confirming what feedback has been given to the individual regarding their health and wellbeing and what remedial action is in place to reduce excessive hours. Consideration of completing a Working Time opt out should be taken and recorded. (Period 3)The Force aims to discourage a persistent, long hours working culture. But, recognises as an ‘emergency service’, running 24 hours, 365 days a year, some flexibility will be required when working on at the end of a shift to maintain to provide some additional hours in times of severe demand i.e. winter pressures and/or major incidents as being a genuine occupational requirement.Overall, this procedure aims to provide greater workforce flexibility for the RMU, DLT’s and SLT’s to cover resource demand at short notice and maintain appropriate skill levels. Through the provision of additional hours and overtime from our existing workforce, we can resource all available requirements.However there is an expectation that first line supervisors and line managers are required to monitor and manage the overtime within their teams. As a manager of a team you are required within your one to one ensures to ensuring that individuals are complying with the working time directive.Individuals must take responsibility in informing their first line supervisor or line manager to inform them if they are undertaking overtime within a different role or area of the Force.ComplianceThis policy complies with the following legislation and policy:ï Working Time Regulations 1998ï Police Regulations 2003Glossary of TermsTermMeaningJNCCJoint Negotiation and Consultation CommitteeOPCC/PCCOffice of the Police Crime Commissioner/Police Crime CommissionerRelated Policies, Procedures and Other DocumentsThis Overtime and Working Time tracking policy and procedure should be read in conjunction with current existing policies on:ï Working Timeï Duty Timeï VSA (Variable Shift Arrangements)ï Rest Day Workingï Shortchanges to working patternsï Bank Holiday workingï Working during annual leaveï Police Regulationsï Police Staff Handbookï 
Law Relating to this DocumentLeading statutory authority Working Time Regulations 1998 Health & Safety Act Work Act 1974 Equality Act 2010Police (Health and Safety) Act 1997Data Protection Act/Access to Medical Records Act 1998 The General Data Protection Regulation 2016/679Data ProtectionAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this procedure will be processed in accordance with the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).The General Data Protection Regulation requires employers to comply with principles for processing personal data, including to protect against unauthorised access of personal data. Personal data that is inappropriately accessed or disclosed may constitute a data breach. The GDPR requires organisations to keep a record of all data breaches and, where the breach is likely to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of individuals, the organisation must notify the Information Commissioner within 72 hours of becoming aware of the breach. If the data breach results in a high risk to the rights and freedoms of individuals, those individuals must be notified without undue delay.Freedom of Information Act 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.Monitoring and ReviewMonitoring the effectiveness of the procedure will be undertaken in conjunction with Human Resources to establish the type of queries that arise. It is the responsibility of Human Resources to ensure this procedure is updated in line with any legislative changes and will ensure it is reflective of best practice.Who to Contact About This ProcedureHR are responsible for this procedure. All queries should be via the People Services Centre.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnershipDepartment Responsible:	People ServicesProcedure Owner/Author:	Head of People Services and Change Technical Author:	Graham CooperSenior Officer/Manager Sponsor: Director of People and ChangeRevision HistoryRevision DateVersionSummary of ChangesApprovalsThis document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionForce Policy Office14.05.20212.0Head of People Services & Diversity14.05.20212.0JNCC04.02.20212.0DistributionThis document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersDiversity Impact AssessmentConsultationList below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc.):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionUnisonAug/Nov 2020The FederationAug/Nov 2020OPCCImplications of the Procedure Training RequirementsNo additional training requiredIT InfrastructureNo additional IT Infrastructure required
Template v4WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICYPersonal Safety Training (Training Policy)Date of Publication: December 2018 Version:	4.0Next Review Date:	December 2019
POLICY STATEMENTThis is Wiltshire Police’s training policy which follows the College of Policing requirement for officers and identified police staff to undertake Personal Safety Training. This policy sets out the expectations and requirements in relation to the completion of Personal Safety Training. It also outlines the expectations upon managers to ensure their staff attend and the potential consequences of non-attendance on the individual officer and staff member.Initial TrainingThe initial and refresher training in personal safety is based upon the role being performed. All initial and refresher training for police officers and police staff in personal safety is underpinned by the National Occupational Standard (NOS) - GC10 Managing Conflict. It is this standard which is integral to the Initial Police Learning and Development Programme (IPLDP) for the initial training of police officers and for the PCSO initial training programme. Different modules will be applied to the different role profiles as appropriate.Refresher TrainingPersonal safety refresher training has to be delivered with such frequency as to maintain and develop skills and competence. Within Wiltshire Police the current policy is that all Police Officers, Special Constables, PCSO’s, Detention Officers, Prisoner Escort Officers and Local Crime Investigators will undertake assessed Personal Safety Training on an annual basis unless exceptions apply (See below). All officers will undertake the same refresher training and will be assessed to the same level of competence.At the start of the PST refresher training, all officers must successfully pass the Job Related Fitness Test, Level 5.5 or the level required for the officers specialisation (JRFT), or the Alternative Fitness Test (Chester Treadmill test) prior to the start of PST training. (See JRFT and Health Screening). As officers have previously completed the fitness test, then they will not be required to run the fitness test to level 3 as a warm up but will complete a group warm up as directed by the training staff prior to commencing the fitness test.Officers of all ranks must attend within 12 months of their previous refresher training. As the annual refresher programme changes each year, each officer must undertake each annual refresher programme.Each officer must achieve competence to the required level and will be assessed against this standard. Any officer failing to achieve competence will be fully supported through a further course of instruction in an attempt to achieve competence.Personal safety refresher training is to be regularly completed by all PCSO’s, Detention Officers, Prisoner Escort Officers and Local Crime Investigators. Other front facing police staff roles will be assessed on a role by role basis as to any requirement for this training.ExemptionsExemptions to this policy will only be based upon medical grounds.Officers who have a passport exempting them from Personal Safety Training will not be required to undertake any of the training.Officers have to attend ALL sessions of PST. If Officers are unable to complete the JRFT then they will not be able to complete the rest of PST.Deferred officers are those who may have a short term medical issue and they will report this through their line managers in order to delay their completion of Personal Safety Training. There should be consideration at this time as to whether or not they are fit for operational duties.
Appeals ProcedureSee Recording ProcessStudents StandardsThe expectations for students attending any learning event are written into the People Development Department Codes of Practice and are covered within the force values and behaviours. It is a requirement that in order for officers to attend any internal or external training courses, they must be Personal Safety Training compliant, taking into account the exemptions as above.Assessment ProcessAt the beginning of the course the lead trainer for the days training will inform students of the assessment process in that it will be ongoing throughout the course and will consist of observation, demonstration and nominated Question & Answers. Formative assessment will be used to improve student attainment, Summative assessment used to monitor outcomes of individual lessons in line with NOS GC 10.During any dynamic training session students will be observed by trainers who will judge if the students have achieved a level of competence. Where students skills fall below an acceptable level 1:1 coaching will be given to the student and they will then be reassessed.Trainers will ask questions at regular intervals to the students in relation to the area of training being taught, ensuring that the underpinning knowledge associated with the lesson is known to the student/s.Students will be asked at the start and end of training to demonstrate a number of ‘linked drills’ as an individual and as a pair. The trainer may require the students to hold a position prior to them being told to continue. This will allow for the trainer to ensure that the student’s technique in a dynamic scenario demonstrates a continuing level of competence.JRFT and health screeningEvery officer will have to successfully complete the multistage bleep test (JRFT) during their Personal Safety Training. This is a mandatory test.If for medical reasons an officer is unable to complete or take part in the multistage bleep test, then a referral to OHU will be requested through their line manager. OHU will then assess the officer to see if they can undergo the JRFT, or they undergo the alternative fitness test (Chester Treadmill test)When given a date for PST, All Police Officers and Police Staff will go to the joining instructions and complete the medical questionnaire and forward it to the Occupational Health Unit (OHU). This will be done at least four weeks prior to the course date. Failure to complete the questionnaire and send it to OHU prior to attendance on the day may lead to the officer being returned to station and line management being informed.If the test is failed, the officer WILL NOT be allowed to proceed with PST and will be returned to station. The line manager will be notified and will take the appropriate action to support the officer, make an OHU referral and review capability for frontline work. This will be risk assessed on a case by case basis.We do not require the police staff to carry out the fitness test prior to PST but the health screening is required in order to take part.
On arrival at People Development, during the briefing prior to commencing the PST, any Police Officer or Police Staff will be required to inform the training staff prior to training if there is a change in their medical condition or they have an injury since completing the medical questionnaire. It will be the discretion of the training staff if they are allowed to continue with the training. Staff attending training, having not completed this process, or disclosing an injury/condition on the day that would prevent them taking part, will be returned to their stations and line management informed.Instructor’s liabilityTraining staff are not able to make decisions in relation to any officer or staff member’s ongoing medical condition. If an officer arrives at a training day with an existing injury then in conjunction with the training staff a decision will be made as to whether they should continue training or be referred to Occupational Health or their supervisor.Training staff have the discretion to refuse to train an officer or staff member if they consider that they are not fit enough to complete the training without undue risk of injury to health.Training staff will be in charge of the training session, irrespective of rank and will have the discretion to terminate the training, or an individual’s participation in it, if they consider it to be necessary. If appropriate then a report will be submitted to the individual’s supervisor via the OSPO Supervisor or Training Delivery Manager.Manager’s LiabilityThere is a requirement of supervisors and managers to ensure their staff attend PST sessions in the appropriate time frame. During appraisals, quarterly reviews and 1-2-1 sessions, the topic of skills accreditation and refreshing should be discussed. PST compliance falls within this topic.Recording ProcessAll PST will be subject to an assessment process taking account of the NOS GC 10 ‘Managing conflict’. This will ensure that students not only receive suitable training for their role within the Wiltshire Police but they can also demonstrate their own level of competence in applying a variety of skills to ensure their safety, the safety of colleagues and that of the publicOn the morning of PST, the Operational Training Team will update GRS for Officers who have not attended PST, who have failed the JRFT or Alternative Fitness Test. They will also send an email to RMU, Attendance Management and three Hub Supervisors to inform them of the officers who have not attended PST.When a student successfully completes PST an ‘attended pass’ will be recorded against the students name on the GRS course record.If a student fails to complete the course or fails the course this will be recorded against the students name on the GRS course record.Where blended learning has formed part of the students training a record of any NCALT packages completed will be recorded on the forces IT systems.Where there is an appeal against a decision, the principles of the IPLDP Assessment Appeals process will be adhered to. This strategy outlines the appeal to the assessor/trainer in the first instance, Operational Training Supervisor and then finally to the Training Delivery Manager.
POLICY AIMThe aim of this policy is to ensure that officers and staff take personal responsibility to maintain their own personal and professional development in relation to Personal Safety Training and to ensure that we recognise we are one team, working together to deliver the highest possible quality of service to the public by maintaining our competency levels.APPLICABILITYThis policy covers all police officers, special constables and staff members who as part of their role have a requirement to attend and complete Personal Safety Training.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEThe Collage of Policing (CoP), on behalf of the Police Lead for Personal Safety, it sets the standards for Chief Officers to provide appropriate learning, delivery and assessment of personal safety training based on the 2009 ACPO Guidance on Personal Safety Training. The ACPO Personal Safety Manual is the reference point for officer safety tactics and procedures for all personnel.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSCop Guidance on Personal Safety Training ACPO Guidance on Personal Safety ManualAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEThere are no associated APP areas at present.DATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000There are no issues within this policy which would mean that it could not be open to public scrutiny.MONITORING AND REVIEWThe effectiveness of this policy will be monitored by measuring compliancy levels from the Force Performance team for officers and staff completing their annual Personal Safety Training.This policy will also be monitored against changes in the Personal Safety Guidance document and the ACPO Personal Safety Manual.This policy will be reviewed on an annual basis prior to the completion of the design for the following years training by the Training Delivery Manager and the OSPO Supervisor.There will be on going monitoring in relation to the following indicators:ï Assaults and injuries to officers and staff (Form 230)ï Complaints against police officers and staff involving use of force.ï Monitoring of use of form 770, Use of Force Forms which must be submitted in accordance with Force Policy.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYTraining Delivery Manager in People Development. David Sharp david.sharp@wiltshire.pnn.police.ukOperational Training Supervisor. PS Pete Tuite. peter.tuite@wiltshire.pnn.police.uk
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnershipDepartment Responsible:	People Development Department.Policy Owner/Author:	Sergeant Peter TUITE (Supervisor Operational Training) Technical Author:	David Sharp (Training Delivery Manager)Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: Insp Allen LUMLEY (Head of People Development)Revision HistoryRevision DateVersionSummary of Changes17.10.20173.0Policy revised & updated. PST SOP incorporated into the policy.25.05.20183.0Data Protection section amended to reflect implementation of GDPR and new DPA.17.12.20184.0Policy revised & updated.ApprovalsThis document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team4.0Head of People Development- T/Supt Allen Lumley4.0ACC Gavin Williams4.0DistributionThis document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionHeld on First Point on the Policy site17.12.20184.0Diversity Impact AssessmentConsultationList below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc.):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionMary Grant – People ServicesDecember 20141.0Mel Rolph - FederationDecember 20141.0UnisonDecember 20141.0Occupational HealthDecember 20141.0Implications of the Policy Training RequirementsThere are no training requirements in relation to this policy. All officers and staff will be updated via an E briefing.IT InfrastructureNone
WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICYPolice National Database (PND)CDate of Publication: September 2018 Version:	1.0Next Review Date:	April 2024
TABLE OF CONTENTSPOLICY STATEMENT	3PND Operating Model	3PND Business Rules	3PND Security	4Accessing the PND	4Data Management	7Administration	8Licence Allocation	8PND Users	8Role Based Access	9Training	9Support and Troubleshooting	9Audit and Compliance	9PND user Meeting	9POLICY AIM	10APPLICABILITY	10LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCE	10RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	10AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE	10DATA PROTECTION	10FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	10MONITORING AND REVIEW	10WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICY	10DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	11
POLICY STATEMENTThe Police National Database (PND) was established following a recommendation from the Bichard Enquiry into the Soham murders for a national IT solution for sharing intelligence. It is a nationally hosted system which holds copies of records relating to crime, intelligence, custody, child protection and domestic abuse from all UK police forces and other law enforcement agencies. It allows users to search actual data records covering Persons, Organisations, Organised Crime Groups, Objects, Locations and Events (also known as POLE).This policy is effective immediately and applies to all police officers and police staff who have a requirement to access the PND, either as a direct user or as a requester of information from the system.This policy sets out clear guidance for Wiltshire Police about the minimum standards for the use of the PND in line with the statutory Code of Practice and national standards.This policy covers the management and use of the PND within the scope defined by the Code of Practice on the Operation and Use of the PND as defined by section 39A of the Police Act 1996 (inserted by section 2 of the Police Reform Act 2002).PND Operating ModelIt is essential that the PND is used consistently across the Police Service and in compliance with legal and policy requirements. This will provide chief officers with confidence that the information they provide is being used appropriately by other forces. Our access to and use of the PND is Conducted in accordance with the Code of Practice on the Operation and Use of the PND and National Standards as defined by the College of Policing.All information obtained by use of the PND will be handled in a way consistent with its protective marking set by the originator, retained securely and disposed of when no longer required.Information on PND is for intelligence purposes only and not to be used as evidence.This policy will ensure that our use of the PND and its information assets will be in compliance with the Data Protection Act 2018 and the Code of Practice on the Management of Police Information. The use of the PND will improve the ability of Wiltshire Police to prevent and detect crime as well as protecting the public through access to otherwise unknown information about offenders and their offending.PND Business RulesPND accreditationThe PND is accredited both as a Police Secured (referred to previously as IL4 Confidential) System and a Police Protected (referred to previously as IL3 Restricted) SystemWiltshire Police will conform to the standards set out in the Home Office Code of Connection. This includes the provision of a CONFIDENTIAL network within Wiltshire Police to allow access from nominated sites throughout the Wiltshire Police estate as required and the use of secure workstations at those locations.
PND SecurityPND has 2 access levels these are the Police Secured (referred to previously as IL4 Confidential) system and Police Protected (referred to previously as IL3 Restricted) system.Police Secured (IL4 Confidential) SystemAccess is limited to explicitly authorised and appropriately security cleared Police officers and staff via dedicated IL4 computers machine using an IAM smart card for authentication.Police Secured computers must always be located in approved secure environments within access controlled Police premises.Police Protected (IL3 Restricted) SystemAccess is limited to explicitly authorised and appropriately security cleared Police officers and staff using force issued computers (Laptops) through the approved Internet browser authenticated by username and password.When accessing the Restricted System within shared use / collaborative working environments, users must be vigilant and aware of unauthorised bystander access (accidental or deliberate) to information and, at all times prevent overlooking of screens and other media / product for example physical documents. Wherever possible, privacy filters must be fitted to computer screens and all documents must be locked away when not in use.Accessing the PNDThe information held on the PND must only be used in line with the Data Protection Act 2018 and Management of Police Information (MoPI) Code of Practice.In general the PND should only be used for:> law enforcement purposesï prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences,ï the execution of criminal penalties,ï safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security> the administration of justice,> the safeguarding of children or of individuals at risk,Priority for access and use of the PND will be given to the following strategic priority areas as laid out in the PND Code of Practice:ï Protecting children and vulnerable people, by being better able to understand the risk they are facing, and by more thorough vetting of people in positions of responsibility and trust.ï Understanding the threat posed by terrorism and helping to reduce the risk of terrorist activity.ï Disrupting and preventing major, serious and organised crime, helping to reduce the harm caused by the most dangerous offenders. This includes preventing and detecting crime.Business leads should review existing procedures to see how the PND can be used to support their requirements, having regard to national doctrine.PND users departments should set service level agreements for conducting PND searches in order to demonstrate that their use of licences meets the workload.
In light of the sensitivity of the data, the complexity of analysis departments have been identified as per the following table in order to provide a consistent and efficient response to PND requests.BUSINESS RULEWhen you should consider a Police National Database (PND) check.Governed by priority, where and when first contact is made1st Contact2nd ContactOut ofHours1All CAIT/CSE suspects, all high risk DAIT cases , all DAITChild AbuseMASH / SAITIntelligencecases that are referred to MARAC, all domestic abuse casesInvestigation TeamLive Cell,where factors are identified to which a PND check would clearlyDomestic AbuseCCC (Onlyaide/enhance the investigation e.g. honour based violence / enhanced vulnerability due to culture.Any other Public Protection incident where the OIC believes aPND (person, object, location, event) check would aide/enhance the investigation or safeguarding strategy.Investigation Teamto be completed for urgent cases, primarily for preservationof life.).All Safeguarding adults suspects who fulfil roles in positions ofChild AbuseMASH / SAITIntelligencetrust or factors are identified which suggest a PND check wouldInvestigation TeamLive Cell,enhance the investigation.Domestic AbuseCCC (OnlyInvestigation Teamto be completed for urgent cases, primarily for preservationof life.).2All suspects & offenders (linked objects, locations, events) forPNC BureauIntelligenceIntelligenceSerious Sexual or Serious/Serial Violent Offences & SeriousUnitLive Cell,Acquisitive Crime; unless directed by supervisor.CCC (Onlyto be completed for urgent cases, primarily for preservationof life.).3Any incident whereby the OIC has determined that a PND checkPNC BureauPNC BureauIntelligencewould aide/enhance an investigation. This could be person,Live Cell,object, location or event.CCC (Onlyto be completed for urgent cases, primarily for preservationof life.).
4Detainees in Custody; as directed by the Custody Sergeant for the purpose of assisting the risk assessment and duty of care.PNC BureauIntelligence Live Cell, CCC (Onlyto be completed for urgent cases, primarily for preservation of life.).5Suspects, victims, witnesses, offenders, vehicles, objects,MCITIntelligence UnitIntelligencelocations, events and TIE nominals for Major CrimeLive Cell,Investigations; as directed by SIO or Intelligence Manager inCCC (Onlyaccordance with operational policy.to be completed for urgent cases, primarily for preservation of life.).6Persons, objects, locations and events involved in Level 1, 2 or 3Intelligence UnitIntelligenceIntelligence or Organised Crime Groups. To be conducted if theLive Cell,Intelligence Officer/Manager or SIO determines that a PNDCCC (Onlycheck would aide/enhance development.to be completed for urgent cases, primarily for preservation of life.).7All suspects, victims, offenders, vehicles, objects, locations andLive CellIntelligence UnitIntelligenceevents associated to Critical Incidents; as directed by the SIO orCommsLive Cell,Intelligence Manager in accordance with operational policy.CCC (Onlyto be completed for urgent cases, primarily for preservation of life.).
8All Level One Missing Persons or any MISPER as directed by the FIM or Duty Inspector.PNC BureauIntelligence UnitIntelligence Live Cell, CCC (Onlyto be completed for urgent cases, primarily for preservationof life.).9All VISOR nominals (linked objects, locations, events)MOSOVOIntelligence Live Cell, CCC (Onlyto be completed for urgent cases, primarily for preservationof life.).10Special Branch nominals (linked objects, locations, events)Special BranchIntelligence Live Cell, CCC (Onlyto be completed for urgent cases, primarily for preservationof life.).11Vetting of new employees (linked persons, objects, locations,events)Vetting Unit12All persons applying for or renewing all firearms, shot guns, explosives, Registered Firearms Dealers, grants and renewals.Firearms Department13All MOPI 1 and 2 nominals subject of a RRD ReviewRRD UnitData ManagementData Provided to the PNDWiltshire Police will supply data in accordance with the Home Office ‘PND Logical Data Model’ from the following business areas:o Crime – Crime records for notifiable crimes recorded on Niche since May 2013, including linked suspects or offenders together with linked locations and object records. We will not provide the Investigation Log as this contains free text making research difficult and increases the risk of sensitive policing tactics being disclosed.o Intelligence – Intelligence reports recorded on Niche since May 2013, including linked suspects or offenders together with linked locations and object records. Source and provenance information will not be provided. Intelligence with a Handling code of 4 or 5 willo 
be supplied but secured with the appropriate PND DARC (Data Access Restriction Codes). There is currently a National pilot testing the sharing of this intelligence with specific authorised units in the Regional Organised Crime Units.o Custody – Custody records recorded on Niche since February 2014 for all arrested persons in Wiltshire, including the disposal of the detention and the custody photograph. The Detention Log element will not be supplied.o Domestic Abuse – Crime or Crime Related Incident (CRI) records of all domestic abuse incidents recorded on Niche since May 2013, including linked suspects or offenders together with linked locations and object records. We will not provide the Investigation Log as it contains free text making research difficult and increases the risk of sensitive policing tactics being disclosed.o Child Abuse - Crime or Crime Related Incident (CRI) records of all Child Abuse referrals recorded on Niche since May 2013, including linked suspects or offenders together with linked locations and object records. We will not provide the Investigation Log as it contains free text making research difficult and increases the risk of sensitive policing tactics being disclosed.o Victim Records - Only victim information associated to any Schedule 3 or 5 offences under the Sexual Offences Act 2003 as held on Niche and linked to Crimes or CRI’s will be supplied.o Witness Records - No witness information will be uploaded to the PND.o Legacy Records – At this point in time legacy records are not able to be uploaded to PND. With the introduction of NLEDS at the end of 2020 it will be possible to upload legacy records.Wiltshire Police will aim to supply this data on a daily basis to the PND, through the agreed automatic upload service, together with any updates or alterations to previously submitted information.When records are deleted on Niche a message will be sent to the PND for the copy held there to be removed.AdministrationLicence AllocationWiltshire Police has been allocated a limited number of licences based on its relative size when compared to other forces. Licences are therefore allocated to the unit and if a PND user transfers to another unit which does not have direct access, their PND licence will be withdrawn for use by their replacement or another unit nominee.Units that no longer require or can no longer justify holding a licence(s) shall return them for reallocation.The usage of PND will be monitored to ensure licence holders are making best use of their licence. Those users not using their licence for extended periods or whose use is unjustifiably low may have their licence withdrawn.PND UsersThe PND is an Identity Access Management (IAM) protected application; therefore all PND users are required to have an IAM identity together with an IAM ‘smart’ system access card for Confidential.
All users must meet the following standards:ï The user has a confirmed business needï The user is adequately identified and vetted to NPCC standardsï The user has been registered within the Home Office IAM Managed Serviceï The user has been trained to the required level (see section 6 below)ï The user’s PND workstation is located within an approved environment.Role Based AccessThe PND has a number of access levels according to the requirements of users. These include General Search Users, Auditors and Administrators. Role Based Access restricts the ability of users to view certain more sensitive data held on the PND and is a necessary requirement to ensure integrity of the system.The PNC Manager and the Vetting Unit Manager will be the administrators for the PND and will provide access to the PND according to the user’s requirements and role.TrainingAll PND search users and auditors shall be trained to a level appropriate to their PND role and access levels as specified by the College of Policing.As a pre-requisite to a training course, users must complete a number of national e-learning modules. These include:ï Government Security Classification Scheme (GSC)ï Data Protection Act/GDPRï MoPI Module Oneï MoPI Module Fourï MoPI Module Six and Sevenï Information ManagementFormal training will be provided by the Force Training Department and users will be required to achieve the necessary standard in order to be accredited to access the PND.Support & TroubleshootingThe PNC Bureau Supervisor will provide an initial point of contact for support.Audit and ComplianceAuditing will be carried out in accordance with the Home Office requirements by the Force Auditor within the RRD department.PND user MeetingA PND User Meeting will be convened with attendance from the tactical leads for each department that has Licences allocated to it and representation from IST and training.This meeting will consider as standing agenda items:o PND usage by each departmento PND usage by individualso PND licence allocationo Identification of current and future staffing issues for PND Userso Training requirementso Access issueso 
o IT issueso Audit complianceo Data upload accuracy.o The PND user meeting will report to SD&To Reginal PND Meting updatesPOLICY AIMThis policy sets out clear guidance for Wiltshire Police about the minimum standards for the use of the PND in line with the statutory Code of Practice and national standards.APPLICABILITYThis policy applies to all police officers and police staff who have a requirement to access the PND, either as a direct user or as a requester of information from the system.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCECode of Practice on the Operation and Use of the PNDSection 39A of the Police Act 1996 (inserted by section 2 of the Police Reform Act 2002) Data Protection Act 2018RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSCode of Practice on the Operation and Use of the PND Data Protection PolicyAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEInformation management > Management of police informationDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWThis policy will be reviewed every three years in the light of any feedback from the PND users, national policy or procedural change or due to changes to law or Force strategy or at such other times as may become necessary.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Head of Contact Management and the PNC Bureau Supervisor are responsible for this policy. All queries relating to this policy should be directed to the PNC Bureau Supervisor or the Force Policy Officer.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	HQ Operations and Contact ManagementPolicy Owner/Author:	Supt. Conway DUNCAN / C/Insp Doug DOWNING Technical Author:Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: ACC Local Policing and PartnershipsRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of ChangesMarch 20180.1New Policy Document around access & use of PND Policy Updated onto new template28/02/20180.2Policy updated with document administration17/08/20180.3Policy Updated with Security administration11/09/20181.0Draft v0.3 published as substantive version 1.027.04.20211.0Review of policy and update new owner. No changes to policy made.Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team11/09/20180.3ACC Local Policing and Partnerships10/09/20180.3JNCC (Not required for all policies)N/ADistribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionPND Tactical Board16/08/2018V 0.1PND Tactical Board17/08/2018V 0.3Implications of the Policy: Training RequirementsSee Training section above (page 7)IT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure require
       WILTSHIRE POLICE & POLICE AND CRIME COMMISSIONER  Police Staff/OPCC Disciplinary ProcedureDate of Publication: September 2020 Version:	4.0Next Review Date:	September 2023
TABLE OF CONTENTSPROCEDURE OVERVIEW	3GLOSSARY OF TERMS	3RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	3AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE	3GENERAL DATA PROTECTION REGULATIONS 2018	4FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	4MONITORING and REVIEW	4WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDURE	41. PURPOSE, PRINCIPLES & SCOPE OF THE DISCIPLINE PROCEDURE	52. INFORMAL ACTION	73. PROBATIONARY PERIOD	84. FORMAL PROCEDURE	85. FORMAL DISCIPLINE INVESTIGATIONS	106. INVESTIGATION PRINCIPLES	137. ON COMPLETION OF THE INVESTIGATION	138. FORMAL DISCIPLINARY MEETINGS/HEARINGS	149. DISCIPLINARY OUTCOMES	1610. APPEALS	1811. SUSPENSION	1912. NON COMPLIANCE WITH COVID-19 SOCIAL DISTANCING OR HYGIENE REQUIREMENTS	2013. DEALING WITH SPECIAL CASES	2114. POLICE BARRED AND ADVISORY REGULATIONS 2017	22APPENDIX 1:	Police Staff Code of Conduct	23APPENDIX 2:	Code of Ethics – Policing Principles	24APPENDIX 4:	PSD Charter	26DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	27INDEX	28
PROCEDURE OVERVIEWThe procedure does not apply in respect of employment terminating when employees are dismissed on the basis of unsuitability for confirmation of employment at the end of the probationary period (Police Staff Probationary Procedure refers).This procedure is to be used in matters which relate to an employee’s conduct and applies to formal disciplinary action. If the matter in question relates to an individual’s capability and/or performance, then this procedure should not be used. You should refer to the separate ‘Managing Performance and Capability Procedure’.In some cases, managers will consider counselling and/or training and development measures which may be more appropriate as a means of addressing performance which is below standard or for minor matters of unsatisfactory conduct. In this respect, the Performance Development Review (PDR) should be utilised should these informal measures not resolve the problem it may be necessary for more formal action to be invoked.Managers should ensure that expected standards of work and behaviour are clearly communicated to staff.Records will be kept detailing the nature of any breach of disciplinary rules, the employee’s mitigation, the action taken and the reasons for it, whether an appeal was lodged, its outcome and any subsequent developments. These records will be retained on the employee’s personal file in accordance with The Procedure and subject to any statutory requirements as detailed within the Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) or the Data Protection Act 2018 and/or the Police Reform Act 2002.GLOSSARY OF TERMSTermMeaningWPWiltshire PoliceOPCCOffice of the Police Crime CommissionerACASAdvisory, Conciliation and Arbitration ServiceHRHuman Resources DepartmentPSDProfessional Standards DepartmentSLAService Level AgreementIOInvestigating OfficerCenturionPSD Monitoring DatabaseRELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSIssue Resolution and Dignity at Work Policy and Procedure Probationary Policy and Procedure for Police Staff Managing Performance and Capability Procedure Redundancy and Redeployment (Staff) ProcedurePolice Staff Code of Conduct Code of EthicsACAS Code of Practice on Disciplinary ProceduresAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEProfessional StandardsTable of Contents
GENERAL DATA PROTECTION REGULATIONS 2018Any information relating to identifiable individuals recorded as a consequence of this procedure is to be processed in accordance with the General Data Protection Regulations (GDPR) 2018, Data Protection Act 2018 and/or the Police Reform Act 2002.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING and REVIEWThis procedure will be reviewed every three years in the light of any national policy or procedural change or due to changes to law or Organisation strategy or at such other times as may become necessary.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDUREThe Head of Human Resources, Operations is responsible for this procedure. All queries relating to this procedure should be directed to the HR Advisory team or the People Services Centre.Table of Contents
1. PURPOSE, PRINCIPLES & SCOPE OF THE DISCIPLINE PROCEDURE1.1 Purpose & ScopeStandards of conduct and performance are required in any organisation to ensure order, the effective operation of the business and a safe and healthy working environment. In the Police Service expectations of conduct and performance standards are high, and reasonably so as a consequence of the type of work we do, the access we have to privileged and often sensitive information, and the issues that we can be required to deal with, within our day to day business. Public confidence in all members of the Police Service is vital. Conduct that may damage this is a risk to the organisation.This discipline procedure is the means by which the standards of reasonable behaviour for police staff within the Organisation are communicated and maintained. The National Police Code of Ethics has been adopted by the Organisation to establish clear standards and expectations (see Appendix 2).Action under this procedure should not be seen solely as a means of applying sanctions but also as a means of encouraging learning and improvement in unacceptable behaviour and conduct.1.2 Legislative ComplianceThis document has been drafted to comply with the principles of the Human Rights Act. Proportionality has been identified as the key to Human Rights compliance, this means striking a fair balance between the rights of the individual and those of the rest of the community. There must be a reasonable relationship between the aim to be achieved and the means used.Equality and Diversity issues have also been considered to ensure compliance with the Equality Act 2010 and meet the Organisation’s legal obligation in relation to the equality duty. In addition, Data Protection, Freedom of Information and Health and Safety Issues have been considered. Adherence to this procedure will therefore ensure compliance with all relevant legislation and internal policies.This procedure is published on the Human Resources Intranet site (on firstpoint) and it is the responsibility of all police staff and line managers to make themselves aware of its content and to ensure it is applied consistently.Where a matter arises that may require consideration under this procedure, further advice is available via the HR Intranet site, from the HR Helpdesk, the local HR Officer and HR Manager and from Unison should you be a member. Managers must seek such support before embarking upon any formal action under this procedure.This procedure applies to all police staff in the employment of Wiltshire Police and the OPCC, with the following exceptions, where termination of employment is:ï as the result of redundancy. A separate procedure is followed as set out in the Redundancy and Redeployment (Staff) Procedure.ï the natural termination of a temporary employee’s fixed term contract of employment.ï due to poor performance, capability, competence or attendance A separate procedure is followed as set out in the Police Staff Capability Procedure.ï where an employee is still within their probationary period. A separate procedure is followed as set out in the Probationary Policy and Procedure for Police Staff.ï 
In addition, Point 12 “Failure to comply with social distancing or hygiene measures at work”, apply to all members of Wiltshire Police, including all Officers.1.3 PrinciplesThe following are the principles upon which this procedure is based. Further details of how they apply in practice follow within the main body of the document:ï The Police Staff Code of Conduct is incorporated within the procedure and sets the expected standards (see Appendix 1).ï Informal action will be considered initially to resolve a problem wherever appropriate.ï No disciplinary action will be taken against an employee until the case has been investigated.ï If formal action is invoked, the employee will be advised of the nature of the allegation against them and will be given the opportunity to state their case before any decision is made at a disciplinary hearing.ï Employees will be provided with written evidence, relevant witness statements and any investigating officer’s report in advance of a disciplinary hearing.ï At all stages of the procedure, the employee will have the right to be accompanied by a Unison representative or a colleague. This person must be employed by Wiltshire Police. However, it would not normally be reasonable for an employee to insist on being accompanied by a colleague whose presence would prejudice the hearing nor would it be reasonable for an employee to ask to be accompanied by a colleague from a remote geographical location if someone suitable and willing was available on site. In exceptional circumstances a Unison regional representative may be allowed.ï No employee will be dismissed for a first breach of the Police Staff Code of Conduct, except in the case of gross misconduct, when the penalty will be dismissal without notice or payment in lieu of notice.ï An employee has the right of appeal against any disciplinary action.ï Procedural timescales as laid down within these procedures may be varied by mutual consent.ï This procedure may be implemented at any stage if the employee’s alleged misconduct warrants this.ï There may be occasions where consideration of a matter through this procedure may result in a decision where it is deemed more appropriate to consider the matter under the Capability Procedure. Unsatisfactory sickness absence or work performance not attributed to discipline will be dealt with under a separate Capability Procedureï In cases where medical advice is required the Occupational Health Department will be consulted.ï Amendments to this procedure except those which arise consequentially from legislation or case law shall be the subject of consultation with Unison.ï This procedure works in conjunction with other Organisation policies and procedures i.e. Substance and Alcohol Misuse Policy & Procedure, Acceptable Use of Email, the Internet and Fixed and Mobile Telephones Policy.ï 
1.4 Conduct of Trade Union officialsAlthough normal disciplinary standards apply to their conduct as employees and such matters will be dealt with under this procedure, no disciplinary action will be taken against a Unison Executive Officer until the circumstances have been discussed with a full time official of Unison and the Head of People Services and Development.No disciplinary action will be taken against any employee in respect of alleged discipline which arises from undertaking Unison duties or activities until the matter has been fully discussed with the Head of Human Resources.Any complaints made against a Unison representative as a result of Unison duties will be investigated by a Unison regional officer in line with their existing procedures.1.5 Involvement of the Professional Standards DepartmentPSD are involved with investigating conduct for police staff, police officers, members of the Special Constabulary, criminal investigations and public complaints for all staff groups. PSD Investigating Officers and the HR Advisors work closely together in conjunction with OHU to ensure appropriate information sharing, considerations and welfare have been considered and put in place throughout the process.The Organisation Anti Corruption Unit (ACU) will monitor the use of email and other IT systems on behalf of the whole Organisation and so will pick up any potential issues for individuals via those processes and these will be passed onto PSD for investigation consideration.1.6 Health & SafetyThere are no apparent risks to the health and safety of any individuals associated with the correct implementation of this procedure. However it is recognised that staff may experience heightened anxiety as a normal response to the situation. Confidential welfare support is available to any individual subject to these procedures and HR will work with the individual alongside OHU to ensure the appropriate welfare is put in place.2. INFORMAL ACTION2.1 When to use Informal ActionThe day to day supervision of staff is part of the normal management process. Part of that responsibility is to highlight to an individual at the earliest possible stage, any shortcomings in their performance or conduct.Unless a matter is serious or there are multiple or repeated incidents, informal action is a more appropriate response to minor offences rather than formal disciplinary action.2.2 Resolving Issues InformallyInformal action is outside of the formal disciplinary procedure but, should there be a need to, may be referred to at a later date. An informal meeting should not turn into a formal investigatory interview as this would deny the employee certain rights. If during the meeting, the matter appears more serious than originally thought, then the informal interview should be terminated and the employee informed that the matter will be handled under the formal discipline procedure with rationale for this decision.Table of Contents
Whilst there is no procedural necessity for Unison representatives to be in attendance at an informal meeting, should the individual member feel it would be helpful to them of having them in attendance, the organisation is happy for them do to so. An informal meeting however, would not necessarily be delayed as a result of the representative not being available.Informal action has the potential to cover a wide range of issues, and will vary according to the case. However, there are some basic points that should always be considered:ï Clear advice about the area for improvement should be given as part of a constructive, two way discussion.ï Clear standards and expectations should be outlined, discussed and an informal support plan mutually agreed.ï Review periods should be set and followed up.ï Further training or coaching may be of value and if this need is identified, this should be provided with minimum delay.ï The discussion should cover any concerns the individual has, both inside and outside of work which may be affecting their performance or conduct. Where appropriate, other adjustments may be of value on a temporary or permanent basis (e.g. review of working patterns or hours, workload review etc.).ï If there are health concerns, then Occupational Health advice should be sought via a management referral at an early stage.ï Line managers are expected to discuss these with the individual at the earliest opportunity and agreements should be reached as to the necessity of any support plan, targets; timescales set and follow up action required. This should be clearly documented and added to the ePDR system.ï Where improvements are forthcoming, this should be recognised, acknowledged to the individual and the matter closed.ï These discussions should always take place privately.2.3 Relationship with the Issue Resolution Procedure(i) There may be occasions where an issue that initially appears to be suitable for the Issue Resolution Procedure, leads to an emergence of potential disciplinary issues. In such cases, the Manager will consult the HR department.(ii) Except in cases of gross misconduct, which will be dealt with immediately under this disciplinary procedure, any misconduct activity may not necessarily commence until the issue resolution process has been resolved. Following conclusion of this process, a decision will be made as to the appropriateness of a misconduct assessment being undertaken and as a result, any disciplinary action taken.(iii) It is acknowledged that an aggrieved member of staff instigating the issue resolution process may not wish to make misconduct allegations against another member of staff. However, whilst their views will be taken into consideration, there may be circumstances where the disciplinary process may need to be instigated such as where the allegation is deemed too serious, or there are compelling issues of public or organisational interest.Table of Contents
2.4 Escalating to the Formal ProcedureIf subsequent informal action fails to achieve the desired improvements, then the individual should be notified that any continued lack of improvement will mean that the matter will be escalated to be considered under the formal discipline procedure.If no improvement is then forthcoming, the supervisor or line manger should refer the matter on to their immediate line manager for consideration under the formal procedure.3. PROBATIONARY PERIODIndividuals, who are subject to the disciplinary process during their probationary period, should refer to the Probationary Policy and Procedure for Police Staff.4. FORMAL PROCEDURE4.1 Initiating the Formal ProcedureThe formal discipline procedure should be used where informal action has failed to achieve the desired improvement in conduct OR where a matter is more serious such that informal action would be inappropriate.In ALL cases the line manager must consult with HR to consider if a formal investigation is necessary. No formal action should be taken until this process is completed. This will ensure consistency of approach and application of this procedure.Other Considerations4.2 Inability to Participate in the Formal Procedure due to Ill-HealthIn circumstances where an individual is unable to participate within the formal procedure due to ill-health, wherever possible, the Organisation will make the necessary reasonable adjustments in order for the process to continue. Wherever reasonably practicable, the individual will be given the opportunity to physically attend and be accompanied at the disciplinary investigation/hearing in order to respond to the allegations made against them. Should an individual be unable to physically attend, other options will be considered and put forward as options to enable the progression of the process.In accordance with the Attendance Management Procedure, individuals who are off sick for more than 7 days are required to provide a Fit Note from a GP. The Occupational Health Department may be consulted for advice via a management referral in cases of persistent non- attendance.In the event of the employee not attending a disciplinary hearing as arranged, the hearing may be reconvened to a later date at the discretion of the Chair, who will take into consideration the reasons for non-attendance due to ill health in making their decision.Persistent failures to attend due to medical grounds will lead to the Head of HR taking advice from the Occupational Health Department in addition to discussion with the Unison representative as to whether the hearing should take place in the absence of the individual against whom the allegations have been made.Table of Contents
4.3 Other Non-AttendanceIf an employee persistently refuses to take part in the disciplinary procedure (including the appeals process), they will be advised that it will be in their best interest to provide some justification or written account for their actions.However, if they still refuse, having attempted to convince them of the benefits of participating in the investigation, appearing and presenting their case at any disciplinary hearing that may be convened, they will then be written to formally explaining that a disciplinary decision will be taken based on the information the Organisation has to hand and that a decision may then be taken in their absence.5. FORMAL DISCIPLINARY INVESTIGATIONSThe purpose of the investigation is to identify facts and gather evidence that enables a decision to be made as to whether or not there is a case to answer. No disciplinary action will be taken against an employee until the case has been investigated and assessed.An appropriate Manager or Investigating Officer from Professional Standards will be appointed to investigate the allegation.The investigation stage will vary according to the route through which the misconduct has been identified and the nature of the alleged misconduct. Advice should be taken from the HR Team in the first instance.Discipline matters in relation to police staff may come to light in different ways. Examples of the common routes of identification are as follows:ï via a line manager where informal action has failed to produce the desired sustained improvement.ï via a line manager where the matter is more serious and so informal action would not be appropriate.ï via PSD where an external complaint has been received about the conduct of a member of police staff e.g. member of the public or external stakeholder.ï via PSD where its normal monitoring processes have identified a case of potential inappropriate use of email/IT systems/Social Media.ï via PSD regarding a matter involving both a police staff member and an officer.ï via the PSD anonymous contact systemï Whistleblowing.In ALL cases, the matter must be referred to HR prior to any formal action being taken. This will ensure consistency of approach and application of this procedure.HR will advise and/or liaise with PSD regarding the most appropriate way in which a matter is to be investigated where appropriate.5.1 Conduct AssessmentsOnce a potential conduct matter has come to light, this will be forwarded to the Organisation Assessment Officer (AO) who will determine as to whether or not further fact finding is necessary and as to whether or not the matter is considered to be “Below or Above Threshold”.
If considered below threshold, the matter will be passed back to an appropriate manager locally to deal with.If above, it will be passed to the organisation’s Authorised Authority (AA) who will determine as to whether or not further fact finding is necessary and once in possession of all appropriate detail, will determine as to whether or not:a. The matter is considered to be Misconduct or Gross Misconduct, or,b. The misconduct is so serious that either suspension from post or suspension from Organisation is appropriate.This investigation will then be passed onto a PSD Investigating Officer (IO) who will be responsible for conducting the formal investigation.5.2 Conducting an InvestigationThe purpose of the investigation is to identify facts and gather evidence that enables a decision to be made as to whether or not there is a case to answer. No disciplinary action will be taken against an employee until the case has been fully investigated.An individual under investigation will be informed as soon as practicably possible in writing of the:ï nature of the allegation and standards breachedï name of the Investigating Officerï right to be accompanied throughout the process by a Unison representative or a colleague.During the course of the investigation, if evidence comes to light which in the opinion of the IO warrants the amendment of the allegations, the IO may resubmit their rationale to the AA for reassessment. The employee must be informed of any changes in the nature of the allegations.Care must be taken to deal with the employee in a fair and reasonable manner. The nature and extent of misconduct investigations will depend upon the seriousness and complexity of the matter in question. It should be proportionate to the allegation made in terms of the time spent, the depth and detail.IO’s are mindful that their role is to gather evidence surrounding the allegation and to look forevidence that supports the employee’s case as well as evidence against.Any investigation conducted by the PSD IO’s are done so in line with the PSD Charter (See Appendix 4)5.3 Investigations as a result of public complaintsAn appropriate manager or PSD Investigator, if appropriate, will be assigned to investigate an allegation of misconduct arising from a public complaint. The purpose of the investigation is to establish the facts surrounding the complaint and allegations.The investigation may be required to be conducted in accordance with The Police Reform Act 2002 (The Act) should the investigation arise as a result of a public complaint.
The Act sets out a framework governing how complaints by members of the public against employees or conduct matters arising out of civil proceedings should be dealt with.The Act created the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC). Certain complaints or conduct matters, if of a serious nature, may be investigated by the IOPC or supervised by them. Matters of a less serious nature will be investigated internally by PSD.At the end of an investigation pursuant to the Act, the Investigating Officer is required to inform the member of the public making the complaint of the conclusions from the investigation. The member of the public may be informed that: -(a) There is not enough evidence to uphold their complaint. In such circumstances no formal disciplinary action would be taken against the employee subject of the complaint.(b) The Organisation has decided to improve or amend its procedures in response to the complaint. In such circumstances no formal disciplinary action would betaken against the employee subject of the complaint.(c) The Organisation intends to take formal disciplinary or other management action against the member of staff. In such circumstances either disciplinary action in accordance with procedure would be taken against the employee subject of the complaint, or advice may be given including the development of an action plan in accordance with the ePDR process.(d) The complaint may be referred to the Crown Prosecution Service for advice on criminal prosecution. However, in such circumstances, disciplinary action in accordance with this procedure may still be taken against the employee without waiting for the outcome of any criminal investigation.If a member of the public is not satisfied with the manner in which their complaint has been dealt with they may appeal to the relevant appeal body (Chief Constable) or the IOPC. The complainant cannot appeal where there has been a finding of case to answer and action has been taken as a result of this finding. Should there be a finding of no case to answer following an investigation and they are not happy with this finding, they may appeal this decision and have a period of 28 days to do this on notification of the decision.The IOPC can direct the organisation to take further action, including disciplinary action, against an employee. This is however a direction (recommendation), and therefore any such action will be taken in accordance with this procedure.When arranging disciplinary hearings and providing notice of such, special arrangements may have to be made where employees work in isolated locations or on shifts extending beyond the normal office hours. The welfare of the employee will always be given primary consideration.Whilst the presumption will be that any warning or dismissal issued in accordance with this procedure will be confidential, disclosure may be necessary in accordance with the policies of the organisation, statutory or court requirements.Investigations against police staff and management intervention can be carried out simultaneously.Table of Contents
6 INVESTIGATION PRINCIPLESNo disciplinary action will be taken against an employee until the case has been investigated and all relevant facts have been considered.An appropriate Manager or Investigating Officer from Professional Standards will be appointed to investigate the allegation.Suspension from duty on full pay, or transfer to another role or department may be considered as a precautionary measure during the investigation (see section 11).The investigation should aim to be completed at the earliest opportunity. The investigation into a public complaint should if reasonably practicable, be completed within 90 days and be subject to regular reviews within that time frame in accordance with IOPC guidelines.In the event of a perceived breach of the Standards of Professional Behaviour, it may be necessary to seek specialist advice which should be sought at the earliest opportunity. This is to ensure that appropriate advice is provided regarding the nature and seriousness of the breach, and to consider if any criminal investigation is necessary.The investigator will give the member of staff a ‘written notice’ informing them of the investigation. This will be supplied at the earliest opportunity and no later than 4 weeks except in exceptional circumstances, such as where disclosure may prejudice an on- going criminal investigation.Within 10 working days of receipt of the ‘written notice’ (unless the period is extended by mutual agreement), the staff member (or representative) may provide an explanation or a written report and or any relevant documents. This will be supplied to the investigator.At all stages of disciplinary hearings and interviews, the employee will have the right to be accompanied by a recognised UNISON representative or work colleague employed by the Organisation (not acting in a legal capacity)(a) the employee and their representative will be updated every 4 weeks as to the progress of the investigation.(b) When an investigator wishes to interview the staff member, they will mutuallyagree a time and date for the interview. However, the staff member may suggest alternative times and dates, within 5 working days of the original date specifiedand the Investigator will give this due consideration.7 ON COMPLETION OF THE INVESTIGATIONWhen the investigation is complete the report and all supporting material should be passed to the Head of HR/Head of PSD. It will be for the Head of HR/PSD to determine how the case will be progressed. The period given for the review and determination of the IO report is 10-15 working days. If there is however a delay in this being achieved, the individual will be give a full update within this timescale and will provide a realistic expectation in regards to when this will be completed along with a reason for the delay.In either case, in consultation with HR, consideration should be given as to whether there is a case to answer. Three options are available at this stage:1. If there is no case to answer i.e. insufficient evidence to support or substantiate the allegation, the employee will be informed of this in writing by the senior manager and advised that no further action will be taken. All references to this matter will be1. 
expunged from the individual’s personal file for disciplinary purposes and the record will be clearly marked ‘Case Unfounded’ by the Professional Standards Administration Team.2. The senior manager may decide that no formal action is necessary but that the matter is better dealt with informally by giving advice to the member of staff, setting support plans etc. Any subsequent monitoring will be their responsibility. This will be recorded on ePDR.3. If the senior manager considers formal conduct action is necessary, they should request that HR set up a formal disciplinary hearing so that the case may be heard in full.4. The Head of HR/PSD may consider the matter in question relates more to an individual’s capability and/or performance in which case, the ‘Unsatisfactory Performance and Capability Procedure’ should be referred to. A record of this will be kept on Centurion, the database maintained by People Services and PSD.No sanction will be issued until a hearing is completed.It should be noted that interviews carried out under the Police Staff Disciplinary Procedures are not conducted under caution. Where staff are invited for meetings or interviews particularly as part of a large scale complex investigation, these meetings or interviews may be tape recorded with mutual and prior agreement of both parties. Individuals are permitted to be accompanied by a Unison representative or colleague at these interviews which are carried out by the IO. This is inclusive of PSD interviews.8 FORMAL DISCIPLINE MEETINGS/HEARINGS8.1 Organisation of a Formal Meeting/Hearing8.1.1 PurposeFollowing an investigation the purpose of the meeting/hearing is to formally determine whether or not the employee is in breach of the Police Staff Code of Conduct, the Code of Ethics, or Standards of Professional Behaviour by considering all available information, including admissions, fairly and impartially to decide what, if any, disciplinary action should be taken.If the conduct has been assessed as Misconduct, this will result in a Misconduct MEETING which will be chaired by an appropriate Manager at grade W10/Inspector rank or above, and will be supported by an HR Advisor.If the conduct has been assessed as Gross Misconduct, this will result in a Misconduct HEARING which will be chaired by an appropriate Manager at grade W13/Superintendent or above, and will be supported by a Senior HR Manager, grade W10 or above.8.1.2 TimescalesThe timescales outlined in this section are designed to reflect the ACAS Code of Practice that states that a conduct meeting should be held without unreasonable delay whilst allowing an employee reasonable time to prepare their case.However, it is recognised that some cases may be more complex, involving many witnesses or large amounts of written material for example. In these circumstances, following discussions from either side, HR will seek mutual agreement to vary these timescales, whilst always seeking to complete the process in a timely manner.
8.1.3 Setting Up the Discipline Meeting/HearingThis is normally undertaken by HR in liaison with the Chair and the PSD Investigating Officer.An employee will be given a minimum of 10 working days notice, in writing, of the date, time and location of the Discipline Meeting/Hearing, unless an earlier date is mutually agreed.This written notification will also include:ï Name of Chair conducting the meeting and notification of any other attendees including that of the HR representativeï Details of the allegation(s) madeï Whether or not the allegations have been assessed as Misconduct or Gross Misconductï Their right to be accompanied by a Unison representative or a colleagueï Their right to call witnesses and submit written statements or representationsï Copies of any written material that will be referred to at the meeting (at minimum this will always include the investigation report)8.1.4 Prior to the Discipline Meeting/HearingNot later than 5 working days before the date of the hearing, the employee shall supply to HR:ï any written statements or representations they wish to be considered at the meeting/hearing (failure to do so will result in such papers not being considered at the hearing)ï details of any witnesses they wish to call including their rationale for the requestï if not already known, details of their representative (if any)Not later than 3 working days before the date of the meeting/hearing, the HR Department will ensure that papers are circulated to all parties and confirm the attendance of witnesses for both sides.8.1.5 WitnessesProviding advance notice is given relevant witnesses may be called by either party where this is considered necessary, having consulted with the relevant parties beforehand. Where witnesses are called in addition to witness statements being provided beforehand, the number of witnesses called will be limited to that deemed necessary for a fair hearing of the case. The employee and/or their representative have a right to raise points about the testimony of a witness.The Chair will make the decision based on the information provided as to whether or not the witness’s attendance is mandatory or optional.8.1.6 Cancellation/Delay of the Disciplinary Meeting/HearingIf a scheduled discipline meeting/hearing is cancelled by the Organisation, an explanation will be provided and a rescheduled meeting will normally take place within 5 working days or as soon as practicably possible. This would be on the assumption that the details of any representative and submission of written statements had already been complied with.Table of Contents
In the event of the employee making a request for an alternative date or not attending the meeting/hearing as arranged, the employee should also provide an explanation for the request and a rescheduled meeting/hearing may be reconvened to a later date at the discretion of the Chair. The Chair will take into consideration the reason for the request or non-attendance in making their decision. Multiple requests for an alternative date or failure to attend without good cause on more than one occasion is likely to result in the case being heard in the employee’s absence and consideration being given to the evidence made available to Chair at that time only.8.1.7 Overview of Meeting/Hearing StructurePresent at a formal Discipline Meeting/Hearing will normally be:ï Chairï Investigating Officerï Member of HR as technical support for the Chairï Note Taker (in the event of a Meeting. A Hearing will be recorded)ï Employee under investigationï Employee’s representative/fellow worker (if employee chooses to have one)ï Agreed witnesses (who will be called in to give their evidence and then asked to leave)However, the Chair reserves the right to reduce the number of individuals present where a case is straightforward and is not being contested by the individual. In such circumstances, a note taker and Investigating Officer may not be necessary to attend the Meeting/Hearing. Any such changes will be agreed with the individual prior to the Meeting/Hearing. A Unison representative or colleague will always be present if requested.8.2 Outcome of the Disciplinary Meetings/HearingsAfter hearing all the evidence presented, the Chair will normally adjourn to consider the matter and to take advice as appropriate. They will then reconvene the meeting/hearing to notify the employee of their findings.If it is not possible to provide a decision on the same day, the Chair will recall the parties no later than 3 working days after the initial meeting/hearing to give their decision.In either event, the decision will be confirmed in writing to the employee within 5 working days of the Chair’s decision being given. This letter will confirm any rights of appeal.9. DISCIPLINARY OUTCOMES9.1 No Case to AnswerHaving heard the evidence, if the Chair of the hearing considers that the case against the employee is unfounded, the employee and their representative will be informed of this at the Meeting/Hearing (following an adjournment) and it will be confirmed in writing within 5 working days of the actual Meeting/Hearing. All references to this matter will be expunged from the individual’s personal file for disciplinary purposes and the record will be clearly marked ‘Case Unfounded’ by the Professional Standards Administration Team.Table of Contents
9.2 Written WarningIf the offence is of a serious nature, a first written warning should be given. This warning will set out the nature of the issue and outline the possibility of dismissal if no improvement takes place. This will require an improvement in the employee’s conduct within a timescale deemed appropriate by the chair, failing which, further disciplinary action will be taken. An appropriate formal support plan should be put in place to set out the required improvements, how these will be measured and achieved.Whilst 12 months is the normal time period for a written warning to remain live on an employee’s personal file, the Chair of the Meeting/Hearing has the discretion to vary this time period dependent on the circumstances of the case. Therefore the warning may remain live on the employee’s personal file for a period of between 6 to 18 months but subject to satisfactory conduct this warning will be treated as spent once the time period has elapsed.9.3 Final Written WarningIn the event of further misconduct following a written warning, or if the offence is very serious but does not amount to gross misconduct, or the conduct of an employee is so serious that it cannot be tolerated a second time, a final written warning should be issued. This warning will outline the reason for this level of warning and that immediate improvement is required in their conduct.An appropriate formal support plan should be put in place to set out the required improvements, how these will be measured and achieved and over what timeframe.In determining the disciplinary sanction, account should be taken of the extent to which standards have been breached, the employee’s general employment record and any mitigating factors which may make it appropriate to adjust the severity of the penalty.Having been issued with a final written warning, should the employee’s conduct cause concern to the Organisation in the future for a similar or related issue, this may result in further escalation of the disciplinary process resulting in their dismissal. Any failure on behalf of the employee to accept the requirements for improvements in their conduct may also result in dismissal at this stage.This warning will remain live on the employee’s personal file for a period of 24 months but, subject to satisfactory conduct, will be treated as spent once this time period has elapsed.9.4 Dismissal (with notice)If the conduct of the employee is so serious, or where previous warnings have failed to achieve the desired improvement such that the Chair of the Hearing decides to dismiss, then the employee shall be informed of this decision (following an adjournment) at the end of the Hearing. They will receive confirmation of this decision in writing within 5 working days of the decision.a. Where appropriate the employee may be given the appropriate pay in lieu of notice and will be asked to leave the premises following the decision.b. The employee is required to sign a copy of the dismissal to confirm his/her understanding.c. Whilst the presumption will be that the dismissal will be confidential, disclosure may benecessary in accordance with policy, statutory or court requirements (such as the Barred and Advisory legislative requirements).Table of Contents
Dismissal may also take place if, following a final written warning there is no satisfactory improvement in conduct. This will be measured as per the requirements of the subsequent formal support plan. In this scenario, the individual would be invited to attend a further misconduct hearing where the evidence would be put to them for their response.In these instances when the appropriate Chair determines that an employee should be dismissed, the individual will receive notification of this decision in writing within 5 working days from the Chair.Dismissal is not suspended pending the outcome of any appeal.9.5 Summary Dismissal (dismissal without notice)An employee may be summarily dismissed for serious matters of discipline but not normally for a first offence, except where that offence is deemed to be gross misconduct. In such cases, summary dismissal without notice or pay in lieu of notice may be appropriate. This may occur where as a result of an initial investigation, the circumstances indicate to the appropriate Chair that gross misconduct has taken place, in which the fundamental trust and confidence of an employee is seriously undermined.In these instances when an appropriate Chair determines that an employee should be dismissed, in exceptional circumstances this may occur without a formal hearing although wherever possible, the Chair should allow the opportunity for the individual to state their position/version of events prior to making such a decision.The individual will receive notification of this decision in writing from the Chair within 5 working days.The employee may still appeal this decision but dismissal is not suspended pending the outcome of any appeal. (See Section 10).9.6 Personal File RecordsRecords will be kept detailing the nature of any breach of disciplinary rules, the employee’s mitigation, the action taken and the reasons for it, whether an appeal was lodged, its outcome and any subsequent developments. These records will be retained on the employee’s personal file in accordance with The Procedure and subject to any statutory requirements as detailed within the Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) or the Data Protection Act 2018 and/or the Police Reform Act 2002.If there is further misconduct during the life of the warning then there may be a further disciplinary investigation which will consider if further disciplinary action may be required in accordance with this procedure.10. APPEALSAn employee has the right of appeal against any level of disciplinary sanction including dismissal. Appeals against disciplinary warnings up to and including written warnings will be heard by a Senior Manager who is of a higher grade and rank than the Chair who gave the sanction and who has had no previous involvement in the case.Any employee wishing to register an appeal must submit their specific grounds for appeal in writing within 10 working days of receipt of the written confirmation of the level of disciplinary warning, to the Chair of the original meeting/hearing. The appeal will normally be heard and considered within 15 working days of receipt of the paperwork by the relevant Senior Manager.
The employee’s written notice of appeal should include full and specific details of the grounds for appeal and whether the appeal is against the finding and/or the level of action taken.The Human Resources Department will arrange the Appeal Hearing ensuring that a minimum of 10 working days notice of the date, time, Chair and location of the Appeal Hearing is given to the employee.At least 5 working days before the appeal hearing, the Human Resources Department will circulate/confirm the documents to be considered at the Appeal hearing. This will include the employee’s written notice of appeal, a statement from the Chair of the original hearing outlining the circumstances of the case, the action taken to date and any other relevant correspondence during the intervening period. It will also include witness statements, as witnesses will not normally be asked to attend appeals unless the Chair of the appeal considers it to be absolutely necessary.Any employee pursuing their right of appeal has the right to be represented by a colleague or a Unison representative.The Chair of the Appeal Hearing will make a decision having due regard to the following:ï Whether the disciplinary action was fair and reasonable in light of the information known to management at the time of the original hearing.ï Whether the prescribed procedures were correctly and fairly implemented.ï The Chair of the Appeal Hearing can make the following decisions based on the above:ï To dismiss the appeal and endorse the disciplinary action taken at the original hearing.ï To uphold the appeal and have the disciplinary record removed from the employee’s personal file and re-instate the employee if the employee has been dismissed.ï To dismiss the appeal as to the finding but allow as to sanction and substitute a less serious disciplinary penalty.If, in exceptional circumstances, evidence is introduced during an appeal that is considered to be new and significant, the Chair of the original hearing may be called to hear that evidence and consider whether it would have altered their original judgement. If subsequently the employee still wishes to appeal, the appeal hearing will continue.There is no further right of appeal. The Chair’s decision is final.The employee will normally be informed of the Chair’s decision at the end of the actual appeal hearing (following an adjournment). In some circumstances the Chair may decide to adjourn to obtain further legal advice and recall the parties no later than 3 working days after the appeal hearing to give their decision. Either way, the decision will be confirmed in writing to the employee within 5 working days of the Chair’s decision being given.11. SUSPENSIONEvery manager has the authority and responsibility to send an employee home if they believe the employee to be a risk to themselves and/or others because of their behaviour or mental/physical state. This would normally be for a period of 24 hours cooling off period. Such action is NOT regarded as suspension and it should be made clear to the employee that this is a formal request to leave the workplace. In such cases the manager should approach an authorised senior manager to consider whether formal suspension is appropriate.
If the employee is not to be suspended then they should be allowed to return to duty as normal as soon as they are able/fit to do so.Before any individual is suspended, a suspension rationale must be completed in order to carefully consider if this is the appropriate action. The rationale will be completed in consultation with the HR department. It will then be forwarded to the Head of HR for sign off.Where practicable, if the employee is to be formally suspended they will be informed of this decision by the appropriate line management in the presence of an HR representative with due consideration given to an appropriate location. Following notification of this suspension, the employee will be asked if they wish contact to be made with either a colleague or a representative from Unison. Confirmation of the reasons for suspension will be provided in writing as soon as is reasonably practicable. A decision to formally suspend an employee may only be taken by a police officer of Superintendent rank or above, or a member of Police Staff of Grade W12 or above. If suspended, an employee’s contract of employment will be deemed to continue together with all their rights, including full contractual pay.Dependent on the circumstances, the employee may be transferred to other employment within the Organisation on normal contractual pay as an alternative to suspension and will be expected to comply with this action. Such a decision will be taken by the relevant Departmental Head (Superintendent / W12 or above) in consultation with the Head of HR.Suspension is NOT a disciplinary sanction and should not be regarded as in any way pre- judging the outcome of the disciplinary investigation.Suspension will normally be effective immediately prior to any investigation. However, where a disciplinary investigation has commenced and the IO becomes aware of additional information that leads them to the conclusion that the employee should now be suspended; this will be actioned at that time by an authorised senior manager.Where criminal investigations take place, timescales are often extended due to the nature of the process and involvement of other stakeholders such as the Crown Prosecution Service.The suspension will be reviewed regularly by the Head of HR and PSD who will ensure that matters are dealt with without undue delay to the process.12. FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH SOCIAL DISTANCING OR HYGIENE MEASURES AT WORKNOTE: THIS ELEMENT APPLIES TO ALL OFFICERS AND STAFF OF WILTSHIRE POLICE AND THE OPCC.Following stringent risk assessment, significant measures have been put in place across the organisation and estate to prevent the transmission of coronavirus (COVID-19) in the working environment. Supplies and appropriate PPE have been provided where necessary and clear guidance has been given to all members of Wiltshire Police. Each member has a personal responsibility to follow any guidance and instruction given in order to protect themselves, their colleagues and members of the public.Failure to comply with these measures may lead to an investigation or fact finding being instigated. Depending on the severity of the situation and taking all considerations into account, a decision will be made as to whether it is deemed appropriate to submit a referral to PSD for assessment as a breach of professional standards of behaviour, or whether to deal with locally as a more minor issue.
If deemed appropriate for assessment, the outcome could result in any one of the following actions:ï No Actionï for Officers, Reflective Practice Review Process, for police staff, a recorded, but informal conversation/action with line managerï Formal performance or misconduct proceedings, where deemed a serious breachEach case will be investigated and considered on a case by case basis taking into account all circumstances and any mitigating factors13 DEALING WITH SPECIAL CASES13.1 Criminal OffencesConviction for a criminal offence is itself a breach of Wiltshire Police’s disciplinary rules, the Police Staff Code of Conduct and the Code of Ethics which are incorporated into the procedure. Police Staff are required to report any conviction or caution against them for a criminal offence to the Professional Standards Department.Any internal investigation will not pass judgement on criminal investigations but will investigate the circumstances of any alleged breaches of disciplinary rules or conduct which affects the employment position of the employee.An internal investigation will fully examine any possible failures to meet the Wiltshire Police’s disciplinary rules, standards and Police Staff Code of Conduct or the Code of Ethics.Wiltshire Police can only act on the information obtained during an internal disciplinary enquiry. Should an internal disciplinary hearing find that the employee should be dismissed, the dismissal will not necessarily be rendered unfair by information subsequently received or by acquittal in a criminal court. Discipline matters will be decided on the ‘balance of probabilities’ rather than ‘beyond reasonable doubt’.Where it is brought to the attention of the Organisation that an employee has been charged with, or is the subject of allegations in connection with a criminal or potentially criminal offence, a Departmental Head should notify the Head of Human Resources immediately so that disciplinary implications can be considered and the method of investigation agreed.The nature of the alleged offence will be considered in relation to the following:ï The nature of the alleged offence and the employee’s positionï The reaction of colleagues and breakdown in working relationshipsï The effect upon public confidence in the ability of the Organisation to conduct its business (if the matter became public knowledge)ï The impact on the employee’s ability to carry out their role or uphold public confidence and the Organisation’s reputation and standards.Where it is considered that one of the above will be adversely affected, an internal disciplinary investigation will be conducted in line with these procedures. Internal disciplinary action may be taken irrespective of criminal proceedings and need not await the outcome of criminal enquiries or any subsequent court appearance. If it appears that suspension should be considered, this should be done in accordance with Section 8.Table of Contents
Where criminal enquiries are also being conducted, an employee must be made aware that details of the disciplinary investigation may be disclosable to the criminal investigation. Employees should be advised that material obtained in the course of a criminal investigation may be used in the discipline enquiry if the individual consents to this disclosure.13.2 MonitoringThe Human Resources Department is responsible for monitoring the disciplinary procedure and promoting consistency in its application. This will ensure allegations of discipline are dealt with in the same manner, and if found to be substantiated, that similar and appropriate sanctions are applied.14. POLICE BARRED AND ADVISORY LIST REGULATIONS 2017The Police Barred List and Advisory List Regulations 2017 came into effect on 15th December 2017.Where serving officers (including special constables) / staff are dismissed, or where officers / staff who have resigned or retired whilst under investigation and a subsequent hearing determines they would have been dismissed had they still been serving, the individual will be entered onto the barred list and prevented in law from gaining employment with most policing bodies in the future. There are a number of variations insofar as how long an individual will remain on the barred list dependant on whether they have been dismissed for conduct or performance. In summary, however, officers / staff dismissed for gross misconduct will remain on the list for life and in respect of officers (not staff) that information for the first 5 years, post dismissal, will be publically available.Where an officer (including special constables) / staff member resigns or retires whilst under investigation for an allegation of gross misconduct, they will be entered onto the advisory list. There they will remain until such time as disciplinary proceedings have concluded. If a hearing then determines that the individual would have been dismissed from their role had they still been serving, then they will be transferred onto the barred list. If the determination is that the allegation is unproven or proven but a sanction short of dismissal would have been given, the individual will be removed from the advisory list. The advisory list is a private list that policing bodies are expected to consult when deciding whether to make an offer of employment, although it does not act as an absolute bar to policing.14.1 Further advice and assistanceA copy of the Police Barred List and Police Advisory List Regulations 2017 can be found at: http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2017/1135/contents/made.Home Office Guidance to accompany the above regulations can be found at the following website address. Annex H and annex I give detailed guidance on the two lists:https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/circular-0122017-new-former-police-officer- and-barred-list-regulations-an-amended-determination-on-retirement-and-amended-home- office- guidance.Table of Contents
Police Staff Code of ConductBelow is an overview of the standards which are included within the code of conduct. A full version is available on the HR Intranet.Honesty and IntegrityPolice staff are honest, act with integrity and do not compromise or abuse their position.Authority, Respect and CourtesyPolice staff act with self-control and tolerance, treating members of the public and colleagues with respect and courtesy.Police staff do not abuse their powers or authority and respect the rights of all individuals.Equality and DiversityPolice staff act with fairness and impartiality. They do not discriminate unlawfully or unfairly.Use of RestraintPolice staff only use restraint as part of their roles and responsibilities to the extent that it is necessary, proportionate and reasonable in all the circumstances.InstructionsPolice staff only give and carry out reasonable instructions.Police staff follow all reasonable instructions and abide by Organisation policies.Work and ResponsibilitiesPolice staff are diligent in the exercise of their work and responsibilitiesConfidentialityPolice staff treat information with respect and access or disclose it only in the proper course of their work.Fitness for WorkPolice staff when at work are fit to carry out their duties.Discreditable ConductPolice staff behave in a manner which does not discredit the police service or undermine public confidence in the police service.Police staff report any conviction or caution against them for a criminal offence.Challenging and Reporting Improper ConductPolice staff whilst at work report, challenge or take action against the conduct of colleagues which have fallen below the standards of professional behaviour expected.(See Police Staff Code of Conduct Policy for more detail).Table of Contents
Police Code of Ethics - that normally result in disciplinary action may include:ï Absence	from	work	without	required	authorisation	or	regard	to	the	appropriate proceduresï Failure to attend punctually or regularlyï Failure to comply with a lawful and reasonable instruction of a supervisorï Substantial complaints in respect of behaviour at work, rudeness or attitude towards other members of staff, visitors, members of the publicï Breaches of the Social Media, Acceptable use of	Force Systems and/or the Acceptable use of email, the internet and fixed and mobile phones policies.ï Lack of application to dutiesï Failure to comply with sickness reporting proceduresï Negligence in standards of workï Failure to comply with Wiltshire Police’s Financial Regulations e.g. expense claimsï Failure to comply with Standard of Dress Procedure and failure to wear uniforms where requiredï Failure to comply with the Smoke Free Procedureï Other failure to meet the Police Staff Code of ConductThe level of disciplinary action will however, depend on the nature and extent of the offence. There may be occasions when the level of offence would constitute a serious offence/gross misconduct leading to dismissal. The repeated commission of single offences or commission of multiple offences may also lead to dismissal.This list is not exclusive or exhaustive and does not indicate any limitation upon management’s right to exercise discretion in individual cases.Gross misconduct is regarded as misconduct of such a nature that it fundamentally breaches the contract between the employee and employer and justifies management no longer accepting the continued presence of the employee at work.Examples of gross misconduct are:ï Unwelcome sexual contactï Unfair discrimination or harassment of an employee, potential employee or person in respect of whom Wiltshire Police has responsibilities for on the grounds of gender, transgender, marital or civil partnership status, racial group, sexual orientation, religion or belief, disability or age.ï Serious breach of health & safety rules and proceduresï Serious breach of the Organisation’s Social Media, Acceptable use of Force Systems and/or the Acceptable use of email, the internet and fixed and mobile phones policies.ï Fightingï Physical assault, abusive behaviourï Drug or alcohol related offences (including positive samples in relation to the Substance Misuse Policy & Procedure)ï Theft or fraudï Deliberate misuse of information held by the Force and/or deliberate interference with computerised informationï 
ï Malicious and deliberate damage to the property of the Police Authorityï Deliberate	misuse	of	information	held	by	the	Organisation	and/or	deliberate interference with computerised informationï Malicious and deliberate damage to the property of the Police Authorityï Deliberate and serious breach of confidentialityï Wilful	disregard	of	duties	and	failure	to	comply	with	lawful	and	reasonable instructions relating to the employmentï Deliberate falsification of records e.g. timesheets, expense claims, self certification of sickness forms and other official organisational formsï Conviction for a criminal offenceï Failure to disclose a conviction for a criminal offenceï Falsification or misrepresentation of qualifications or experience which are a stated requirement of employmentIt is stressed that this list is not exhaustive, and each case would reviewed individually; however, it is intended to give an indication of the type and level of conduct which would be regarded as gross misconduct and render an employee liable to dismissal.In certain cases, what might be considered a less serious breach of discipline (e.g. under the influence of alcohol) may be regarded elsewhere as gross misconduct (e.g. where driving or endangering themselves or others is involved).

Appendix 3
Wiltshire Police Charter for Officers and Staff Subject of Public Complaint or Conduct Investigation
If you become the subject of a public complaint or misconduct investigation the Professional Standards Department, will work to ensure that the minimum standards set out in this Charter are provided to you. We appreciate that being the subject of an investigation can be difficult and stressful, therefore the below detail is intended to assist with reducing the impact on your wellbeing by providing clear guidance to help manage expectations.1. You should expect to be treated fairly and in line with Organisation values and behaviours throughout the complaints and conduct process by all individuals and organisations involved. Everyone has the right to fair and unbiased treatment throughout the duration of their investigation, and I will do everything I can to ensure this is maintained.2. You will receive an update at least every 28 days from the Investigation Officer; this will be either via a telephone call, email or letter and your preferred method of update will be discussed with you and agreed.I recognise that being kept updated as to the progress of your investigation is of paramount importance. Agreeing with you the terms of ongoing contact will not only keep you updated on progress, but will help provide reassurance to you that something is happening, even if you cannot see it.3. Where appropriate, you will be provided with the contact details of services so that you can access support when you need to, such as Occupational Health, staff associations and People Services.You may not recognise a need for this until later in the process, and it is important that once this is realised, you can access the appropriate services which will assist you.4. You may be assigned a welfare point of contact, depending on the nature and circumstances of the allegation.5. Where appropriate, and with your consent, information about your case will be shared with partner organisations who have a supportive role, who may be able to provide additional support to you.6. If any items of property are seized from you as evidence during the investigation, then we will ensure it is looked after and returned to you when no longer needed.7. I will work with officers and staff who have been subject of investigation to monitor how well we have responded and dealt with your investigation.In undertaking the Charter we will do our best to support you. I will also address any concerns you bring to my attention regarding the conduct of your investigation.Tim Corner D/SuperintendentHead of Professional Standards Wiltshire Police
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	People Services (Human Resources) Procedure Owner/Author:	Sarah HARDINGTechnical Author:	Natalie STRONG Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: Deputy Chief ConstableRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes20.08.20183.0Section 9.4 - Last paragraph and bullet points removed.13.09.20183.0Minor amendment to section 6 (page 12) bullet point (b).30.09.20204.0New section 12 added – compliance with Covid-19 requirements.Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionForce Policy Officer16.09.20204.0JNCC (Not required for all procedures)14.09.20204.0Distribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this procedure (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionUNISONSeptember 20204.0Police FederationSeptember 20204.0OPCCSeptember 20204.0Implications of the Procedure: Training RequirementsNo additional training requirements.IT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure required.
INDEXTABLE OF CONTENTS	2PROCEDURE OVERVIEW	3GLOSSARY OF TERMS	3RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	3AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE	3GENERAL DATA PROTECTION REGULATIONS 2018	4FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	4MONITORING and REVIEW	4WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDURE	41. PURPOSE, PRINCIPLES & SCOPE OF THE DISCIPLINE PROCEDURE	51.1 Purpose & Scope	51.2 Legislative Compliance	51.3 Principles	61.4 Conduct of Trade Union Officials	71.5 Involvement of the Professional Standards Department	71.6 Health & Safety	72. INFORMAL ACTION	72.1 When to use Informal Action	72.2 Resolving Issues Informally	72.3 Relationship with the Issue Resolution Procedure	82.4 Escalating to the Formal Procedure	93. PROBATIONARY PERIOD	94. FORMAL PROCEDURE	94.1 Initiating the Formal Procedure	94.2 Inability to Participate in the Formal Procedure due to Ill-Health	94.3 Other Non-Attendance	105. FORMAL DISCIPLINARY INVESTIGATIONS	105.1 Conduct Assessments	105.2 Conducting an Investigation	105.3 Investigations as a result of Public Complaints	116. INVESTIGATION PRINCIPLES	131. 
7. ON COMPLETION OF THE INVESTIGATION	138. FORMAL DISCIPLINARY MEETINGS/HEARINGS	148.1 Organisation of a Formal Meeting/Hearing	148.1.1 Purpose	148.1.2 Timescales	148.1.3 Setting up the disciplinary Meeting/Hearing	158.1.4 Prior to the Disciplinary Meeting/Hearing	158.1.5 Witnesses	158.1.6 Cancellation/Delay of the Disciplinary Meeting/Hearing	158.1.7 Overview of the Meeting/Hearing Structure	168.2 Outcome of the Disciplinary Meeting/Hearing	169 DISCIPLINARY OUTCOMES	169.1 No Case to Answer	169.2 Written Warning	179.3 Final Written Warning	179.4 Dismissal (with notice)	179.5 Summary Dismissal (dismissal without notice)	189.6 Personal File Records	1810. APPEALS	1811. SUSPENSION	1912. FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH SOCIAL DISTANCING OR HYGIENE MEASURES AT WORK	2013. DEALING WITH SPECIAL CASES	2113.1 Criminal Offences	2113.2 Monitoring	2214. POLICE BARRED AND ADVISORY LIST REGULATIONS 2017	2214.1 Further Advice and Assistance	22APPENDIX 1:	Police Staff Code of Conduct	23APPENDIX 2:	Code of Ethics	24APPENDIX 3:	Professional Standards Charter	26DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	27
POLICY STATEMENT.Force policies and procedures provide a definitive reference for staff and, where approved for publication under the Freedom of Information Act 2000, the public in a range of areas relating to the business of Wiltshire Police.Policies and procedures are essential for the efficient running of the organisation. They should aim to inform and instruct staff towards a particular approach or course of action to be undertaken when dealing with the core functions of the Force.Policy is often confused with procedures or guidance. Wiltshire Police has therefore adopted the following definitions:Policy is a general high level statement to guide thinking; who, what and why.Procedure is a detailed statement on ‘how’ policy is to be implemented or a process carried out. Guidance is a statement of good practice or sensible steps.A policy is a statement (expressed in broad terms) setting out the Forces position or desired position in relation to a relevant and significant issue. It helps people (officers and staff) to exercise good judgement and discretion in the management of daily affairs.Policy should support, and be in line with, the Forces Delivery Plan and Values & Behaviours.Policy should provide a basis for consistent decision-making and resource allocation and should be aimed at assuring consistency and fairness in how those decisions are taken within the framework of the Forces Delivery Plan.Force policy and procedures are binding on all members of the organisation and individuals will be accountable for their actions. Non-compliance may render individuals subject to disciplinary action.Authorised Professional Practice and NPCC Guides sit alongside Force policy and procedures. Wherever possible Force policy and procedures will be aligned to Authorised Professional Practice or relevant NPCC Guide.In some circumstances a specific content area of Authorised Professional Practice or an NPCC Guide may be adopted as Force policy and will have the same status as Force policy. The decision to replace a Force policy or procedure with Authorised Professional Practice or an NPCC Guide will follow the same process and require the same level of approval as the adoption of a new Force Policy (see appendix A below).Roles and Responsibilities.Any member of staff tasked with developing new policy or procedure is responsible for:ensuring that the new policy or procedure is sponsored by the relevant Chief Officer Group member responsible for that business areadrafting the new policy or procedurealigning the policy or procedure with Authorised Professional Practice and relevant national Guidance consultation and implementation of the new policy or procedure andcompletion of an Equality Impact AssessmentThe department owning a policy or procedure is responsible for maintaining and reviewing that policy or procedure. All Force policies and procedures should be reviewed regularly, at least once every 3 years, with critical areas reviewed yearly.
A full review will constitute more than just reading through that policy or procedure; a number of important elements must be considered. These elements are listed in appendix B (below).The Head of Department (Superintendent or Police Staff equivalent) is responsible for all policies and procedures falling within their business area. Heads of departments have the responsibility of ensuring that the policies and procedures sitting within their remit are relevant, accurate and fit for purpose.The Continuous Improvement Team, through the Force Policy Officer, has responsibility for overseeing all Force policies and procedures and for ensuring that the relevant department head is notified prior to a policy or procedures next review date. The Continuous Improvement Team will maintain a log of all Force policies and procedures. All Force policies and procedures can be found on the SharePoint Policy Library.Force policies and procedures that are no longer current working practice will be withdrawn, archived and removed from SharePoint Policy Library by a member of the Continuous Improvement Team. The responsibility for removing archived documents from other SharePoint sites rest with relevant site owner. A copy of all archived policies and procedures will be retained for future reference and audit purposes by the Force Policy Officer.Policy Process.To ensure consistency in policy and procedure formation and implementation all Force policies and procedures must:1. Be drafted on the current form for drafting and submitting a new policy.2. Equality Impact assessed.3. Approved and signed off at the appropriate level. For most policies and procedures this will be the relevant Chief Officer Group lead or relevant representative body (e.g. Health and Safety Committee). Politically or strategically sensitive policies and procedures must be approved by the Chief Officer Group. Full details on the correct level of approval can be found in appendix A (below).4. Be published on the SharePoint Policy Library.Only those policy and procedure documents (including Authorised Professional Practice or NPCC Guides adopted as Force Policy) published on the Policy Library will be considered to be official Force Policy documents.POLICY AIM.The aim of this policy is to ensure that a robust corporate framework exists that ensures the successful implementation of Force strategy, mission, vision and values by providing a clear articulation of the way Wiltshire Police develops, manages and reviews its policy and procedures.APPLICABILITYThis policy applies to all Police Officers, Police Staff, Special Constabulary and Volunteers.RELATED DOCUMENTS and Authorised Professional Practice.This policy applies to all existing and new internal Wiltshire Police policies and procedures.DATA PROTECTION AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION.Any information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, UK General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUALITY IMPACT.
This policy has been drafted to comply with the principles of the Human Rights Act 1988 and Equality Act 2010. Members of Wiltshire Police administering this policy are responsible for ensuring that in its application, those to whom the policy applies, shall not receive less favourable treatment because of their age, colour, disability, ethnic or national origin, gender re-assignment, marital status, nationality, race, religion, sex or sexual orientation.This policy has been subject to an equality impact assessment and has been graded Low Impact.Appendix A:	Approval routes for Force Policy and Procedures.The appropriate approval level for all new and substantially amended policies and procedures is determined by the category the policy/procedure falls under:Category 1: Politically or strategically sensitive policies or procedures must be approved by the Chief Officer Group (a Category 1 policy or procedure would be one that has been created or substantially amended as a result of an IOPC investigation, HMIC inspection, legal judgement etc.).Category 2: Operational Policing policy and procedure not falling into Category 1 - must be approved by the relevant ACC for the department that owns that policy or procedure.The Head of Department is responsible for updating the ACC on the creation of a new policy.Category 3: Non-operational - must be approved by the relevant Chief Officer Group Lead for the business area creating the policy or a representative body (e.g. the Health and Safety Committee).The Head of Department is responsible for updating the relevant Chief Officer Group Lead on the creation of a new policy.If there is any question concerning the effectiveness of any new or amended policy or procedure (whatever category) then that policy or procedure will be submitted to the Chief Officer Group for final approval.Advice on the correct category and approval route can be obtained from the Force Policy Officer or Continuous Improvement Team.Appendix B:	Reviewing a Policy or Procedure.The review of your policy or procedure must address the following:  Is the policy or procedure still required?i.e. the reason the policy was adopted no longer exists, the policy was adopted to aid the introduction ofnew legislation or a new process and that legislation or process is now fully incorporated. Is the policy or procedure achieving its objectives?  Is the policy or procedure still consistent with: - the assumptions and objectives that led to the adoption of the policy or procedure  best practice the Forces Delivery Plan the Police and Crime Plan Authorised Professional Practice national codes of practice or guidance  legislation or case law  Has the policy or procedure had any unintended consequences?i.e. hindering operations, processes or tasks - such as the ability of an officer or staff member to do their jobs efficiently. Is the policy or procedure being applied or used effectively?i.e. do the people expected to use the policy or procedure do so. If not, is this because the policy or procedure is not right or is it because the application of the policy or procedure needs to be changed (better communication, training etc.). Have there been any constraints on implementing the policy or procedure at lower organisational levels? have the people expected to use the policy or procedure been able to do so. If not why not (ICT issues, lack of training etc.). Does the policy or procedure interfere with or replicate any other policy or procedure?
 Do any related policies or procedures need to be revised or withdrawn because of your policy or procedure or any changes you are making? Can the procedure you are reviewing be done in a better more efficient way?In order for policies and procedures to be fully effective it is important that they are evidence-based. When considering the above you must also consider what evidence can be used to show that the policy or procedure is the right one for the Force. You should consider the evidence available from both internal and external sources.You should consider stakeholder and user feedback, any indications from survey results (e.g. the staff survey) and relevant corporate and local performance monitoring data.Once you have collated the evidence you should assess it to identify what, if any, amendments to the policy or procedure are needed.? Revision HistoryVersionDateSummary of Changes4.005.10.2023Scheduled review – minor changes made to ensure clarity and consistency with current department names etc. Reference to JNCC removed.
Template v4WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICYPost Incident ProcedureDate of Publication: December 2020 Version:	2.0Next Review Date:	December 2023
TABLE OF CONTENTSPolicy Statement	3Post Incident Manager	3Collaborations and Cross Border	4Appointment for Post Incident Manager	4Applicability	4Legal Basis & Driving Force	4Related Policies, Procedures and other documents	5Authorised Professional Practice	5Data Protection	5Freedom of Information Act 2000	5Monitoring & Review	5Who to contact about this policy	5Post Incident Procedure	6Cadre maintenance and training	6Post Incident Management - Roles	7Post Incident – procedures for return to work	7Special Leave or Suspension from duty	7APPENDIX 1 – PIP Designated Venue Plans/Equality Impact Assessment	8APPENDIX 2 – Occupational Health Unit PIP flow chart	9DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	10
POLICY STATEMENTKeeping people safe is at the very heart of the Wiltshire Police. Our aim is simple – to increase the protection provided to communities so that those who live work or visit locally will be safe and feel safe.Death or serious injury following police contact is an emotive issue, even when the cause of death is not directly attributable to police action. It could lead to speculation, mistrust and possible disorder from the family, relations, friends, or the local community. It will also have a significant impact on the emotional wellbeing of any officers and staff involved.The Post Incident Procedure (PIP) seeks to strike a balance between the needs of an investigation with the welfare of any staff involved after such an incident. The Procedure will facilitate so that the best possible evidence is made available for a tranparent investigation, while managing the impact such an incident will have upon any Key Police Witnesses (KPW) and their families.This policy applies to all police officers and police staff who could be considered as a KPW under the definition in APP for the discharge of a weapon or for Death and Serious Injury incidents.Recent updates to Post-Incident APP has officially expanded this beyond the world of firearms and the discharge of a lethal or less lethal weapon and there is now a separate APP for any incident which is not covered under the armed policing APP:ï Where a death or serious injury (DSI) results, directly or indirectly, from the discharge of a firearm, less lethal weapon, or specialist munition.https://www.app.college.police.uk/app-content/armed-policing/post-deployment/#post-incident- managementOR (new APP)ï Any circumstances (unless the circumstances are or have been the subject of a complaint or amount to a conduct matter) in or as a result of which a person has died or sustained serious injury and:> at the time of the DSI, the person had been arrested by a person serving with the police and had not been released, or was detained in the custody of a person serving with the police, or at or before the time of the DSI, the person had direct; or> indirect contact with a person serving with the police who was acting in the execution of their duties, and there is an indication that the contact may have directly or indirectly caused or contributed to the DSI. This sub-category excludes contact that a person suffering the DSI had while acting in the execution of their duties as a person serving with the police (see section 12 Police Reform Act 2002, as amended by the Policing and Crime Act 2017).https://www.app.college.police.uk/app-content/death-or-serious-injury/?sThe APP should be the first reference in relation to the running of a PIP. It Establishes best practice in the event of a PIP being activated. This Policy seeks to highlight areas of the process which would be particular to Wiltshire in the event that a PIP is instigated.Post Incident Manager:The PIM facilitates, manages and ensures the integrity of the post incident procedure. Chief Officers must ensure that arrangements exist whereby appropriately selected, trained, assessed and accredited PIMs are available. The PIM’s role is to:
ï Facilitate the investigationï Ensure integrity of processï Ensure that the Key Police Witness’ needs are addressed in a manner which does not compromise the investigative process.When an officer has attended and satisfactorily completed a course of instruction based on the post incident management module in the National Police Firearms Training Curriculum, they will be assessed to be occupationally competent to perform the role of a PIM. Chief Officers are responsible for ensuring that PIMs are able to maintain their operational competence by regularly performing the role or actively participating in relevant continuous professional development activities.Due to the infrequency of Post-Incident Procedures arising, it is not possible to set a formal process of mentoring and shadowing for Post-Incident Managers. Continuous CPD will be utilised as appropriate for the PIM cohort to remain accredited. PIMs must be formally re-accredited at least every five years, but consideration should be given to re-accreditation between three to five years depending on operational exposure. PIMs often perform their role as part of a PIM team, under the direction of an overall PIM coordinator.Cross border incidents are always a possibility and the use of PIMs from one force in another area should be considered by Chief Officers in both affected forces at the time that a PIP is instigated. If Wiltshire officers are involved in a PIP in another force area, there would be an expectation that consideration is given to utilising a Wiltshire PIM as part of the PIM team.Collaborations and Cross BorderWhilst the Specialist Operations aspect of Tri-force has now dissolved, with Firearms, Roads Policing and Dog units returning to the control of each individual force, there are a number of collaborations which still exist which mean there will routinely be officers from other forces working within Wiltshire. On any occasion where PIP is instigated in Wiltshire, which involves staff from any other force, contact will be made with that force in order to consider whether it is appropriate and practical to send a PIM from that force to assist with the procedure in Wiltshire.Appointment of Post Incident Manager:In the event of a PIP it is the responsibility of the duty Chief officer to appoint the PIM. The on-call Post-Incident will be contacted and instigate the PIP process. At this time an Appointed Officer (AO) will be sourced by the PIM from the current cohort of trained PIMs. In the event that an AO cannot be located the PIM can, as per APP, designate a suitable officer as AO with a briefing on their role during the PIP. The reason and rationale for this would have to be documented in the PIM log by the lead PIM for the PIPAPPLICABILITYThis applies to all Police Officers and Police Staff who could fall under the definition of a KPW as per both APPsLEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEThe legal basis for this policy comes from the common law duty of the police to protect life and property, prevent and detect crime, keep the peace and in particular:Police Reform Act 2002 Criminal Law Act 1967 section 3Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 section 117Human Rights Act 1998
RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSCollege of Policing Code of Ethics Firearms Standard Operating Procedures Pava Irritant Spray ProcedureSpit and Bite Guard ProcedureTazer Standard Operating Procedure Use of Force PolicyAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEPost-incident procedures following death or serious injury Armed Policing – Post DeploymentRoad Policing – Police Pursuits Detention & Custody – Deaths in CustodyDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWMonitoring and evaluation of this policy is the responsibility of the Superintendent HQ Operations and Contact Management who will re-authorise it annually. This policy and the activation of any PIP procedure will be monitored quarterly through the Armed Policing Strategic Threat and Risk Assessment meetings (APSTRA) to ensure it remains accurate and compliant with both legislation and national/ local drivers.Local debrief after a PIP will be organized by the Lead PIM in order to identify any immediate learning form the PIP. This will be restricted to the PIM cohort involved. A full debrief of the entire incident will be directed by Gold at the most appropriate time, most likely when any investigation is concluded.This policy will be reviewed after one year, following which a decision as to whether two or three yearly reviews are necessary there on.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYResponsibility on behalf of the Chief Constable for this policy resides with the following post holders:ï Superintendent Operationsï Inspector Operational Lead Armed Policingï 
POST INCIDENT PROCEDUREThe Superintendent, Force Operations, must ensure the maintenance of the policy for post-incident procedure. They will ensure:o The appointment and training/accreditation of officers to effectively meet the needs of the post incident procedureo That there exists a process for the activation of a PIP and the use of the PIP suite which are reviewed in line with this policyo Any documentation that is used as an aide memoir for the management of the post incident procedure is to form part of the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) (i.e. Post Incident Managers Aide Memoir)o Provision is made for the archiving of policy guidance and SOPs to meet force scrutiny, either for legal or civil purposes.Post incident procedureA considerable amount of research has gone into preparing and revising the College of Policing Authorised Professional Practice. The purpose of this policy is to ensure it compliments the guidance given in Authorised Professional Practice and most importantly to bring some clarity to our own officers as to who does what, when and where.This procedure will be available to assist all staff in preparation to undertake the following:o Carry out their operational work;o Carry out any investigative work;o Provide the appropriate welfare support where needed.It is natural that in high risk and / or violent or traumatic incidents officers will be concerned for their own liability, safety and well-being. Likewise, the public also for their safety and that the appropriate lawful procedures have been undertaken. The following sections will now consist of procedural guidance with associated information. It must be kept in mind the College of Policing Authorised Professional Practice contains infinitely more detailed information from which these procedures are designed.The importance of disclosure must be borne in mind at all times.Cadre maintenance and trainingThe Superintendent Force Operations will be responsible for:o Ensuring that a register for the various cadre roles is kept up to date;o Ensuring that officers have received appropriate training and accreditation, and this is supported by the documentation referring to course content and accreditation process;o Ensuring that the SOPs are yearly (also when any amendments to College of Policing Authorised Professional Practice are issued) compared with College of Policing Authorised Professional Practice, taking account of any legal changes, and good practice to ensure they accurately reflect the most appropriate procedures to deal with our lawful and welfare obligations;o Appointment of a lead PIM who will co-ordinate the training and accreditation;o Ensuring the appropriate support material used by staff (i.e. PIM) is kept up to date;o Ensuring old policy and procedures, documentation or accreditation is dated and stored to meet future allegations or claims.o 
Post Incident Management - RolesIn the event that PIP is activated, there are a number of functions that particular roles must perform:ï FIMï Chief Officer (or designated senior officer)ï PIMï SFC – in the event of a dischargeï ITFC/TFC – in the event of a dischargeï OFC – in the event of a dischargeï Initial Investigating Authorityï Initial Investigating OfficerThe functions for each of these roles are contained within the relevant APP, the links for which are at the start of this document.Post incident - procedures for return to workSee Appendix 2 which deals with the return to work procedures for KPWs who have been involved in an incident to which PIP applies. Effectively it seeks to introduce them back to the workplace in a supported and managed way and only when they are in a position to do so.Special Leave or Suspension from DutySpecial or Administrative leave may be granted to a KPW when appropriate. There may, however, be circumstances where such leave is not in an officer’s best interest. The officer and staff associations should be consulted.Suspension from duty should only be necessary in exceptional cases, and in accordance with force policy.
APPENDIX 1 – PIP Designated Venue Plans – Primary suite L&D Force HQEquality and Diversity ConsiderationsAn equality Impact Assessment has identified 2 areas of risk relating to protected Characteristics.The mitigations for each are listed after each area of risk:ï Disability - there is no wheelchair access to the upper floors of L and D where the PIM suite is housedMitigation – the training room on the ground floor and the trainer’s office, also on the ground floor can be utilised in this scenario. The training room will become the KPW room and the trainer’s office can be used for consultations with solicitors and staff association representatives for those staff that cannot use the stairs. There is access to toilets in this areaï Gender reassignment and access to showering and toilet facilities.Mitigation – in order to maintain integrity of the process and to ensure there is no conferring, both changing rooms in the gym block would be commandeered by the PIM so that they could be used on an individual basis, which would render both changing rooms gender neutral for the purposes of the Post Incident Process.In relation to toilet facilities staff would also be using the facilities on a one at a time basis in order to maintain integrity and prevent conferring.
APPENDIX 2 – Occupational Health Unit PIP flow chart
 Reasonable Adjustments to be put in place
Return to Work Guidelines
External Referral to commence
OH processes to be followed ongoing monitoring Engagement with line manager /welfare officer/OH
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnershipDepartment Responsible:	HQ Operations and Contact ManagementPolicy Owner/Author:	Superintendent Gavin Williams / Inspector Paul SAUNDERS Technical Author:Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: ACC Local Policing and PartnershipsRevision HistoryRevision DateVersionSummary of Changes10.12.20202.0Updated to align to current Force structure and APP Post-incident procedures following death or serious injury.07/12/20212.0Scheduled review conducted by Insp Paul SAUNDERS: No changes made.Next review date set for December 2023ApprovalsThis document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement TeamDecember 20202.0Superintendent Gavin WilliamsDecember 20202.0ACC Local Policing and PartnershipsDecember 20202.0DistributionThis document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact AssessmentConsultationList below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionLian DUNWELL, Elizabeth COLES, Louis McCOY30.09.20201.1Elizabeth COLES19.10.20201.4Implications of the PolicyThe principles of this policy have been taken from the Authorised Professional Practice (APP Post- incident procedures following death or serious injury and Armed Policing) as the principle documents on Post Incident Procedures.
Training RequirementsAll PIM’s will receive the appropriate training and be accredited with the College of Policing and PFOA before they can practice.Selection for training within this demanding area of police work will be in line with the Forces current iPerform framework and the detailed evidence around certain specific criteria as laid down in the Authorised Professional Practice.CPD will be organised throughout the year in line with the material which is produced by the College of PolicingIT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure required.
Probationary Policy and Procedure for Police StaffAll new appointments to the Wiltshire Police Authority will be subject to a probationary period which usually lasts for a duration of 26 weeks. Probationary periods are designed to enable both Wiltshire Police and the probationer to establish both the suitability of the role and the capability of the post holder. The probationary period not only measures the performance of the probationer but also examines their conduct and behaviour. As highlighted in the Code of Conduct, Wiltshire Police expects high standards from individuals in terms of their behaviour and conduct both in the workplace and when they are off duty. The probationary period enables police staff to become familiar with the Code of Conduct and the Police Service values of integrity, respect for diversity, compassion for others and commitment to public service. Any behaviour which falls below the standards required is unacceptable and will be addressed in the probationary period.1. Scope of the Policy1.1 The following procedures apply to all newly appointed permanent police staff and to temporary staff initially appointed on a fixed term contract for six months or more. Regardless of the length of the contract, the line manager should undertake periodic assessments of the work being undertaken to ensure that standards are being maintained.1.2 The procedures will also apply to all internal appointments or ‘transfers’ within the Wiltshire Constabulary. Probationary transferees will be confirmed in post subject to the satisfactory completion of a probationary period within their new role. The duration of the probationary period will be in accordance with that set for new police staff.1.3 Our Disciplinary Procedures will not apply during the probation period.2. The Probationary Period2.1 The length of the probationary period for both new police staff and probationary transferees will be 6 months. The normal probationary period may be extended prior to recruitment for identified posts (normally those requiring an extensive training period). The length of probationary period will also be specified in the contract of employment.3. Purpose of Probation3.1 The purpose of the probationary period is twofold:3.11 To ensure that new staff members have the opportunity to become familiar with the practices and procedures of the Wiltshire Constabulary.3.12 To allow staff members to demonstrate their ability to effectively and efficiently perform their duties.3.2 During the probationary period the line manager has the responsibility to set the required performance standards and follow up any development needs that have been identified, either during the selection process or subsequently. Managers must ensure that staff members understand what is expected from them during their employment.1.1 
4. Principles of Probation4.1 The probationary period is used to assess the suitability of a probationer for the post. The line manager will assess the performance and competence to ensure that the probationer is meeting the required standards.4.2 The newly appointed staff will be given suitable guidance and support during their probationary period and will be provided with appropriate development and training opportunities.4.3 Performance will be assessed at the 4th, 12th and 20th week of the probationary period and where areas for development are highlighted, every reasonable opportunity will be provided to assist in the improvement of performance. The line manager will make clear how and when these standards will be monitored.4.4 Line managers should seek advice from the Human Resources Department should a probationer’s performance or conduct give cause for concern as early as possible. It is important not to wait until the end of the probationary period to raise any concerns.4.5 Management may extend the probationary period, in consultation with the Human Resources Department. This may be for reasons such as absence due to ill health or where a further period of training and/ or experience may establish the staff member’s capability to perform the requirements of the role. This extension will normally be for a maximum period of three months or in cases of ill health, by the length of time lost to sickness absence.4.6 Employees going through their probationary period may be dismissed following adverse probationary reports on disciplinary, capability or other grounds (e.g. loss of trust and confidence, giving a false statement to gain employment) without being subject to further procedures.5. Responsibilities5.1 ProbationerThe newly appointed member of staff is responsible for demonstrating their suitability for the post and is responsible for highlighting to their line manager any training needs they may have. It is also the responsibility of the new member of staff to attend any induction or other appropriate training events that are held in order to assist with their development.5.2 Line ManagerIt is the responsibility of the line manager to clearly define the set of performance standards and the required procedures to ensure the newly appointed member of staff understands what is required from him or her. The line manager is also responsible for providing guidance and support and ensuring the newly appointed member of staff receives an effective induction.5.21 It is also the responsibility of the line manager to ensure that all probationary review reports are completed and returned to the Human Resources Department in a timely manner.
6. Probationary Procedure6.1 For the standard six month probationary period, formal Initial Performance and Development Reviews are required after 4, 12 and 20 weeks service in the post. Where other than the standard length of probation is being undertaken, the frequency of reports will be established at the commencement period in consultation with the Human Resources Department.6.2 The review forms are located within the HR Services intranet page on First Point. All sections of each review are to be completed fully by the line manager.6.3 The reports must be signed and comments endorsed by the first line manager and forwarded to the post holder for signature and comments. The second line manager must then comment and sign the appropriate and forward to the Divisional/ Department Head for signature. On full completion of the report, the document should be forwarded to the Human Resource Department. Line managers must ensure that a copy of the review is kept for their records.6.4 Line managers are expected to complete the reports in a timely manner and be returned to the HR Helpdesk.7. Satisfactory Performance7.1 Following successful completion of the probationary period, line managers may recommend that the post holder be confirmed in the role.7.2 Both line managers should document this recommendation at the final stage of the review process, if appropriate.7.3 The review should be sent to the Human Resources Department who will then send a letter to the staff member confirming that their probationary period has been satisfactorily completed and that they are therefore confirmed in post.8. Early Confirmation8.1 If a new member of staff is able to demonstrate their ability to function effectively at an early stage and the line manager decides that early confirmation of appointment may be appropriate, this decision may be indicated following the 12 week review.8.2 If the first and second line managers are entirely satisfied that the member is working at full capacity, then a report must be submitted to the Human Resources Department for consideration, requesting an early confirmation of appointment.8.3 A letter of confirmation of appointment will be forwarded from the Human Resources Department.9. Unsatisfactory Performance9.1 If progress is unsatisfactory, the line manager should discuss with the member of staff the areas of performance that are causing concern and should clarify objectives and timescales within which improvements will need to be made as well as identifying methods of achieving such improvements. Any additional training, re-training or support should be1.1 
mutually agreed by both parties and appropriate action taken. This should be put in writing to the probationer in the form of an Action Plan. The probationer should also be advised in writing that if the specified improvements are not met by 20th week review then a recommendation to the Head of Human Resources for dismissal may be made.9.2 Details of the problems with supporting evidence, efforts made to resolve them and Action Plans must be placed with the appropriate review and forwarded to the Human Resources Department.9.3 At the final stage of the reporting process a decision will be made by the line manager and the Human Resources Department as to the most appropriate course of action/ This may include extension of the probationary period which is dependent on certain circumstances, termination of employment or the staff member deciding to resign.9.4 In circumstances where a probationary transferee fails to satisfactorily complete their probationary period, management will take all reasonable steps to re-deploy the individual. If an employee is re-deployed in these circumstances, the terms of appointment will be those appertaining to the post in question i.e. there is no protection of grades etc. If no other suitable positions are available, the employment may be terminated.10. Unsatisfactory Performance - Extension of Probationary Period10.1 Extensions to the probationary period will only be granted in circumstances whereby the post holder is unable to demonstrate their ability to perform to an acceptable standard within their role within the specified probationary period. These may be for reasons such as an additional training requirement or sickness absence. Following liaison with the Human Resources Department, line managers may request an extension to the probationary period. An extension will normally be for a maximum period of 3 months or in the cases of ill health, normally by the length of time lost to sickness absence.10.2 Notification must be forwarded to the Human Resources Department as soon as this option is considered appropriate and reported in the post holder’s review.10.3 The individual will then continue to receive reviews at agreed periods to monitor their progress.10.4 At the completion of the agreed extension, the final report will be completed with the recommendation to either confirm the appointment or terminate the individual’s employment with Wiltshire Constabulary.11. Unsatisfactory Performance – Dismissal11.1 Where the line manager considers that there has been apparent misconduct, unsatisfactory work performance, poor attendance or unsatisfactory progress despite attempts to resolve these problems with the staff member in the form of action plans etc., the Human Resources Department will need to be consulted to determine whether the circumstances warrant a recommendation for dismissal.11.2 If dismissal is a recommendation, a formal meeting should be arranged before the end of the probationary period. The probationer should be informed in writing by the line manager at least 2 working days in advance of the formal meeting and that a possible outcome is dismissal from Wiltshire Constabulary’s employment. The probationer will be1.1 
advised of the right to be accompanied by a friend, colleague or trade union representative.11.3 At the formal meeting, the line manager will explain the severity of the issues of concern and should clarify that the problems have been identified and discussed with the probationer. The line manager will also provide any supporting information showing that the probationer has been given the opportunity to improve and support has been provided.11.4 The staff member will also have the opportunity to explain and respond before a final decision is made.11.5 If the decision is dismissal the member of staff will be notified in writing that their employment is terminated by due notice, within the probationary period. The reasons for the termination will be included. The staff member will be notified that they will have the right of appeal under Section 13 below.11.6 Probationers may be dismissed at any stage during their probationary period for misconduct or gross misconduct.12. Dismissal – Right of Appeal12.1 A staff member on probation will have the right to appeal against the decision to dismiss him or her from Wiltshire Constabulary’s employment. The member of staff wishing to appeal against dismissal should submit in writing notice of appeal to the Head of Human Resources within five working days of receipt of the written notice of termination. The notice should include full reasons for the appeal.12.2 The Human Resources Department will arrange the appeal hearing ensuring that a minimum of 2 working days notice of the date, time and location of the appeal hearing is given to the member of staff.12.3 At the appeal hearing, the appeal panel will consider the evidence and will make a decision based on the following reasons:12.31 Whether the disciplinary action was fair and reasonable in light of the information known to management at the time of the original hearing.12.32 Whether the prescribed procedures were correctly and fairly implemented.12.4 The Chair of the Appeal Hearing can make the following decision:12.41 To dismiss the appeal and endorse the disciplinary action taken at the original hearing.12.42 To uphold the appeal and re-instate the employee.12. 5 There is no further right of appeal. The Chair’s decision is final. The member of staff will be informed of the Chair’s decision at the end of the actual appeal hearing and confirmed in writing to the member of staff within 5 working days of the Chair’s decision being given.12. 
12.6 If a member of staff who has been dismissed is reinstated on appeal, the reinstatement will take effect from the date of the original dismissal and no loss of earnings shall be incurred.13. Further Guidance13.1 For further information and guidance on this procedure, please contact the HR Helpdesk in the first instance.12.1 
Template v5WILTSHIRE POLICE & POLICE AND CRIME COMISSIONERRECORDS MANAGEMENT POLICYDate of Publication: May 2022 Version:	6.0Next Review Date:	May 2024
TABLE OF CONTENTSPOLICY STATEMENT	3Records Management Within Wiltshire Police	3Applicability	3Risk Assessments / Health and Safety Considerations	4Record Characteristics	4Records for Law Enforcement Purposes	5Record Creation	5Storage	6Metadata	6Preservation of Physical Records	7Exhibits	7Preservation of Electronic Records	7Scanning	8Email	9Access and Security	9Review, Retention and Disposal	10ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITY	11Expectation of All Staff	11Audit Trails	14POLICY AIM	14LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCE	14RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	14AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE	15DATA PROTECTION	15FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	15MONITORING AND REVIEW	15WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICY	15DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	16
POLICY STATEMENTWiltshire Police and the Office of the Police and Crime Commissioner (OPCC) recognise that the efficient management of records is necessary to comply with legal and statutory obligations, the Management of Police Information (MoPI) Code of Practice, Authorised Professional Practice (APP) Information Management, Guidance and other Codes of Practice. Dynamic records management contribute positively to the performance, efficiency and effectiveness of the overall business management through:a) Supporting policy formation and decision-makingb) Protecting the interests of the force and the rights of individuals (staff and members of the public)c) Facilitating consistent and equitable delivery of serviceRecords Management Within Wiltshire Police and the OPCCInformation, knowledge and intelligence are the lifeblood of policing. Once captured, they must be systematically managed as business records according to the policy and standard working principles highlighted within this document.The integrity of police information relies on the information being trusted, acceptable, useable and available. It should be in a format that is accessible and easy to use, whether it is an electronic, photographic or paper format.The purpose of records management from policing and business perspectives is to ensure that information is documented and maintained in such a way that its evidential weight and integrity is not compromised over time. To achieve this, records must be managed throughout their lifecycle, from creation through to disposal.ApplicabilityA record is defined as “information created, received, and maintained as evidence and information by an organisation or person, in pursuance of legal obligations or in the transaction of business.” (BS ISO 15489-1: 2001 – British Standards around Information, Documentation and Records Management).Although not an exhaustive list, examples of items that can constitute records include: -ï documents (including written and typed documents and annotated copies)ï computer files (including word processor files, databases, spreadsheets and presentations)ï electronic mail messagesï notebook records (including One Note and ‘blue books’)ï fax messagesï brochures and reportsï intranet and Internet Web pagesï formsï seized evidenceï audio and video tapes, including CCTVï microfiche and microfilmï maps and plansï photographsThis policy, together with the associated standards, applies to the management of all operational and business records (whether containing personal data or not) in all technical or physical formats or media, collected, received, created, held, shared, disseminated, disclosed, maintained, reviewed,
retained or disposed of by staff of Wiltshire Police, the OPCC and 3rd parties in the course of carrying out the functions of the organisation. All police officers, police staff, OPCC staff, service provider staff and those working voluntarily or under contract to Wiltshire Police must be aware of, and are required to comply with, this policy.This policy does not apply to copies of documents published by other organisations that are kept for reference purposes only.Risk Assessments / Health and Safety ConsiderationsThere are no risks associated with the implementation of good records management procedures. The risks associated with not following good records management procedures are:a) inability to ensure that records are present, accessible, capable of being interpreted, trusted and maintained through timeb) health and Safety / Environmental risks associated with the storage of large amounts paper incorrectly and / or unnecessarily (e.g. trip hazards, blocking exits and risk of fire)c) criminal Justice outcomes being prejudicedd) inability to comply with legislative and Regulatory body expectations (e.g. MoPI, Data Protection, Freedom of Information, VAT rules etc.)This policy aims to minimise the above risks as much as possible.Record CharacteristicsRecords owned and managed by Wiltshire Police and the OPCC provide organisational memory, evidence of actions and decisions and represent a vital asset to support daily functions and operations. Wiltshire Police and OPCC records will be compliant with BS ISO 15489-1:2001 and will be complete, authentic, reliable, secure, usable, have integrity and be accessible. These records will be managed in accordance with good practice and legislative requirements ensuring they remain credible and authoritative throughout their lifecycle.It must be possible to prove that records are what they purport to be, to demonstrate that their integrity is intact and to identify the originator. Where a record is amended, an audit trail will be created.Records will accurately reflect the transactions that they represent.The Force and OPCC will seek to comply with other national and international standards such as BS 10008:2014 – Evidential Weight and legal admissibility of electronic information and BIP 0025:2002 – Effective Records Management (this list is not exhaustive).Records will be securely maintained to prevent unauthorised access, alteration, damage or removal. They will be held securely according to their Classification in accordance with the requirements of the Government Security Classification Scheme (previously Government Protective Marking Scheme).Records will be reviewed and disposed of promptly in accordance with the Records Retention Schedule and an audit trail kept.Records management systems will provide an auditable trail of records transactions from creation through to ultimate disposal.
Records will be readily available and sufficient in content, context and structure to provide sufficient, authenticated evidence of the relevant activities and transactions. This includes the preservation of physical records, the migration of electronic records and the accurate cross referencing of hybrid records (part paper, part electronic).The term “readily available” is not the same as immediately available. The speed at which records can be retrieved will depend on where, how and in what format they are stored. Files or tapes may have to be retrieved from offsite Archive Facilities, both of which may take several days.Systems that are routinely used for records management will support these characteristics and be comprehensive, systematic and compliant with all requirements arising from current business. The Force and OPCC will make the best use of available technologies to assist in the efficient management of records.The intelligent application of records management standards and principles will lead to the retention of few records. However, those records will be of a higher quality, be more useful as evidence and be a reliable source of information on which to base decisions.Records for Law Enforcement PurposesFor the purposes of the Data Protection Act 2018 Part 3 governs information that is required for Law Enforcement Purposes.Law Enforcement Purposes are defined as:* prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences, or* execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and* prevention of threats to public security.These purposes are not mutually exclusive. Information can be collected for one Law Enforcement Purpose and used for another that may not have been known about at the point of collection. It is essential that in order for information to be legally held, a lawful purpose is established.Generally, if the processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out for the following purposes; law enforcement, a legal obligation, the administration of justice, the safeguarding of children and of individuals at risk, a contract or the data subject has given consent then the processing will be lawful (for more information see the Data Protection Policy).The Management of Police Information (MoPI) guidance applies to records held within the business areas of crime, intelligence, custody, domestic violence, child abuse investigation, firearms revocations and refusals. There will be additional business areas to which the MoPI principles are to be applied. However, information that is ancillary to a Law Enforcement Purpose (i.e. personnel, finance etc.) is not included under MoPI.Historical data is defined in MoPI as anything recorded prior to April 2006. The back record conversion (BRC) of historical data held for a policing purpose will be prioritised based on risk. Low priority historical data, where the cost of BRC greatly outweighs the potential risk, will remain subject to time-based disposal, where applicable.Record CreationGood quality information collected, recorded, evaluated, shared, reviewed, retained and disposed of is essential to support our policing and organisational objectives. It is essential that our information can be shared with and used confidently by other Forces and agencies.
The Force and OPCC will comply with APP by ensuring information entered onto a record (paper or IT based) conforms to the following:* information is recorded for Law Enforcement Purposes* information is recorded in the appropriate format for the business area in which it is held* information is recorded according to the data quality principles – accurate, adequate, relevant and timely* checks are made to avoid creating duplicate records* links are made to existing records* correct GSC marking is usedCompliance with APP on record creation and local Data Quality standards is the responsibility of everyone who enters new data onto police databases. This important principle should be conveyed and reinforced in initial training and in subsequent practice. It will be the line manager’s responsibility to carry out regular dip samples to check that their staff record information to the required standard. Where the standard is not being met, feedback should be given, and where necessary, appropriate training or guidance arranged using the Personal Development Review process.Each operational/business area will have in place clearly worded and effectively disseminated procedures, rules and conventions relating to each police system/process in that area. These procedures will take into account the legislative and regulatory environments in which the operational/business area works and include controls to ensure each record is created using the appropriate templates, forms or database.Information received from other agencies will be treated and evaluated as a piece of intelligence.StorageAll records created by Wiltshire Police and OPCC employees or service provider staff for a work purpose remain the property of Wiltshire Police and OPCC. They must be searchable and retrievable in order to comply with legislation (i.e. Data Protection Act, Freedom of Information Act etc.)Wherever possible, records will be stored electronically and source documents only retained where there are compelling operational or legal reasons for doing so. In circumstances where individual records cannot be separated out, for example police pocket notebooks, the entire collection of records should be retained according to the most serious offence they contain.Once information becomes a record, it must be stored in appropriate, secure, shared (where feasible) areas (i.e. SharePoint), rather than in “My Documents”, Outlook folders, Desktops, One Note or desk drawers, and any draft notes deleted  As a general rule, Niche RMS / other operational line of business Applications (for example Storm) should be used to process operational information. Sharepoint / other line of business Applications (for example Origin) should be used for non-operational records.Legacy operational information is accessible through the Force Data Search (FDS).MetadataMetadata is supplementary data about a record. It may be descriptive metadata, which aids searching (e.g. subject or date created), or it may be technical metadata, which aids with the management of the record over time (e.g. disposal schedule, access rights or preservation details).
All records will be tagged with appropriate descriptive and technical metadata, including protective marking category and disposal schedule.Metadata should be based upon a business classification scheme or file plan and should stay with the record until the point of disposal when the record is no longer needed for business purposes.Information for a Law Enforcement Purpose (as defined by DPA) will be collected, recorded and linked in accordance with the MoPI Guidance during the initial review. Niche RMS will be the primary repository of Law Enforcement Purpose data.Preservation of Physical RecordsThe tracking (movement and location of physical records) will be managed by the Operations Manager, Justice Division to ensure that any record can be:ï easily retrieved at any timeï and that there is an auditable trail of record transactionsThe long term preservation of physical records depends largely upon the environment in which they are stored. The following factors can all cause the premature degradation of physical records (e.g. paper, photographs & negatives, exhibits and audio/visual media):* adverse temperatures* fluctuations in relative humidity* exposure to light* pest infestations (insects or vermin)* mould* pollution* the stability, acidity or impurity of the paper* the quality of the storage wallets, folders and boxes used* incorrect handlingThe Operations Manager (Crime Justice & Standards) will ensure equipment and facilities used for current records storage is fit for purpose and safe from unauthorised access, meeting fire regulations and providing reasonable protection from water, rodent or other damage, at the same time permitting maximum approved accessibility to the information and commensurate with its frequency of use.A business continuity plan must be in place to provide protection for records which are vital to the continued functioning of the Force.ExhibitsExhibits will be stored in accordance with the Force Policy and Procedure for the Seizure, Storage Retention and Disposal of Special Property.Preservation of Electronic RecordsThe preservation of electronic records presents a more complex challenge, known as digital obsolescence. Not only must one preserve the physical storage medium (e.g. CD ROM), but one also requires the hardware on which to play the media (e.g. CD drive) and software to read the data on the media and present it to the user in a comprehensible way (e.g. a compatible version MS Word etc.). The absence of any one of these three conditions will make the record irretrievable. Once digital obsolescence has occurred, even if the situation can be remedied, it is often extremely expensive to do so.
One solution to digital obsolescence is to store data on networked servers and migrate data onto new media and software as technology advances. This is particularly effective in organisations where the information contained within records is more important than the way that information is displayed. Where records are migrated across changes in technology, the Force will ensure that they remain authentic and accurate. If this is not possible, the reason and risk to the organisation will be fully documented by the Information Asset Owner.To minimise the risk of records being overlooked during a migration exercise, electronic files should not be stored on local drives / discs or removable media unless there is a genuine business need (i.e. sealed master discs for use in court cases). Where files are created and/or updated using mobile or portable computing devices (e.g. laptops), it is the responsibility of the user to ensure that these files are transferred onto the central system within 72hrs so that they can be backed up. Users should be aware that until the files are backed up, they remain at risk and could potentially be lost in the event of a problem with the portable device.It is the responsibility of business area leads to ensure that the information held within their IT systems can be and is preserved over time. The requirement to preserve electronic information in accordance with the Force’s disposal schedules must be incorporated into the Statement of Requirements for all future procurement of electronic data management applications.All line of Line of Business Applications are backed-up. However this does not mean that the information is in a format that can be swiftly accessed following a disaster. An ICT Service Continuity Plan exists to cover a small number of Applications, ensuring that the core business would be supported in the event of a major incident. It is the responsibility of each department to ensure that their business continuity and disaster recovery plans provide adequate contingencies for the ICT systems that the department owns and/or uses, if they are not covered by the overall Force ICT Service Continuity Plan.ScanningThe scanning of paper records is a time-consuming process, which will only be undertaken where there is a genuine business need, such as:* the need to create space by disposing of the original paper record or* the need to share the record on a regular basis between business areas located in different parts of the county.Any department considering a scanning project must consult with the Information Asset Owner to ensure the business needs are met, and with ICT to ensure that there is sufficient capacity within the ICT infrastructure to safely store the volume of files, that accessing the files is not detrimental to the performance of the network and that resources exist to back up the files appropriately.Where scanning results in the disposal of the original record, care must be taken to adhere to the scanning standards set out in BS 10008:2008 (code of practice for legal admissibility and evidential weight of information stored electronically).Scanned copies must be checked for quality before the original is disposed. The original must be retained if:* a scanned image of sufficient quality cannot be obtained;* the scanned image requires significant enhancement;* the record has physical amendments that have not been captured (e.g. pencil annotations that do not show up properly, or Post-It™ notes);* fraud is suspected;* 
* there are legal reasons for retaining the original (e.g. contracts)* the scan is of an exhibit (e.g. a hate-mail letter)Originals of scanned, non-Wiltshire Police or OPCC records should, wherever practicable, be returned to the originator rather than destroyed.Where the original is retained after scanning, the scanned version is nothing more than a “convenience copy” and scanning standards need not be so rigorously applied.Hardware used to scan records will allow the Force and OPCC to adhere to the standards set in BS10008:2014. Where it is intended to dispose of the original record after scanning, multi-function scanner/printer/copier machines will not be used.EmailThe management of email and the associated email archive is covered in the Acceptable Use Force Systems Policy.Access and SecurityThe legal and business environment in which the Force and OPCC operate establishes broad principles on access rights, conditions and restrictions. The standard business model of preserving the Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability (CIA) and non-repudiation (of origin, content and receipt) should be followed when handling force information and assets. In this context, confidentiality is a set of rules that limits access to information, integrity is the assurance that the information is trustworthy and accurate, and availability is a guarantee of reliable access to the information by authorised individuals. All staff have a responsibility to ensure that records are classified and handled in accordance with this environment and are protected from unauthorised access, disclosure and loss.Electronic and physical records will be made available for continuity of actions, with originators and managing individuals or groups having need to know and use access to information.The Government’s Security Classification system (GSC) applies to all force records and information and will be complied with at all times. Roles / functions within force identified as being competent and authorised to make assessments should decide on the sensitivity / protective marking of a record. This judgement could be on an entire series of records or on an individual record. In all cases, it will identify limitations / restrictions on the records and will highlight groups or individuals who should have access.The need to ensure appropriate access controls will be managed by assigning access status (privileges and attributes) to both records and individuals. This will ensure that:ï records are categorised according to their access status at a particular timeï records are only released to those who are authorised to see themï encrypted records can be read as and when required and authorisedï records processes and transactions are only undertaken by those authorised to perform them andï parts of the organisation with responsibility for particular business functions specify access permissions to records relating to their area of responsibility.Any judgements for withholding or masking information must be recorded and the resulting record must be maintained for at least as long as the information in question.
The Force and OPCC will not seek to put blanket restrictions on a record series where only some of the individual records are judged sensitive. However, where there is a requirement to use blanket restrictions for genuine technical reasons, they may be used.The monitoring and mapping of user permissions and role based functional job responsibilities is a continuing process which occurs in all records systems regardless of format. Information Asset Owners will assign individuals access privileges.Information abstracted from records or record metadata may be subject to legislation requiring it to be either withheld or made more widely available outside normal business needs, or even outside the Force itself. For example, compliance with Data Protection & Freedom of Information legislation.All records are part of the corporate memory. Unless restricted/limited due to legislation or as a result of judgement/sensitivity (need to know and use principle), they should be made readily available within force. This may be subject to volume restrictions because of technical limitations or copyright reasons. Any access arrangements will be made for a specified duration and these will be reviewed according to a schedule identified during appraisal.All personnel must be security cleared / vetted before being allowed access to information. This need for security clearance / vetting will be reflected in the role profile.It may be necessary to grant third parties access to Force records. There may be a requirement for third parties to be security cleared / vetted prior to accessing certain Force records and some records may require redaction prior to sharing. Third party access to Force information will be managed by the business area which created and owns the records in question.Information for Law Enforcement Purposes will be shared in accordance with Information Sharing Agreements set up between the Force and its partner agencies under MoPI.Review, Retention and DisposalThe principles of review, retention and disposal will apply to all Force and OPCC records (operational and business) and will be assigned a retention/disposal schedule.MoPI guidance on review, retention and disposal relates to information held on all police systems other than PNC. The review, retention and disposal of information on the PNC must be conducted in accordance with the PNC Retention Guidelines.Specific guidance on the review, retention and disposal of MoPI defined information is available in the Force Procedure for MoPI Review, Retention and Disposal.The Review process is the examination of a record to ensure:* there is a continuing lawful or business purpose to retain* the record is adequate, accurate, relevant, up to date and not excessive – records that are found to be inaccurate will, where systems allow, be corrected* all records containing personal data are compliant with data protection principles* a future date is set to review the record if appropriateThe Retention process will incorporate the continued storage of and controlled access to information held following a review. The main principles supporting this process are:ï all records will be held in line with the Force retention/disposal schedule, any decisions to retain for longer than that specified will be fully documented for audit purposesï 
ï due regard will be given to the requirements and implications of relevant legislation (for example the Criminal Procedures Investigation Act 1996)The Disposal process will incorporate the removal of information from all police systems to the extent that the information cannot be restored. As a general principle, records and any copies (physical or electronic) are disposed where it is deemed that they:* are no longer necessary for a policing/business purpose* are deemed to be disproportionate/excessive to the purpose they serve* are inaccurate beyond alteration* are duplicatesMaterial that contains personal data will be treated as confidential waste and disposed of in accordance with Force policy.Please note that there are currently retention protocols in place outlining the types of records that are to be kept outside of usual retention policies if they are (or may be) of interest to:o the Public Inquiry into the death of Dawn Sturgess and Salisbury Poisonings (Novichok);o the Public Inquiry into the Response to the Covid 19 Pandemic.Records that fall within the scope of these enquiries must not be destroyed. For more information, please refer to the Force Records Manager.ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITYWiltshire Police and the OPCC have a corporate responsibility to own and manage all information created, received and held for business and Law Enforcement Purposes in accordance with the regulatory environment. The Chief Constable is the Data Controller for Wiltshire Police records. The Police and Crime Commissioner is the Data Controller for the OPCC .Expectation of All StaffThe Chief Constable has delegated responsibility for records management across Wiltshire Police and the Police and Crime Commissioner for the OPCC. It is the responsibility of all police and service provider staff to ensure that:* all information created, received and held, for which they are responsible is secure, accurate, relevant, kept up to date and retained or disposed of in line with Force policies/procedures and the Retention Schedule;* they are aware of and implement Force Information Management policies and procedures;* information is recorded for Law Enforcement Purposes (in accordance with DPA), in the correct format and in a timely and efficient way.You should:* understand and abide by your legal obligations under the Data Protection Act 2018 and the Freedom of Information Act 2000* understand and handle information in line with the Government Security Classification rules* understand the College of Policing APP on Information Management* know where to find published guidance and how to use it* 
* follow good practice in labelling, storing, sharing, protecting and preserving information* when appropriate, make a written record of information known to make it easier and more reliable to share with others, or to ensure that actions or decisions made at the time can be understood in the future* understand and follow the Force’s Acceptable Use of Force Systems Policy when using any Wiltshire Police ICT equipment* understand how to use the ICT provided by the Force for your role* follow the System Operating Procedures for any Wiltshire Police ICT that you use* report any risks and areas of concern. Everyone in Wiltshire Police and service provider staff has a responsibility to report inappropriate access, use or disclosure of information, in accordance with the Code of Ethics and the Competency and Values Framework (CVF)* remember the importance of good personal security, information security, operational security and communications security at all times, whether on duty or off and whether using Wiltshire Police ICT or your own equipmentThe Senior Information Risk Owner (SIRO) is the Deputy Chief Constable. The SIRO is responsible for the setting the information risk appetite and risk tolerance parameters.Each Business Area Lead nominated as an Information Asset Owner (IAO) by the SIRO will ensure that processes exist to control access, so that only those with the appropriate training, knowledge and skills can access and use the information held in their business area. Refer to the Information Risk Management Policy for terms of reference for SIRO/IAO.The Records Manager and the Operations Manager, Crime, Justice Standards will jointly provide advice and leadership in the maintenance and development of records management facilities, standards and practices in order to secure the Force’s compliance with records management legislation and guidance.The Records Manager willï provide a single point of contact for all matters relating to Records Management and leadership of the Records Management and the Data Quality/Business Support Teamsï review and maintain operationally the Force Policy on Information Managementï review and maintain the Force Policy for Records Management, Information Review, Retention and Disposal (RRD) and Data Quality Standardsï jointly with all departments maintain the Force Retention schedule and Information Asset Registerï undertake and record detailed audits of randomly selected business areas across the force to ensure that Managers are:- conducting regular audits for data quality assurance- checking for compliance with relevant Force policies and procedures and- reviewing/retaining/disposing of information held in their business area in accordance with the Force retention scheduleThe Operations Manager, Justice Division has responsibility for the management of all physical records held under that command, to include the Force Archive Facilities, Traffic, Integrated Prosecutions Team and Special Property, although ownership of those records rests with the originating business area. The Operations Manager, Justice Division will;ï provide a single point of contact for Archive and Special Property Records Management;ï 
ï review and maintain a Procedural Guidance for the Management and review/disposal of Physical (Special) Property Records and assetsï monitor and review systems in place for special property records management in order to make improvementsï jointly with the Records Manager maintain the Force Retention schedule (as it relates to special property)All business area leads/departmental managers have ownership of records within their business area. Where there is no clearly defined business owner of a record, the Records Manager will decide appropriate ownership.All business area leads / managers will:ï ensure that all information and assets created, received and held, for which they are responsible, is secure, accurate, relevant, kept up to date and reviewed/retained or disposed of in line with the Force Records Retention Schedule.ï ensure that all officers and staff are involved in the implementation of records management through internal communication, profile raising, publicity and trainingï ensure that appropriate resources are available to properly maintain their business area’s recordsï publish accurate procedural guidance, support and tools designed to help each person in that business area manage and use the information effectively and in accordance with the APP on information management, relevant policies and supporting SOPs and Guidance. Where local procedures dictate a deviation from the APP on information management, the full rationale will be documented and authorised in the relevant procedural guidanceï conduct and record periodic data quality assurance audits on the information held in their business area to ensure that Data Quality Standards and recording principles are complied with and utilise performance information to provide feedback and support where appropriateï conduct and record annual audits of the information held in their business area to ensure the ongoing compliance with the Force Records Management Policy, the Force Records Retention Schedule and other appropriate local and national policies and proceduresï ensure that the records in their business area are backed up, that disaster recovery processes are in place and that the records can be preserved over timeThe Data Quality/Business Support Team undertake non technical support to Niche RMS and detailed research, analysis and updating of Niche to ensure that data recorded is accurate, relevant and up to date including the merging of duplicate data, correction of poor data entries, identifying and rectifying overwritten data and where necessary deletion of inaccurate data.Records Management Decision Makers conduct nominal focused reviews by critically assessing all crime and incident occurrences, intelligence submissions, command and control and firearms records together with other information and then assimilate it all before making a documented and auditable decision, primarily about the level of risk the individual poses to the community and which MoPI Group (1 to 4) should be assigned. They will also provide support to the Records Manager by responding to records management enquiries, providing advice and guidance and escalating to the Records Manager where appropriate.
Audit TrailsAudit trails will be provided for all records and documents. They should be kept securely and should be available for inspection by authorised personnel.Audit trails will be managed since they may be of critical importance to the organisation. Claims of compliance may be discredited if the audit trail is not treated correctly and cannot be interpreted unambiguously.The audit trail will include a record of all relevant occurrences and will be secure. If any significant occurrence is not audited, then the whole audit trail can be discredited and as a direct result all or any information held within the system will also be able to be discredited. For all audit trail data, it will be possible to identify the processes, enabling technology and individuals involved and the time and date of the event.POLICY AIMTo competently record and manage all information held for policing activity in an efficient and consistent manner to support the objectives and vision of Wiltshire Police and the OPCC and ensure that national and local objectives are met.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEKey drivers for this policy and the need for a consistent approach are legislative, particularly the eight principles of the Data Protection Act 2018 and the College of Policing (COP) Authorised Professional Practice (APP) on Information Management. A failure to record, retain, review and dispose information appropriately may constitute a breach and, ultimately, undermine public confidence in the Force.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSThis document has been drawn up within the context of:ï Information Management Policyï Acceptable Use of Force Systems Policyï Records Retention Scheduleï Information Asset Owners Handbookï Information Sharing Policyï Information Risk Management Policyï Niche RMS Minimum Data Quality Standardsï ISO 15489-1:2001 (Information and documentation - Records management - Part 1)ï ISO 17799:2005 (Information technology - Security techniques - Code of practice for information security management)ï BSI BIP 0025-1:2002 (Effective records management. A management guide to the value of BS ISO 15489-1)ï BSI BIP 0025-2:2002 (Effective records management. Practical implementation of BS ISO 15489-1)ï BSI BIP 0008:2004 (Code of practice for legal admissibility and evidential weight of information stored electronically)ï BSI BIP 0009:2004 (Legal admissibility and evidential weight of information stored electronically. Compliance workbook)ï BSI BIP 0010:2004 (The principles of good practice for information management)ï Force Information Security Policy (FISP),ï NPCC Governance & Information Risk Baseline Standardsï Quality Assurance and Audit (QA),ï Force Systems Operating Protocols (SOPs)ï 
AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEInformation ManagementDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This has been classed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWThis Policy will be reviewed and updated by the Records Manager every two years.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Head of Information Management and Assurance and the Records Manager are responsible for this policy.All queries relating to this policy should be directed to the Records Manager or Force Policy Officer.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Information Management and Assurance Policy Owner	Head of Information Management & AssurancePolicy Author:	Records MangerTechnical Author:	Policy Officer Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor:	SIRORevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes25.05.20226.0Policy extended to reference OPCCReview, Retention and Disposal section text and requirement on the moratorium on the disposal of information relating to on-going Inquiriesinto Child Sexual Abuse / Undercover Policing removed.22.08.20226.0Reference and links to the public enquiries into the death of DawnSturgess/Salisbury Poisonings (Novichok) and the Response to the Covid 19 Pandemic added to page 11.Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionForce Policy Officer25.05.20226.0Head of Information Management & Assurance04.06.20195.0JNCC(Not required for all policies)N/ADistribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionImplications of the Policy: Training RequirementsNone.IT InfrastructureNone.
Template v5WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICYRECOVERY OF CRIMINAL ASSETSEffective from:	May 2005Last Review Date: September 2020 Version:	1.0Next Review Date: September 2022
POLICY STATEMENTThe Wiltshire Police are committed to building a safer community by ensuring that individuals do not financially benefit or profit from criminal activity.With the effective identification, confiscation and recovery of criminal assets, we aim to reduce the quantity of funds available for future criminal endeavours, thereby lessening the impact of crime on our community.By the confiscation of criminal assets we will work to reduce the expectant quality of life of offenders and deter the creation of role models for potential recruits into criminal life.POLICY AIM> Reducing and detecting crime> Develop safer communities through partnerships> Ensure continuing organisational development.APPLICABILITYThis policy relates to all Police Officers, Police Staff and Special Constables.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEThe legal basis within which this policy is to operate can be found in:ï Proceeds of Crime Act 2002ï Misuse of Drugs Act 1971ï Magistrates Courts Act 1980Other legislation may be relevant to the issue of asset recovery and the above list is not exhaustive.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSSeizure and Retention of Money Procedure CPS Proceeds of Crime GuidanceAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEInvestigation > Investigative Strategies > Financial Investigation > Asset RecoveryDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWThis policy will be monitored through the:ï Quality of items booked into Special Property (and subsequent rejections)ï Legal compliance relating to the handling storage, retention and disposal of Money seized,   ï Maintaining of integrity and correct management of Special Property throughout its lifecycle This policy will be next reviewed in September 2022 by the FAIT Manager.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThis Policy is the responsibility of the Financial and Asset investigation Team.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	HQ Crime - Financial Asset Investigation Team Policy Owner/Author:	Supt. Steve KIRBY / Lou MARTINTechnical Author:Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: ACC Crime, Justice and VulnerabilityRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes24.05.20171.0Reviewed no amendment - adapted from old template to new policy template.25.05.20181.0Data Protection section amended to reflect implementation of GDPR and new DPA.21.09.20201.0Reviewed – no amendments. Change of Policy OwnerApprovals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team25.09.20201.0SCT/ACC/ACO**(Delete as appropriate)N/AJNCC(Not required for all policies)N/ADistribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionImplications of the Policy: Training RequirementsNoneIT InfrastructureNone
Template v6 WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE PROCEDUREREDACTING PERSONAL DATA PROCEDURE.Date of Publication: June 2018 Version:	1.0Next Review Date:	June 2021
TABLE OF CONTENTSPROCEDURE OVERVIEW	3GLOSSARY OF TERMS	3RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	3AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE AREAS ASSOCIATED WITH THIS PROCEDURE	3DATA PROTECTION ACT 1998	3FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	3MONITORING and REVIEW	3WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDURE	31. Background	42. What is Redaction?	43. The Redaction Process	44. Inspecting Documents	45. Types of hidden data and personal information	5Appendix A: Redacting a Microsoft Word Document	6Redacting a Pdf Document	7Appendix B Find and remove hidden data and personal information with the Document Inspector. 9 DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	11
PROCEDURE OVERVIEWThis procedure is intended to be used by those departments who routinely redact personal data/information prior to disclosure and to draw their attention to other file types, such as email or images, which may contain additional meta-data that is not obviously visible.There are several instances when Wiltshire Police departments will need to remove personal data from documents (word, images, PDF, excel etc.) prior to release to members of the public, insurance companies, statutory partners, CPS, solicitors (not an exhaustive list).Note: The simplest case of data being disclosed in error occurs when the data in question is not immediately visible on the screen but is elsewhere within the file. This can be due to a range of design choices or the rendering of certain formatting styles. For example, when setting up a template a user might have chosen to ‘hide’ certain data by setting the font colour to be the same as the background (e.g. white on white or black on black).Whilst hiding data in this manner prevents personal data being disclosed on a printed version of the file, it will remain within the source file. This personal data is at risk of unintended disclosure if the electronic version is distributed. Highlighting the text or changing the font colour will expose it.GLOSSARY OF TERMSTermMeaningICOInformation Commissioners OfficePIIpersonally identifiable informationRELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSData Protection Policy Freedom of Information Policy Records Management PolicyAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE AREAS ASSOCIATED WITH THIS PROCEDUREInformation ManagementDATA PROTECTION ACT 2018Any information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this procedure will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING and REVIEWThis procedure will be reviewed every three years in the light of any feedback or lessons learned from the redaction process, national policy or procedural change or due to changes to law, Force strategy or at such other times as may become necessary.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDUREThe Head of Information Management and Assurance is responsible for this procedure. All queries relating to this policy should be directed to the Force Disclosure Unit or the Force Policy Officer.
1. BackgroundSoftware packages in use today have many hidden dangers. A chart or summary table might not appear to contain any personal data on the surface, but it could in fact have a copy of the individual data points embedded within and allow this data to be made accessible with nothing more than a couple of clicks.Complex file types can also contain meta-data, which may not be appropriate for disclosure, such as photographs with embedded GPS coordinates or the routing information of an email. A recent Wiltshire Police example demonstrated how easy it is to fall foul in this area. Information that was believed to be correctly redacted led to a data breach.A data breach means a breach of security leading to the accidental or unlawful destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorised disclosure of, or access to, data. Failure to correctly redact sensitive/ personal information could lead to reputational and/or financial damage to the Force.2. What is Redaction?Redaction is the separation of disclosable from non-disclosable information by blocking out individual words, sentences or paragraphs or the removal of whole pages or sections prior to the release of the document. In the paper environment some organisations will know redaction as extracts when whole pages are removed, or deletions where only a section of text is affected.3. The Redaction ProcessThere are a number of redaction methods available, which are dependent on the different document formats (PDF, Excel, word). However, this procedure will only concentrate on the redaction technique used on either word or PDF documents which can be found at Appendix A.For further guidance on how you should redact other formats then use the following links:Information Commissioners Office (ICO):https://ico.org.uk/media/for-organisations/documents/how-to-disclose-information-safely-removing- personal-data-from-information-requests-and-datasets/2013958/how-to-disclose-information- safely.pdfNational Archiveshttp://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/documents/information-management/redaction_toolkit.pdf4. Inspecting DocumentsWhen you share/disclose an electronic copy of certain Office documents, you should review the document for hidden data or personal information. You can remove this hidden information before you share the document with other people/partner agencies.The Document Inspector feature in Word, Excel, PowerPoint, or Visio can help you find and remove hidden data and personal information in documents that you plan to share/disclose.Hidden information can include:ï hidden data or personal information that you might not want to share in Word documentsï data Excel adds to a workbook when you collaborate with other peopleï hidden data or personal information in a PowerPoint that might be stored in the presentation or its metadataï document information and file properties in Visio documentsï 
5. Types of hidden data and personal informationWord documents can contain the following types of hidden data and personal information:> Comments, revision marks from tracked changes, versions, and ink annotationsIf you've collaborated with other people to create your document, your document might contain items such as revision marks from tracked changes, comments, ink annotations, or versions. This information can enable other people to see the names of people who worked on your document, comments from reviewers, and changes that were made to your document, things that you might not want to share outside of your team or the force.> Document properties and personal information - Document properties, or metadata, include details about your document such as author, subject, and title. Document properties also include information that is automatically maintained by ‘Office’ programs, such as the name of the person who most recently saved a document and the date when a document was created.If you used specific features, your document might also contain additional kinds of personally identifiable information (PII), such as e-mail headers, send-for-review information, routing slips, and template names.> Headers, footers, and watermarks - Word documents can contain information in headers and footers. Additionally, you might have added a watermark to your Word document.> Hidden text - Word documents can contain text that is formatted as hidden text. If you do not know whether your document contains hidden text, you can use the Document Inspector to search for it (see section 4 above).> Document server properties - If your document was saved to a location on a document management server, such as a Document Workspace site or a library based on Windows SharePoint Services, the document might contain additional document properties or information related to this server location.> Custom XML data - Documents can contain custom XML data that is not visible in the document itself. The Document Inspector can find and remove this XML data.Guidance on using the Document Inspector can be found in Appendix B.
Appendix ARedacting a Microsoft Word Document:Step 1:	Make an electronic copy of the word document to be redacted.Step 2:	When redacting a word document you should replace the words / text to be redacted with [REDACTED] throughout the document. Then click save.Step 3:	Save the document as a PDF and close it. To do this, simply select File>Save as and select PDF from the ‘Save as Type’ drop down menu – then select >options>PDF options and tick ISO 19005-1 compliant. Your screen will now appear as below.
Redacting a Pdf DocumentStep 1:	Open document in Adobe Pro and click on ‘Tools’Step 2:	Go through the document and mark for redaction, then apply redactions
Step 3:	You will receive a prompt if you want to remove hidden information. Select ‘Remove’Step 4:	To complete the redaction process either close the document or save as - if you want
Appendix BFind and remove hidden data and personal information with the Document InspectorYou can use the Document Inspector to find and remove hidden data and personal information in Word documents. It is a good idea to use the Document Inspector before you share an electronic copy of your Word document, such as in an e-mail attachment.Important: It is recommended that you use the Document Inspector on a copy of your original document, because it is not always possible to restore the data that the Document Inspector removes.1. Open the Word document that you want to inspect for hidden data and personal information.2. Click the File tab, click Save As, and then type a name in the File name box to save a copy of your original document.3. In the copy of your original document, click the File tab, and then click Info.4. Click Check for Issues, and then click Inspect Document. 5. In the Document Inspector dialog box, select the check boxes to choose the types of hidden content that you want to be inspected.6. Click Inspect.7. Review the results of the inspection in the Document Inspector dialog box.8. Click ‘Remove All’ next to the inspection results for the types of hidden content that you want to remove from your document.Important: If you remove hidden content from your document, you might not be able to restore it by clicking Undo.In Word, the Document Inspector displays several different Inspectors that allow you to find and remove hidden data and personal information that is specific to Word documents. For a list of the different types of hidden data and personal information that the Document Inspector can find and remove from Word documents, review the table below.
Inspector nameFinds and removesComments, Revisions, Versions, and AnnotationsCommentsRevision marks from tracked changes Document version informationInk annotationsDocument Properties and Personal InformationDocument properties, including information from the Summary, Statistics, and Custom tabs of the Document Properties dialog boxE-mail headers Routing slipsSend-for-review information Document server propertiesDocument Management Policy information Content type informationDatabinding link information for databound fields (last value will be converted to text)User name Template nameHeaders, Footers, and WatermarksInformation in document headers Information in document footers WatermarksHidden TextText that is formatted as hidden (a font effect that is available in the Font dialog box)Note: This Inspector cannot detect text that was hidden by other methods (for example, white text on a white background).Custom XML DataCustom XML data that might be stored within a documentInvisible ContentObjects that are not visible, because they have been formatted as invisible.Note: This Inspector cannot detect objects that are covered by other objects.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Information Management and Assurance Procedure Owner/Author:	Keith LEWIS / Christopher HARWOOD Technical Author:Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: Deputy Chief Constable Paul MILLSRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of ChangesApprovals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team14.06.20181.0Head of Information Management and Assurance19.06.20181.0JNCC(Not required for all procedures)N/ADistribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this procedure (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionImplications of the Procedure: Training RequirementsNo training requirements.IT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure required.
Template v8WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICYReporting WrongdoingDate of Publication: May 2023 Version:	3.0Next Review Date:	May 2026
Reporting Wrongdoing is also referred to in Employment Law as Whistleblowing and historically this has been associated with ‘telling tales, snitching or ratting’ on colleagues. The effect of this discouraged people from reporting any wrongdoing.Wiltshire Police is aiming to encourage and promote a positive workplace culture that actively supports individuals who raise concerns openly or who raise a concern in a confidential manner where they do not feel confident about reporting openly.This in turn will encourage workers to regard ‘whistleblowing’ or ‘Reporting Wrongdoing’ positively. The term Reporting Wrongdoing will be used throughout to assist in creating a positive and open culture.Using the lessons learned from the recent past within Wiltshire Police, this policy statement aims to support and protect those who come forward to report any wrongdoing.It is important to highlight that you could become involved in an internal or IOPC investigation even if you have reported a protected disclosure.It’s also really important for you to know that as per the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998; an individual who makes a protected disclosure has the right not to be dismissed, subjected to any other detriment or victimised because he/she has made a disclosure.Wiltshire Police commits to support all staff in raising concerns about any safety, malpractice or wrongdoing in the workplace at the earliest reasonable opportunity and will respond to, investigate the concerns raised and act consistently with the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998.The act of reporting wrongdoing should be seen as an act of loyalty rather than an act of disloyalty.This policy applies to everyone who works directly for, or on behalf of the organisation and is designed to enable and support individuals to report wrongdoing at any level without fear of reprisal.If a worker is going to make a disclosure it should be made to the employer first via the Counter Corruption Unit or, if they feel unable to use the organisation’s procedure, the disclosure should be made to a prescribed person so that employment rights are protected. Anonymous reports can be made via the Crimestoppers Police Integrity Line, which is independent of Wiltshire Police.The IOPC is the prescribed body for conduct within the Police Service. Other prescribed bodies include:Health & Safety ExecutiveCriminal Cases Review Commission (CCRC) Financial Conduct AuthorityHM Revenue & Customs The Environment Agency Serious Fraud OfficeMembers of the House of Commons (MP’s)Further information regarding reporting wrongdoing is available on the Professional Standards portal pages. This includes information about the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998, anonymous reporting and what to do if someone reports wrongdoing to you.
This policy is designed to protect people within the organisation who report wrongdoing and to provide them with appropriate support within the workplace.It is our intention to promote a culture in Wiltshire Police that prevents, discourages and detects wrongdoing within the organisation. This policy and its associated procedure will empower and encourage staff to do the right thing, confident in the knowledge that they will receive support and protection.APPLICABILITYThis policy applies to all police officers and police staff, including the extended police family and those working voluntarily or under contract to Wiltshire Police.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEThis policy underpins and is additional to obligations under the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998, and the following:ï Employment Rights Act 1996ï Serious Organised Crime Act 2005ï Police Reform Act 2002ï The Police (Conduct) Regulations 2020 for Police Officers.ï The conditions of employment for Police Staff.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSA complete list of relevant policies can be found on the Conduct and Standards page of the Policy Library.ï Code of Ethicsï The Police (Conduct) Regulations 2020 for Police Officers.AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEProfessional StandardsDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, UK General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWFeedback on the content of the policy from policy users, will be used to monitor the efficiency and effectiveness of the policy and associated procedure.This Policy and Procedure is owned by the Professional Standards Department. The Head of the Professional Standards Department will ensure that this policy is reviewed every three years.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYProfessional Standards are responsible for this policy. Contact can be made with the department by the following means – Email: ProfStand@wiltshire.police.uk.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	 Professional Standards Policy Owner/Author:	Supt Steve Cox Technical Author:Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: Deputy Chief ConstableRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes11.03.20212.0Police statement added to the current Policy Template. Prescribed bodies list update.17.06.20212.0Link to Anonymous Reporting SharePoint page added.01/07/20212.0Link to Anonymous Reporting changed to Crimestoppers Police Integrity Line.02.05.20233.0Summary of changes updated to reflect Professional Standards PortalApprovals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionForce Policy Officer09.05.20233.0Head Professional Standards02.05.20233.0JNCC (Not required for all policies)N/A Minor amendments only.Distribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionProfessional Standards portal/local circulationDiversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionImplications of the Policy: Training RequirementsNoneIT InfrastructureNone
Template v9WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE PROCEDUREResponding to the PublicDate of Publication: June 2023 Version:	1.0Next Review Date:	June 2024
TABLE OF CONTENTSPROCEDURE OVERVIEW	3General Principles	3Role Purpose - Contact Handlers and Enquiry Office Staff	4Gradings	5Grading and Deployment Decisions	6Repeat victims	7Prevention and Intervention	7RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	7AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE AREAS ASSOCIATED WITH THIS PROCEDURE . 7 DATA PROTECTION	7FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	7MONITORING and REVIEW	8WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDURE	8APPENDIX 1 National Decision Making Model – NDM	9APPENDIX 2 THRIVE+ PRINCIPLES	10APPENDIX 3 GUIDE FOR TASKING TO ROAD RELATED INCIDENTS	11APPENDIX 4 GUIDE FOR REPORTS OF THREATS, ADVERSE COMMENTS AND ENTRIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA	12APPENDIX 5 GOLDEN HOUR	13APPENDIX 6 999 Calls for Other Forces	14DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	15
PROCEDURE OVERVIEWWiltshire Police remains committed to delivering a service that aligns to the three National Contact Management Principles, which are:I. being public focussedII. having effective channel managementIII. ensuring appropriate prioritisation of contactThis document details how Contact Management staff within Wiltshire Police will use a structured process to assess threat, harm, risk, and vulnerability to apply the appropriate grading for effective prioritisation, management, and response to reported incidents.Following this procedure ensures that Wiltshire Police complies with the National Contact Management Strategy 2019, the National Call Handling Standards (NCHS) (ACPO 2012), the National Standard for Incident Recording (NSIR), National Crime Recording Standards (NCRS), HMICFRS PEEL assessments - characteristics of good, APP Risk principles and APP.Compliance with this procedure and any linked procedures is mandatory.General PrinciplesIncident Control (IC) is responsible for providing the Command-and-Control function for Wiltshire Police (999).The Crime Recording & Incident Bureau (CRIB) is responsible for recording and quality assuring crimes and incidents that are reported to Wiltshire Police (101, Single Online Home(SOH) and 999 support).Wiltshire Police will use STORM as our Command-and-Control System to record incidents reported to us.If the matter is a non-urgent crime or incident and has been resolved within the CRIB, it will not feature on STORM and will be recorded directly onto Niche (crime recording system).All emergency calls received by Wiltshire Police will be answered by trained 999 call handlers operating within the CCC.If, following assessment of THR, a call is found to be more suitable for 101/CRIB the caller will be advised the call is not an emergency and that they are being transferred to CRIB for full details to be obtained. The call will be informed of the call wait time and opportunity to use Single online Home to report. At no point should the caller be advised to call back on 101. (Please see Appendix 6 for dealing with 999 calls where the emergency is happening elsewhere, but the person reporting is in Wiltshire).Non-emergency calls will be triaged by both the Interactive Voice Response (IVR) supported by Central Call Handling (CCH) and transferred predominately to the CRIB for details to be recorded or advice to be given.Where a call on 101 is received and the Central Call Handler identifies during an initial triage that there is a Threat, Harm, or a Risk to a person, the operator will obtain initial contact details and will transfer the call to 999 or the Priority line as appropriate.
To reduce the risks associated with abandoned calls, the caller will not be returned to the queue in these situations.Incident Control staff will utilise appropriate technology and mapping to obtain real-time information on the availability of resources. This will enable the effective and efficient deployment of resources to incidents.It is essential that the police service deals with contact from the public effectively. The demand on control rooms is increasing and so needs careful management to make sure our service doesn’t become overwhelmed. As such, Contact Management staff will be empowered to make ethical decisions around the Outcome of Crimes and Incidents reported into the control room, using their training, skills, experience and in compliance with the Victim Code of Practice.Role Purpose - Contact Handlers and Enquiry Office StaffTo be the first point of contact for all types of contact from the public and other agencies including 999, 101, crime reports, intelligence and general enquiries including both telephone and electronic media.Responsibility is to deliver a quality service built on accuracy, timeliness and a personalised service, identifying and assessing risk, making resolution and deployment decisions using a range of systems.Grading and deployment decisions will be assessed using THRIVE
GradingsINCIDENT GRADERESPONSE TIMESINCIDENT DESCRIPTION(BASED ON APPLICATION OF THRIVE PRINCIPLES)Immediate15 mins (urban)20 mins (rural)Transfer in 2 minsThere is an incident ongoing and there is, or is likely to be, a risk of:ï Danger to lifeï Use or immediate threat of use of violenceï Serious injury to a personï Serious damage to propertyDispatch in 3 minsAllegation of criminal conduct where:ï The crime is, or is likely to be, serious and in progressï An offender has been disturbed at the sceneï An offender has been detained and poses, or is likely to pose, a risk to other peopleReport of road related incident (please also see appendix 3) where:ï It involves or is likely to involve serious personal injuryï The road is blocked or there is dangerous and excessive build-up of trafficWhere the above circumstances do not apply, a contact will be classified as an emergency if the call handler has reasons for believing that the incident should be classified as an emergencyPriority60 minsTransfer in 10 minsPriority incidents require attendance as soon as possible and within 60 minutes. Prompt attendance is to mitigate/reduce Threat, Harm and Risk, toenable Golden Hour Principles to be followed and to ensure face to face interaction between the victim/caller and police.
Dispatch in 20 minsPriority incidents may include the below with an appropriate THRIVE+ rationale recorded:ï There is a genuine concern for a person’s safetyï A hate incident/crime is reportedï An offender has been detained but poses no risks to othersï A witness or other evidence is likely to be lostï A person involved is vulnerable or a repeat victimï A wanted person or recall to prison where Threat, Harm or Risk existsï There is a sudden death that does not initially appear suspiciousï There is a report of a missing person where there is no immediate riskï A road collision, there are injuries or obstructionScheduled8 hours*Consider – does the incident require police attendance within 8 hours or could it be dealt with via an alternative allocation/disposal method. What are the caller’s expectations/availability, what avenues are available to best meet them? *A scheduled incident may include any of the above priority incidents. THRIVE will be used to determine whether a response within 8 hours is appropriate and the THRIVE rational will be recorded and will reflect that:ï Threat, Harm and Risk has been assessed and does not require a prompt (immediate/priority) attendance to mitigate or reduce itï Investigation has no Golden Hour’ principles to be followed with no loss of evidenceï Caller/victim is not a vulnerable person or repeat victim who requires prompt attendanceï There are no engagement opportunities that would require a prompt attendanceNo deployment necessaryï A low-level crime is reported that does not require Incident Control to dispatch a police resource and can be allocated as per the Crime Allocations Policyï The incident has been referred to another agency or police forceï The call to the police was inappropriate and telephone words of advice have been givenA guide to dealing with social media related incidents can be found at Appendix 4.Grading and Deployment DecisionsAll grading and deployment decisions should be assessed using the National Decision-Making Model (Appendix 1) incorporating the THRIVE+ principles (Appendix 2).Grading decisions will be based on the threat, harm, risk, investigative opportunities, any vulnerability a call handler identifies and to reasonably meet the expectations of the caller.By applying these principles call handlers will be able to determine:ï If the deployment of resources is necessary and proportionateï If deployment is deemed necessary, what priority grading is appropriateï If deployment is not necessary, what other means of recording/investigation is required, if anyDeployments are typically necessary in order to:ï Eliminate threats to the publicï Ensure vulnerable people are protected and safeguardedï Manage and reduce the risk of harm to the publicï Identify and secure evidenceï Detect crimeï Maximise opportunities to increase community confidenceï 
Repeat victimsRepeat victimisation can be a factor that indicates someone may be vulnerable.Wiltshire Police needs to identify repeat victims as early as possible. Doing so should support the identification of patterns of abuse and the associated vulnerability.This is particularly important in cases where a single incident may not appear to be serious, but where previous reports show a pattern of behaviour (for example, anti-social behaviour, coercive control or stalking and harassment).Although an individual report may well be the only time that police have been contacted it may not be the only offence/ASB incident that has been committed against the individual, their family or organisation. Should a repeat victim be identified this must be annotated on the log or NICHE occurrence.Prevention and InterventionInitial contact between victims and witnesses with the police service should be regarded as the start of the investigative process.The call is an opportunity to obtain accurate and relevant information, collect evidence, ascertain if a crime has occurred and give reassurance and guidance to the caller, for example, about the preservation of forensic evidence. This is particularly important where the Golden Hour Principles (Appendix 5).Any Crime Prevention advice we can give has the potential to prevent them becoming a repeat victim and aids people to protect themselves and their property. The portal site provides useful information Crime Prevention Contact Management (sharepoint.com).Advice given in relation to crime scene preservation or crime prevention should also be recorded on the log or occurrence.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSCrime Screening and Allocation ProcedureCrimes or ASB against Vulnerable Adults Procedure Hate Crime Policy and ProcedureMissing Persons Policy Missing Persons ProcedureDomestic Abuse Policy and ProcedureAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEAPP > National Decision ModelDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this procedure will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, UK General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitability for public release.
MONITORING and REVIEWThis procedure will be monitored against the calls received and responses to those calls. This procedure will be reviewed yearly.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDUREThe Supt. Head HQ Operations and Contact Management and the Chief Inspector Head of Contact Management are responsible for this procedure. All queries relating to this procedure should be directed to the Chief Inspector Head of Contact Management or Force Policy Officer.
National Decision Making Model - NDM
THRIVE+ PRINCIPLES
GUIDE FOR TASKING TO ROAD RELATED INCIDENTSUse of the term “Fast road” should be avoided as any road in the county could be fast and instead roads will be split into Levels (*note they are only on road speed and not road classification):Level 1:  Single Carriageway with speed limit 40MPH or Less.Level 2:  Single carriageway with a speed limit of 50+MPH andDual carriageway Roads with a Speed limit of 40+MPH, including Strategic Road Network.Level 3:  MotorwayTo attend an incident on the motorway Officers MUST a) be suitably trained b) in a vehicle rated for use on the Motorway which MUST contain all the required signs, cones and lights for use on the Motorway. The only asset that meets these standards is a marked RPU vehicle or, alternatively, a National Highways patrol vehicle
GUIDE FOR REPORTS OF THREATS, ADVERSE COMMENTS AND ENTRIES ON SOCIAL MEDIAPLATFORMSYesNoYesNoPrivate message	OpenAre the threats, adverse comments / entries targeted at the victim / reporting person / identifiable person?NoYesNo3. Is the content indecent, grossly offensive, obscene, threatening, menacing?YesLow risk and low vulnerability?NoMedium risk and medium vulnerability?NoYesNICHE allocationYesGrade as THRGrade as Immediate,Priority or ScheduledNoYes
GOLDEN HOURThe golden hour is the term used for the period immediately after an offence has been committed, when material is readily available in high volumes to the police.Positive action in the period immediately after the report of a crime minimises the amount of material that could be lost to the investigation and maximises the chance of securing the material that will be admissible in court.Golden hour considerationsVictimsIdentify, support and sensitively preserve evidenceScenesIdentify, preserve, assess and commence logSuspectsIdentify, arrest and preserveWitnessesIdentify, support and sensitively preserve evidenceLogDecisions and rationale, circumstances, resources and conditionsFamily/communityIdentify, inform, primary support (needs, concerns, expectations, sensitivity)Physical evidencePreservation (CCTV, public transport, escape routes, ambulances, hospitals)IntelligenceIdentify, prioritise, maximise, exploit, consider, community and open sourcePrevent contaminationVictims, scenes, witnesses, suspectsLines of responsibilityIdentify, inform, brief, coordinate and review
999 calls for Other ForcesIn the main these calls are where callers are reporting someone else’s emergency and the address is in a different location to the caller. It is important that the customer is not asked to redial 999 to ask for a specific area as this goes against procedure and BT operators will override the request and connect to the Emergency Authority (EA) with the presented routing information.It is the responsibility of the 999 operator to establish that the call is proper to the Force area and to instigate means of transfer if it is not. This can be achieved in several different ways in decreasing order of preference.i. Taking details of the call and passing the information to the correct Force Control Room;If option (i) is not possible, thenii. Recalling the BT operator and requesting that the call is passed to another EA or County. This may not be possible if the BT Operator has already relinquished the call into the system.The 999 Operator should not advise the caller to redial 999 and request a specific area or Police Force. The BT Operator will automatically connect the call to the relevant Force as per the presented routing information and override the request from the caller. If a call has been misrouted the 999 Operator should advise the CHA by completing a misroute form and sending to 999liaison@bt.com .
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	HQ Operations and Contact Management - CCC Procedure Owner/Author:	Supt. Conway DUNCANTechnical Author:	C/Insp. Matt ARMSTRONGSenior Officer/Manager Sponsor:	ACC Local Policing and PartnershipsRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of ChangesApprovals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionForce Policy Officer27.06.20231.0ACC Local Policing and Partnerships27.06.20230.4JNCC (Not required for all procedures)N/ADistribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Equality Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this procedure (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionImplications of the Procedure: Training RequirementsAll CCC staff will undergo THRIVE+ training as required. All FIM’s / FORS staff will have annual RABM’sIT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure required.
WILTSHIRE POLICEREST DAY WORKING / SHORT NOTICE CHANGES TO WORKING PATTERNS (OFFICERS & STAFF)AuthorS WILLIAMSDepartmentHUMAN RESOURCESDate of PublicationAPRIL 2012Review DateAPRIL 2015Technical AuthorT RODRIGUEZNOT PROTECTIVELY MARKED/UNCLASSIFIED
REST DAY / FREE DAY WORKING - POLICE OFFICERSWhere an officer is required to do duty on a rostered rest day, the recompense varies with the amount of notice given and the rank of the officer. Both full and part time officers are compensated in the same way for rest day working.Recompense for Rest Day Working – Constables and SergeantsAmount of NoticeRecompenseNotesLess than 15 days in advance of the planned starting timeTime and a halfMinimum payment of 4 hoursAny other caseAnother rest day, notified within 4 days of notification of the requirement to work(When calculating the number of days’ notice given, both the day on which the requirement was notified and the day on which the officer is required to do the duty, should be disregarded.)Where an officer is retained on duty into a rest day and the period worked on the rest day is less than one hour, the minimum four hour payment does NOT apply. The time to be reimbursed counts towards the completed 15 minute periods (see under Overtime).A re-rostered rest day should be regarded as a rest day and attract the same compensation should there be a requirement to work upon that day.Recompense for Free Day Working – Constables and SergeantsWhen an officer is required to perform duty on a free day, it attracts the following compensation:Amount of Notice  Where only that particular officer could perform the dutyWhere any officer could perform the dutyMore than 15 daysFree day reallocated within 4 days of it being cancelledFree day reallocated within 4 days of it being cancelledLess than 15 daysAdditional hours paid at plain time or taken as time offPaid at the appropriate rate of pay for rest day workingRecompense for Rest Day / Free Day Working – Inspectors and Chief InspectorsTime off in lieu is granted to be taken subject to the exigencies of duty.
SHORT NOTICE CHANGES TO WORKING HOURS / PATTERNS – POLICE STAFFNB: This section applies to ALL police staff, not just those working shifts/unsocial hours. All police staff can be required to work outside their normal working hours/days to meet identified organisational demands.It is the responsibility of management to allocate their available resources to meet organisational demand. Where the planned resource is no longer sufficient or available, it is also their responsibility to make adjustments to ensure, as far as is practicable, that the demands will still be met.Where management changes the planned starting times of a shift or changes a work day, this should be notified to employees as soon in advance of the intended change as possible. Such changes should be kept to a minimum and undertaken with prior discussion with the staff member wherever possible. Where such changes need to be made at short notice, additional recompense is due to those individuals affected as outlined below.Change to workpatternDegree of changeAmount of NoticeRecompenseNotesStart of shift timeBy 3 hours or moreLess than 120 hours (5 days) in advance of the planned starting timeAdditional day’s pay (plain time)Requirement to stand-by at home does NOT qualifyChange to rest dayRequired to work on a rest dayLess than 120 hours (5 days) in advance of the planned starting timePayment at relevant overtime rate PLUS a day off in lieuOT rate varies according to the day in question (see Overtime section)Change to rest dayRequired to work on a rest dayLess than 15 days but more than 5 days in advance of the planned starting timePayment at relevant overtime rate OR a day off in lieuIt should be noted that such changes to the anticipated working pattern are NOT regarded as overtime. Where overtime is worked it is paid as additional time in complete recompense. The above refers to changes to the duty pattern and does NOT apply where additional hours are being worked.
INDEXREST DAY WORKING - POLICE OFFICERS	2Recompense for Rest Day Working – Constables and Sergeants	2Recompense for Rest Day Working – Inspectors and Chief Inspectors	2SHORT NOTICE CHANGES TO WORKING HOURS / PATTERNS – POLICE STAFF	3
Template v6 WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE PROCEDURERight of Access Request Procedure(RoARs)Date of Publication: March 2022 Version:	3.0Next Review Date:	March 2025
TABLE OF CONTENTSPROCEDURE OVERVIEW	3RIGHTS	4Rights of the Data Subject	4Rights of the Data Controller	4PROCEDURE	5Receiving a Right of Access Request	5Verification of Identity	5Consent for Release of Information to Third Parties	6Request Details and Sourcing Information	6Disclosure	7Timescales	9Manifestly Unreasonable, Excessive or Unfounded Requests	9Fees	10Request for Conviction Information Held on the Police National Computer	10Other Means of Disclosure	10Calls to Control Room Asking for Incident/Occurrence Numbers	11Enforced Right of Access Requests	11Right of Access Requests from Children	11Complaints Procedure	12DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	13
PROCEDURE OVERVIEWSection 45 of the Data Protection Act 2018 and Article 15 of the General Data Protection Regulation (to be referred to as Data Protection Legislation for the remainder of this procedure unless a specific section/article applies) gives an individual the right of access to their own personal data held by a data controller. This procedure will enable staff to identify what constitutes a Right of Access Request (RoAR) and the procedure to be followed to allow a data subject (including children) to exercise their ‘Rights of Access’GLOSSARY OF TERMSTermMeaningData Protection legislationSection 45 of the Data Protection Act 2018 and Article 15 of the General Data Protection RegulationICOInformation Commissioner’s OfficeROARRight of Access RequestACROACPO Criminal Records OfficeRELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSData Protection PolicyRight of Access Code of PracticeAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE AREAS ASSOCIATED WITH THIS PROCEDUREData Protection MoGInformation Management > Data Protection AppDATA PROTECTION ACT 2018This procedure is compliant with the obligations placed on Wiltshire Police in accordance with the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and Data Protection Act (DPA) 2018.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING and REVIEWThis procedure will be reviewed every three years by the FDU Disclosure Manager.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDUREFDU Disclosure Manager: christopher.harwood@wiltshire.police.uk
1. RIGHTS1.1 Rights of the Data SubjectAn individual has a right to access their personal information held by a Data Controller under Data Protection legislation.Under the legislation individuals have the right to obtain:ï confirmation that their data is being processed;ï access to their personal data; and the following supplementary information;o the purposes for which the data is being processed;o the categories of personal data concerned;o the recipients or categories of recipient the personal data has been disclosed to;o the retention period for storing the personal data or, where this is not possible, your criteria for determining how long it will be stored;o the existence of the data subject’s right to request rectification, erasure or restriction or to object to such processing;o the right of the data subject to lodge a complaint with the ICO or another supervisory authority;o information about the source of the data, where it was not obtained directly from the individual;o the existence of automated decision-making (including profiling); ando the safeguards provided if the personal data has been transferred to a third country or international organisation.The following supplementary information is contained in Enclosure 2 ‘Data Subjects Information Notice’, which should be sent with all RoAR disclosures1.2 Rights of the Data ControllerThe Chief Constable (as Data Controller) may refuse or restrict access to information to:ï avoid obstructing an official or legal inquiry, investigation or procedure;ï avoid prejudicing the prevention, detection, investigation or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties;(c) protect public security;ï protect national security;ï protect the rights and freedoms of others.The Chief Constable has the right to ask that the Data Subject to provide documentation to verify their identity.If the request is deemed ‘manifestly excessive or unfounded’, the Chief Constable has the right to:ï charge a reasonable fee taking into account the administrative costs of providing the information; orï refuse to respond (Where a request is refused on the grounds of being manifestly excessive or unfounded the Data Subject will be advised of this).ï 
2 PROCEDURE2.1 Receiving a Right of Access RequestAny request from a member of the public which appears to be asking for information/records held by Wiltshire Police should be forwarded to the Force Disclosure Unit (FDU) via the Force Disclosure Unit inbox (if received via email/Social Media), through the internal mail (if received in the post) or to Ext 62005 (if received via telephone). If forwarding a hard copy paper request then the letter should be date stamped with the date the correspondence was received in Force prior to transfer. This will allow the FDU to accurately calculate the deadline for response to such requests which is 1 month (28 calendar days) from the date of receipt.If a request is received by an individual in person either at a Custody Suite or at an Enquiry office, staff can suggest that they complete a Form 135 - Right of Access Request, alternatively staff can follow the Verbal Right of Access Request process. Completed forms should be date stamped and forwarded to the FDU via internal mail as soon as possible.Although an individual does not have to make a written request under DPA 2018, Wiltshire Police are not obliged to supply any information to an individual until we:a. Have enough information to complete the requestb. Have confirmed the individual’s identity (see Identification for further information)If receiving a telephone call from a member of the public asking for information held about themselves by Wiltshire Police, staff may wish to direct them to the Right of Access Request link on our website where the Data Subject can either download a copy of the From 135 and return to the FDU either via email or in hard copy through the post; or make an online request @ https://www.wiltshire.police.uk/rqo/request/ri/request- information/rso/request-information-about-yourself-or-someone-else/. This is a very straightforward process and is directed straight to the FDU. It is important to note that a Data Subject is not obliged to complete this form in order to make a valid request under this right; however, the form will assist the applicant in providing enough detail and supporting identification documents to ensure that their request becomes valid under Data Protection legislation.As per Section 2.1 all requests made to Wiltshire Police for disclosure of information under Data Protection legislation will require identification verification before disclosure can be facilitated.2.2 Verification of Identity‘The controller shall use all reasonable measures to verify the identity of a data subject who requests access, in particular in the context of online services and online identifiers. A controller should not retain personal data for the sole purpose of being able to react to potential requests’.Most requests for information received by Wiltshire Police will require the applicant to provide proof of identity. *Please note that you only require ID if you have reasonable doubts as to the identity of the data subject – for example, if a data subject has been heavily involved with PSD and there has been several email exchanges between the two parties then it will be hard to argue that you have reasonable doubts as to the data subjects identity*. Whilst the application process insists on two forms of ID (for efficiency purposes) to show name, date of birth, address and facial image, the minimum requirements to satisfy identity verification should be a document/record, which verifies the Data Subject’s name and date of birth. For any requests relating to obtaining video or photographic records such as custody photographs or Body Worn Video footage, photographic identification must be produced. If the request is received in the post and the applicant wants a hard copy response, then confirmation/proof of address will be required.The identity of the data subject must be validated on all occasions before disclosure of information is made to them.
This proof of identity may include:Birth/adoption certificate Marriage certificate Driving licenceMedical card PassportPension book/statement Benefits statementInsurance certificate (not schedule) Hire purchase agreementOr, any other official certified document. Utility billTelephone/Mobile statement Bank statementCredit/debit card statement Council tax billRent bookRequests identifying photographs or videos will require photographic proof of identity– PassportPhoto driving licenceIdentity cardsBus passes/membership cards, etc. (an additional proof of identity will also be required)The level of checks you make may depend on the possible harm and distress that inappropriate disclosure of the information could cause to the individual concerned.2.2 Consent for Release of Information to Third PartiesAn individual can ask for information disclosure to be made to a third party acting on their behalf such as a Solicitor.Consent of the data subject is defined as:Any freely given, specific informed and unambiguous indication of the data subject’s wishes by which he or she by statement or by a clear affirmative action, signifies agreement to the processing of personal data relating to him or her.In order to facilitate disclosure to a third party, the Data subject will need to provide explicit and specific consent at the time of making their request. This can take the form of:I. A short statement within the request affirming that disclosure is to be made to a third party and details of that party along with the specific description of the information to which the consent relatesII. By completing Section 2 of the Form 135 available on our website or section 2 of the online form.Identification of the Data Subject will still need to be provided (if you have reasonable doubt as to their identity).2.3 Request Details and Sourcing InformationThe Data Subject should identify the information to which he or she requires access by providing a description of this information within their request at section 2 of the online form or the form 135. Please note that there is no requirement to complete either form, however where we process large volumes of data it is best practice to engage with the data subject to identify the information they require. This can include incident or occurrence numbers or dates and times when the information is likely to have been captured.Recital 63 states:
Where the controller processes a large quantity of information concerning the data subject, the controller should be able to request that, before the information is delivered, the data subject specify the information or processing activities to which the request relates.All details provided within the Right of Access Request will be held for the purposes of facilitating disclosure in line with the Data Subjects rights of access. Copies of requests and accompanying documents will be scanned into the associated task and retained for a maximum of 36 months from the date the request is closed. This is in line with our retention schedule.The decision maker will review the information being requested and access the appropriate computer systems in order to locate the records/information being sought. These records will then be saved in to the associated folder within ‘SharePoint’ for disclosure to be considered and facilitated. The decision maker will apply any redactions and restrictions on access to information as per Data Protection legislation and fully record the decisions for these on the task. This includes the redaction of third party and operationally sensitive material. It should be noted that it is now a legislative requirement to articulate the reasons for a decision to restrict (whether wholly or partly) the rights of a data subject.During the course of their research, decision makers may have cause to liaise with individual Police Officers or Departments in order to locate any specified records or information falling within the scope of the Data Subject’s request. The decision maker must not be impeded in this research and any records requested by the decision maker should be provided to them in order for them to consider any exemptions on disclosure. Where possible, supplying officers/staff/departments should make the decision maker aware of any areas of sensitivity, however, it is the responsibility of the decision maker to apply any appropriate exemptions on disclosure. Any exemptions placed on disclosure should be done in line with the Data Protection legislation.Deleted Information - Information is ‘deleted’ when you try to permanently discard it and you have no intention of ever trying to access it again. The ICO’s view is that, if you delete personal data held in electronic form by removing it (as far as possible) from your computer systems, the fact that expensive technical expertise might enable it to be recreated does not mean you must go to such efforts to respond to a Right of Access request.The contents of emails stored on Force computer systems are a form of electronic record to which the general principles above apply. For the avoidance of doubt, you should not regard the contents of an email as deleted merely because it has been moved to a user’s ‘Deleted items’ folder.It is not acceptable to amend or delete the data if you would not otherwise have done so.Under the DPA 2018, it is an offence to make any amendment with the intention of preventing its disclosure.2.4 DisclosureUnder Data Protection legislation, an individual is only entitled to their own personal information, held by a data controller. The decision maker will review records located as a result of their research and will remove any information which relates to a third party, any information which is tactically sensitive or any information which falls within an exemption under the legislation. This redaction of PDF documents will be as per the Redacting Personal Data Procedure to ensure that any electronically disclosed material will not be able to be un-redacted by the recipient.Completed disclosures will be tasked to the FDU administrator who will format the documents and return to the relevant decision maker.Disclosure will be made via Egress. Hard copy disclosure will only be made in exceptional circumstances. If the Data Subject specifies no preference at the time of making their request, response will be made via Egress. If the decision maker is unsure of the means of communication then contact should be made with the applicant.
If the only option is hard copy disclosures, this will be sent to the applicant via special delivery to ensure safe receipt of the requested information. Such delivery method will require the applicant to be available to sign for the delivery. The cost of providing information by this method will be charged to the applicant. The minimum cost for special delivery is £6.50 (this charge increases to £7.30 for larger parcels) and this fee will be applied to all requests involving postal delivery.Data Subjects can choose to collect their disclosure from any of the Force enquiry offices. This preference must be specified to the FDU prior to the disclosure being made. The decision maker or FDU workflow coordinator will arrange with the respective enquiry office to have the information internally sent via Egress. The Data Subject will need to show valid original identification prior to collecting the disclosure and may be required to sign a receipt to indicate that the disclosure has been collected.A copy of the completed response will be held in the ‘SharePoint’ folder for a maximum of 36 months (2 years plus current year) from disclosure from the date the request is closed in line with our retention schedule.There is no requirement to translate the information we hold into another language as the applicant has poor English comprehension skills. You are only required to send a response which can be understood by the average person. However, it is good practice to help individuals understand the information we hold about them.Can we provide the information verbally?If an individual asks, you can provide the response to their SAR verbally, provided that you have confirmed their identity by other means. You should keep a record of the date you responded and what information you provided. This is most likely to be appropriate if they have requested a small amount of information.You are not obliged to provide information in this way. However, we should take a reasonable approach when considering such requests.All applications for disclosure will be acknowledge on receipt by the FDUExemptionsIn line with the accountability principle, you should justify and document your reasons for relying on an exemption so you can demonstrate your compliance.What should we do if we refuse to comply with a request?If you refuse to comply with a request you must inform the individual of:ï the reasons why;ï their right to make a complaint to the ICO or another supervisory authority; andï their ability to seek to enforce this right through a judicial remedy.If you believe, a request is manifestly unfounded or excessive you must be able to demonstrate this to the individual.Where an exemption applies, the reasons you give to an individual for not complying with a request may depend upon the particular case. In line with s45(6) of the DPA’18 there is no requirement to articulate why a disclosure has been fully or partially restricted if that, in itself, would prejudice the exemption you are relying on. However, if it is appropriate to do so, you should be transparent about your reasons for withholding information.
2.5 TimescalesRequested information should be provided immediately and at the latest, within one month of receipt of the request.The ‘clock’ will not start until the FDU is in receipt of all the required information to enable it to progress the request, such as identification documents.If the further information is not received within one month of being requested by the FDU, the request will be closed and the applicant informed in writing/email. The request can be reopened at any time upon receipt of the requested information from the Data Subject.Where a request is overly complex and involves a large number of records to be reviewed, the deadline for compliance can be extended by the FDU up to an additional 2 months. (Note this refers to GDPR processing only – HR/Finance/Recruitment/PSD etc.). Where this applies, the Data Subject will be notified in writing/email within the initial one month deadline. From a customer service perspective, the data subject should be informed as soon as is practical and not within the last few days of the due date. It therefore follows that decision makers should assess applications on receipt to identify the volume of data held.Disabled peopleSome disabled people may experience communication difficulties, and may therefore have difficulty making a SAR. We have a legal duty to make reasonable adjustments if they wish to make a request.If the request is not straightforward, you should document it in an accessible format and send it to the disabled person to confirm the details of the request.Before responding to a SAR you should liaise with the applicant to find out how best to meet their needs. This may be by providing the response in a particular format that is accessible to the person, such as large print, audio formats, email or Braille. If an individual thinks you have failed to make a reasonable adjustment, they can make a claim under the Equality Act 2010 or the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 (NI). Further information about your legal obligations and how to make effective reasonable adjustments is available from the Equality and Human Rights Commission or from the Equality Commission for Northern Ireland.2.6 Manifestly Unreasonable, Excessive or Unfounded RequestsIf the request is deemed ‘manifestly unreasonable, excessive or unfounded’, The Chief Constable has the right to:ï charge a reasonable fee taking into account the administrative costs of providing the information; orï refuse to respondData Subjects could potentially attempt to use the Subject Access process as a means to harass Police Forces with no real purpose other than to cause disruption. An example of this can be repeated requests for the same information over a short period of time (or over several years) or where the Police Force has provided the Data Subject with their personal data through an alternative disclosure mechanism e.g. pre-trial information being disclosed under CPIA and the same information being requested through a Right of Access Request.‘Excessive requests’ can refer to those which would involve a substantial effort to respond to. ‘Unfounded requests’ are those which are clearly without basis or where the request is not made out.Any request which asks for “all information held about me” or “all emails in which my name is mentioned” may be considered to be manifestly excessive and/or unfounded and will be rejected for further refinement from the data subject.
In the event that a request ‘has the potential’ to be refused by Wiltshire Police, you should discuss with the FDU PDM in the first instance for a second opinion. If required, the Data Subject should then be contacted to offer them the opportunity to refine their request or clarify the information sought. If, having advised the data subject of the need to refine their request, as it is deemed to be Manifestly Unreasonable, Excessive or Unfounded, they are still dissatisfied, then the Data Subject should be advised on their ‘right of appeal’ to the Information Commissioner.2.8 FeesThe majority of Right of Access Requests will not involve a fee. Information will be provided free of charge to any individual making a Right of Access Request unless:ï The request is manifestly unreasonable, excessive or unfoundedï The request asks for a further copy of information which has already been disclosedAny fees deemed relevant by Wiltshire Police will be based on the administrative cost of providing the information only.In the event that Wiltshire Police deem a fee to be chargeable in response to a Right of Access Request, the Data Subject will be advised in writing by FDU within 28 days of receipt of the request. The disclosure will not be facilitated until such time as the required fee is received by Wiltshire Police.Disclosures provided in response to initial Right of Access Requests to Wiltshire Police and which are facilitated via Egress or by the data subject collecting in person will be provided free of charge unless they are deemed to be excessive. Subsequent requests made by the same applicant for the same information within a 60 day period will attract a reasonable disbursements charge.Data Subject requested hard copy disclosures will be sent to the applicant via special delivery to ensure safe receipt of the requested information. Such delivery method will require the applicant to be available to sign for the delivery. The cost of providing information by this method will be charged to the applicant. The minimum cost for special delivery is £6.50 (this charge increases to £7.30 for larger parcels) and this fee will be applied to all requests involving postal delivery. The fee must be paid prior to any disclosure being facilitated.2.9 Requests for Conviction Information Held on the Police National ComputerRequests for copies of conviction records or copies of any information held on the Police National Computer (PNC) will be facilitated by ACRO Criminal Records Office and NOT Wiltshire Police.Such requests should be made directly to the ACRO Criminal Records Office as per the details on their website: https://www.acro.police.uk/Subject-accessAny request for PNC records received by Wiltshire Police will be rejected and the applicant advised to redirect their request to the ACRO Criminal Records Office.2.10 Other Means of DisclosureDecision makers should be aware of other disclosure routes and, where appropriate, direct applicants to the correct / most appropriate disclosure regime.Examples include:ï DBS disclosure for employment is facilitated through the Disclosure and Barring Service.ï Requests for copies of Custody Records and interview recordings under PACE are facilitated through custody.ï Victim updates in relation to on-going criminal investigations are facilitated in line with the Victims Code of Practice through Horizon.ï 
2.11 Calls to Control Room/FDU asking for Incident/Occurrence NumbersWhen a member of the public calls up for basic information such as an incident or crime number; providing you are satisfied that they are the person entitled to the information (possibly by asking them to verify basic details as recorded on the incident such as their name and date of birth, or the location of incident), it is appropriate to pass the incident number or Niche Occurrence number only.2.12 Enforced Right of Access RequestsCertain employers and organisations such as recruitment agencies may attempt to exploit the subject access process by requiring individuals to use it to obtain a copy of their criminal convictions (or evidence that there is nothing held) as part of recruitment or continuing employment processes.This process, known as enforced subject access, is legislated through Part 7 section 184 of the Data Protection Act 2018. It states it is a criminal offence for a current or prospective employer or recruitment agency to require an individual to make a Right of Access Request as a condition of employment or for the provision of goods or services. They should instead be using the existing formal criminal records check arrangements operated by the Disclosure and Barring Service, Disclosure Scotland or Access Northern Ireland.Where a Right of Access Request is made and the applicant clearly states that the information is for employment purposes, the request will be rejected and the data subject will be redirected to the appropriate agency.The applicant can identify whether they have been asked to seek disclosure from an agency within Part 2a of the Right of Access Request form. Positive indication will not affect the data subject’s right to information under the Act and their request may continue to be processed as per the Act, however, the Information Commissioner should be notified of the request.2.13 Right of Access Requests from ChildrenChildren are to be afforded the same rights regarding access to their information as is given to adults as long as they are competent to do so. You must bear in mind that it is the right of the child rather than of anyone else, such as a parent or guardian. So it is the child who has a right of access to the information held about them, even though in the case of young children these rights are likely to be exercised by those with parental responsibility for them.Before responding to a Right of Access Request for information held about a child, you should consider whether the child is mature enough to understand their rights. If you are confident that the child can understand their rights, then you should usually respond directly to the child. You may, however, allow the parent to exercise the child’s rights on their behalf if the child authorises this, or if it is evident that this is in the best interests of the child.What matters is that the child is able to understand (in broad terms) what it means to make a Right of Access Request and how to interpret the information they receive as a result of doing so. When considering borderline cases, you should take into account, among other things:ï the child’s level of maturity and their ability to make decisions like this; (why are they requesting it)ï the nature of the personal data; (what does the data relate to and in what context is the child involved)ï any court orders relating to parental access or responsibility that may apply;ï any duty of confidence owed to the child or young person;ï any consequences of allowing those with parental responsibility access to the child’s or young person’s information. This is particularly important if there have been allegations of abuse or ill treatment;ï 
ï any detriment to the child or young person if individuals with parental responsibility cannot access this information; andï any views the child or young person has on whether their parents should have access to information about them.In Scotland, a person aged 12 years or over is presumed to be of sufficient age and maturity to be able to exercise their right of access, unless the contrary is shown. This presumption does not apply in England and Wales or in Northern Ireland, where competence is assessed depending upon the level of understanding of the child, but it does indicate an approach that will be reasonable in many cases.The parent must provide proof of parental responsibility in these cases as well as valid identification for themselves. Disclosure will not be facilitated until we are in receipt of such documents as required to validate the requestor’s identity and parental responsibilities to the child in question.2.14 Complaints ProcedureWhere an applicant is dissatisfied with how their Right of Access application has been processed they should follow the complaints procedure contained in the response letter. They have 30 days of receiving their response to register their complaint.On receipt of a complaint the Principal Decision Maker (PDM) will conduct a review of how their application was processed, any redaction(s) that were made and the disclosure that was provided. The PDM will provide a narrative of their findings / decision, which will be communicated back to the applicant by the DM.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Force Disclosure UnitProcedure Owner/Author:	Keith LEWIS / Chris Harwood (Author) Technical Author:Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: Head of Information Management and AssuranceRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes11.07.20181.0Draft30.07.20181.1Feedback from FDU11.02.20202.0Review in light of RoAR ICO guidance11.03.20223.0Scheduled Review. New section on complaints added.Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement TeamSenior Command Team/ACC/ACO (Delete as appropriate)JNCC (Not required for all procedures)Distribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this procedure (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionImplications of the Procedure: Training RequirementsNo additional training requirements.IT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure required.
POLICY STATEMENT.Wiltshire Police will identify, analyse and prioritise the risks it faces. We aim to manage and control risks in a cost- effective manner in order to maximise the quality and efficiency of our service provision and to uphold our reputation. Risk management is an integral part of the planning and management process.Risk is defined as:“…..an uncertain event or set of events, which, should it occur, will have an effect on the achievement of objectives. A risk consists of a combination of the probability of a perceived threat or opportunity occurring and the magnitude of its impact on objectives?. (Management of Risk: Guidance for Practitioners)Wiltshire Police utilise the National Decision Model (NDM) when assessing Risk. This framework along with the College of Policing Authorised Profession Practice content on Risk, which identifies ten principles related to taking and reviewing risk, assists police forces in making the most appropriate decisions and ensures that Forces are better equipped and supported in exercising professional judgement.Risk Management is a planned and systematic approach to the identification, evaluation and management of risks in order to achieve continuous improvement. It includes the appraisal of options for managing and controlling such risks, and the implementation of cost-effective mitigation. It has six key elements:1. Identification of the risks to which the organisation is exposed.2. Assessment of those risks in terms of frequency and severity.3. Evaluation of control measures, where possible and cost-effective, to eliminate or reduce the frequency and/or severity of risk events.4. Allocation of Risk Owner and implementation of control measures.5. Managing the residual risk, either by self or by transferring the risk (e.g. to an insurer or partner etc.).6. Monitoring and reviewing the risks and control measures and responding to change.Wiltshire Police is exposed to a number of risks that may threaten its assets, interrupt activity and divert resources from the Force’s purpose of ‘Preventing Crime and Protecting the Public’.Wiltshire Police is committed to the management of risk in order to:-Safeguard its personnel and all other persons to whom it has a duty of care Ensure compliance with statutory obligationsPreserve and enhance service delivery Maintain effective control of public fundsProtect its property and all other physical assets and resources Protect the reputation of Wiltshire Police.Risks are managed at two levels:Strategic. - The management of risks that may impact on the Force’s medium to long-term goals and objectives will be co-ordinated by the Head of Improvement and Change, reporting into a Chief Officer Group (COG) meeting on a monthly basis with a dedicated focus on risk management. Individual managers at senior level will be allocated ownership of those risks that fall within their area of responsibility.Operational. – The management of risks that they will encounter in the daily course of their work will be an intrinsic part of the role of all managers throughout the Force. All personnel will have a responsibility to co-operate with their managers to identify, assess and review risks that may affect the achievement of their objectives.
Wiltshire Police has a risk management process in place that effectively manages risk against its business in order to ensure it operates under the sound principles of Corporate Governance and is in line with the Police and Crime Plan adopted by the Office of Police and Crime Commissioner (OPCC) and the Delivery Plan adopted by the Chief Constable.The OPCC has oversight of risk management under the obligation to maintain an efficient and effective Police Force (Section 1(6) Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011) and holds the Chief Constable to account for the exercise of the Chief Constable’s functions and functions of people under the direction and control of the Chief Constable (Section 1(7) Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011).The Force’s Corporate Risk Register and the risk process is owned by the Deputy Chief Constable of Wiltshire Police with delegated responsibility to the Head of Improvement and Change to manage the associated policy and processes on his behalf.The Continuous Improvement and Business Planning Team Leader is responsible for managing the risk management process on behalf of the Head of Improvement and Change and will maintain the policy and processes on their behalf.In addition Local Risk Registers will be owned by each Business Area lead. The Local Risk Registers will contain those risks identified within a business area that primarily affect that area only and so can be managed locally by the relevant Senior Management Team.It is the responsibility of all executive leads, heads of departments and business area leads to ensure they manage the risks residing within their own areas of authority and to provide regular updates for the relevant entries on the Corporate Risk Register and Local Risk Register. Executive leads should take ownership and provide support for their risks before they are escalated through the Force governance structure.The current Force and OPCC RISK APPETITE is 30. To reach this score suggests there are exceptional concerns (i.e. a score of at least 4 or above for Likelihood, Controls or Impact, such as L3 x C4 x I3 = RR36). Please see figure 1 below.Where a risk on a Local Risk Register reaches or exceeds a score of 30 this must be escalated to the Chief Officer Lead for that risk for them to decide whether or not the risk should be escalated to the Corporate Risk Register. Factors to consider when making that decision include whether or not the risk is likely to impact on the Force’s medium to long-term goals and objectives, and whether or not mitigation can be controlled locally or requires Force wide support. The Chief Officer Lead may determine that despite the score of 30+, the risk does not need to be escalated to the Corporate Risk Register. This process should be undertaken via liaison with Continuous Improvement Team and Business Planning Leader , and an update will be provided to the monthly COG risk review.Taking into account the current Force Risk Appetite of 30, this should be used as an aspirational benchmark for all risks in Force. However, it is imperative that there is an understanding that accepting and retaining a level of risk (even if it is significant), providing it is being managed, is appropriate and healthy. It is inappropriate and dangerous to manipulate assessment scores to suit the Force aspiration.Figure 1:
When identifying new risks consideration needs to be given to the nature of the risk, i.e. is the risk Inherent or Topical. Inherent risks are those that pose a future risk to the organisation, but it is not clear what or when the risk might occur. Topical risks are where the risk is known and needs to be managed proactively (issues). Both types of risks will be managed through the same risk register.Effective Risk Management leads to better policing and overall organisational excellence. This Policy should be used to inform and guide decision making, before the decision has been finalised. Assessing the risks of each option within the decision making process will result, not only in a better decision, but a more informed one where Chief Officers and management will be aware of the risks they are exposed to.The practical guide on how to manage and grade risks can be found through the Risk Management Practical Guide.POLICY AIM.It is a principle of Wiltshire Police to adopt a pro-active approach to Strategic Risk Management which can be defined as “The culture, processes and structures that are directed towards effective management of potential opportunities and threats to the organisation achieving its objectives.”This policy is necessary to ensure a consistent approach is taken across the force when managing risk, and that business areas and departments make effective use of the risk management process.APPLICABILITYThis policy applies to all police officers and police staff as they are integral to the identification of risks that the organisation might face. It specifically applies to the Chief Constable, the Deputy Chief Constable, and Departmental Heads.RELATED DOCUMENTS and Authorised Professional Practice (A.P.P.).
Business Continuity Management Systems (BCMS) PolicyCritical Incident ProcedureHealth and Safety Risk Management ProcedureRisk Management Practical GuideThe primary site on the Authorised Professional Practice relating to this policy is the Risk content area.  Other relevant areas of APP are:National Decision ModelOperations > Operational Planning > Strategic planning > Assessing risk and impact Critical incident management > Phase 1 Preparing > Operational risk managementDATA PROTECTION AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION.Any information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, UK General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUALITY IMPACT.This policy has been drafted to comply with the principles of the Human Rights Act 1988 and Equality Act 2010. Members of Wiltshire Police administering this policy are responsible for ensuring that in its application, those to whom the policy applies, shall not receive less favourable treatment because of their age, colour, disability, ethnic or national origin, gender re-assignment, marital status, nationality, race, religion, sex or sexual orientation.This policy has been subject to an equality impact assessment and has been graded Low Impact.? Revision HistoryDateVersionSummary of Changes13.01.20234.0Updated role, department and meeting titles.11.08.20234.0Reference to ELT changed to Chief Officers Group (COG)14.08.20234.0SPIO changed to COG. Risk escalation process updated.22.09.20234.0Minor amendment to responsibility of all executive leads ownership and support
Template v5WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICYSocial Media and Internet Messaging Policy and GuidanceDate of Publication: November 2022 Version:	4.0Next Review Date:	November 2024
POLICY STATEMENTThis policy and guidance has been implemented to provide structure and clarity in the use of social media and internet messaging forums by officers, staff and volunteers of Wiltshire Police.Social media and internet messaging services are constantly evolving. For the purposes of this policy Social Media and internet messaging refers to the means of interactions among people in which they create, share, and/or exchange information and ideas in virtual communities and on networks and internet messaging services. This includes, but is not limited to; Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Instagram, Snapchat, Periscope, LinkedIn, blogs WhatsApp and Line and will apply to any new social media internet messaging services that may be developed.Reference to social media and social networking in this policy should be taken to include internet messaging services and any internet based communication channels.Wiltshire Police Social Media Accounts:Effective communication can have a significant impact on the achievement of operational or corporate objectives, in particular community engagement. It has a direct impact on our reputation as a Force and our relationships with staff, stakeholders, customers and the public.Before using a Wiltshire Police social media account for communication purposes, the employee should ensure that it is the most appropriate channel for the message/dialogue. If in doubt, please contact the Corporate Communications and Engagement Department (CCE).Using social media is a very positive tool, however, it can potentially create a number of risks to both the users and the wider reputation of the organisation. For this reason only Wiltshire Police authorised social media accounts set up by the CCE will be used for the sharing/communication of Wiltshire Police Information. A list of the current approved social media platforms can be obtained from the CCE. Personal social media accounts MUST not be used for the sharing/communication of Wiltshire Police Information.Preserving the confidentiality of personal and operational information is critical to all online engagement. Breaching security or disclosing official, personal or operational information without authorisation is considered a serious disciplinary offence and may be a breach of the Data Protection Act 2018 and/or Official Secrets Act 1989.Wiltshire Police has imposed the following rules and responsibilities for anyone using a Wiltshire Police social media account:ï All new accounts must be authorised by the Corporate Communications and Engagement Department and set up in line with guidelinesï The Corporate Communications and Engagement Department reserves the right to deny an application for a Wiltshire Police social media account or access to an existing one and carries the final decision over whether an application is acceptedï Force Facebook pages must be administered only through a dedicated account set up for this purpose and not by officer’s or staff members personal Facebook accountsï Accounts set up specifically to administer a Wiltshire Police Facebook page must not be used for any other reason.ï Wiltshire Police Facebook users must only post on the Facebook page they are an editor for and must not accept or make friend requests to other Facebook users.ï Wiltshire Police Facebook accounts are limited to:o the main Wiltshire Police accounto the main Wiltshire Police Facebook accounto 
o one Facebook page per policing team geographical area, administrated by local officerso one per department with a community engagement focus (considered on a case by case basis)ï Wiltshire Police Twitter accounts are limited to:o the main Wiltshire Police accounto one account per policing team geographical area (i.e. CPT or equivalent)o one account per department with a community engagement focus (considered on a case by case basis)o CPT Inspectors and Senior Command Team/Hub superintendentso other requests will be considered on a case by case basisï Wiltshire Police Instagram accounts are limited to:o the main Wiltshire Police Instagram accounto Youth Engagement Instagram accountï All Wiltshire Police social media accounts for policing team areas must be named in the format of ‘area name’ Policing Team e.g. Calne Policing Team, North Swindon Policing Team.ï Any Wiltshire Police account left unused for a month or more is subject to review and could be automatically shut down by the Force for inactivity.ï Anyone reporting a crime via a Wiltshire Police social media account should be strongly advised:o that reports of crime cannot be taken over social mediao to call 101 in a non-emergency or 999 in an emergencyo Wiltshire Police social media channels are not monitored 24/7o Wiltshire Police have no control over the security and confidentiality of messages sent through Facebook Messenger.This information must also be included as standard in ‘About Us’ or ‘bio’ sections of individual social media accounts / pages and must not be changed or deleted.ï Facebook’s ‘Call to action’ will direct people to sign up for Wiltshire and Swindon Community Messaging (www.wiltsmessaging.co.uk). This must not be changed without consulting the Corporate Communications and Engagement Department.ï The use of Wiltshire Police social media accounts should be for work purposes only, including all forms of interaction via that medium, and in line with the Corporate Communications and Engagement Department Social Media Guidance.ï It may be necessary on some occasions to send photos and videos to Corporate Communications and Engagement for branding and compression before they are able to be posted online. Please contact Corporate Communications and Engagement further information on the use of photos/videos.ï Any photos posted by a Wiltshire Police employee or volunteer to a Wiltshire Police social media account could be potentially reused by Wiltshire Police without your consent. For example shared on another Wiltshire Police social media account, or used in Internal Communications etc.ï All Wiltshire Police accounts are regularly monitored and each carries an audit trail for all activity.ï Any officer, staff member or volunteer using social media for covert or intelligence-led policing purposes must refer to the Wiltshire Police guidance on ‘Covert Use of Social Media’ and consider seeking the guidance of the Covert Authorities Bureau (CAB). See also: Open Source and Internet Based Research and Investigation Policy and Procedure.ï All policing intelligence gathered by any officer, staff or volunteer must be officially submitted and recorded through the Niche Record Management System. If you require assistance in doing so please seek guidance from the Wiltshire Police Intelligence Unit.ï 
ï Behaviour through the medium of social media will be treated in exactly the same way as any other behaviour and assessed with reference to the Police Standards of Professional Behaviour, the Code of Ethics and the Competency and Values Framework (CVF). Any breaches of these standards or code will be investigated and appropriate disciplinary sanctions will be issued to individuals. This may include:o Any use of racist, sexist, homophobic, sexually explicit, abusive or otherwise objectionable language.o Any posting considered likely to incite violence, attack or offend others, contain swear words or other language likely to offend, break the law or condone unlawful activity, describe or encourage activities which could endanger the safety or well-being of others, or be seen to impersonate someone else.o Any other behaviour which has the potential to damage the reputation of Wiltshire Police.o Wiltshire Police reserve the right to permanently remove any user of their social media sites if deemed appropriate and reasoned to either protect the Force’s reputation, the fellow users of the sites or the person/s posting.ï If a member of the public needs to be blocked from a Wiltshire Police social media account, the Corporate Communications and Engagement Department should be consulted/informed.All content posted on social media sites is considered to be in the public domain. Terms and conditions on sites usually include the waiving of any copyright. It is the responsibility of the employee, who is posting, to ensure that the content is appropriate and, as far as possible, does not contain a breach of copyright. Best advice is: if in doubt do not post the content. Any concerns regarding copyright should be raised with the Corporate Communications and Engagement Department.No material classified above ‘Official’ under the Government Security Classification should be posted on any social networking site (business or personal). Attention must be paid to any ‘handling requirements’ attached to any document classed as ‘Official’ or ‘Official-Sensitive’.Once a message, image or video has been published to social media anyone can re-use it or share it, including the press, even if deleted afterwards from your timeline, or sent in a ‘private’ capacity (i.e. through direct messaging, or equivalent). Always consider this when sharing content online.Any officer, member of staff or volunteer found to be in breach of the above could be subject to disciplinary proceedings.To request permission to use a Wiltshire Police social media account, please contact the Corporate Communications and Engagement Department by emailing ecomms@wiltshire.police.uk.Posting Political Opinions on Social Media Channels:Police officers must always remain apolitical and should not, either on a work or personal social media account, talk about political matters or share political views. This includes retweeting, sharing or liking messages of a political nature as this could be considered as endorsing an originator’s views. The College of Policing’s Code of Ethics clearly defines this matter.It is commonly understood within social media that sharing, retweeting or liking of messages is often considered as an endorsement of an originators views, even if you do so out of satire or in irony. To help you stay safe, this policy recommends that you always consider what you share, retweet or like.This neutrality requirement applies to all members of staff during any Purdah period (the time between the announcement of an election/referendum and the final results).
Personal Use of Social Media:Wiltshire Police recognises an individual’s right to a private life and understands that social networking sites are a way for people to maintain contact with friends and family.How much information you share about yourself is very much a personal decision but working for Wiltshire Police brings with it responsibility. All officers and staff are accountable for any information placed in the public domain, even if it is on a privately held account.As an employee of Wiltshire Police you are expected to conduct yourself appropriately both on and off duty, and should always consider the consequences of sharing information with others. You have a duty to ensure that inappropriate use of information through any personal social media sites and internet messaging services does not jeopardise:ï The safety of any officers and staffï The organisation’s reputation or public confidenceï The confidentiality of any assets retained by the organisationAll officers and staff are required to ensure that they:ï DO NOT use their Wiltshire Police email address / telephone number(s) to register for any personal / private accountsï DO NOT use any personal social media accounts to promote or detail policing work, provide details of an investigation or operation or to divulge sensitive operational or covert tacticsï DO NOT use any messaging services for example Facebook Messenger, Twitter DM, Snapchat, TicTok etc. to send police information classified under the Government Security Classificationï DO NOT share police information with those who do not require or have the authority to view itï DO NOT conduct themselves on any social media platform in a way that is detrimental to Wiltshire Policeï DO NOT participate in any interaction which would damage working relationships between officers, staff, partners agencies, members of the public, or other stakeholdersï DO NOT make offensive comments about the service provided by Wiltshire Police including officers, staff, partners agencies, members of the public, or other stakeholdersï DO NOT make offensive comments of a discriminatory nature about anyoneï DO NOT make insulting, abusive and bullying comments on public social media accounts or on closed team chat groups (e.g. WhatsApp)ï DO NOT share official information about Wiltshire Police, its officers, staff, partners agencies, members of the public, or other stakeholdersï DO NOT discuss private information about others that they have learned through their workï DO NOT discuss operational or otherwise sensitive matters on privately held social media sites or internet messaging servicesï DO NOT share their security clearance level on any social networking siteï DO NOT use personal social media accounts to carry out searches on persons of interest; including suspects, victims, witnesses or missing peopleï DO NOT post or publish any written or pictorial material obtained or gathered during the course of their duty/workï DO NOT display any photograph or image of themselves in Wiltshire Police uniform in circumstances likely to undermine the reputation of Wiltshire Policeï DO NOT post sexually inappropriate photographs on dating sites (including pictures of officers in uniform)ï DO NOT join any group or organisation likely to undermine the integrity or impartiality of the officer or staff memberï 
ï DO NOT post or share any material, or links to any material that is intentionally offensive or illegalï DO NOT breach copyright laws for example using someone else’s images without permissionThe public expects all members of the police service to act as role models and it is clear that, although we all have a right to a private life, we also have a responsibility to act appropriately to protect our own integrity and that of Wiltshire Police and the police service as a whole.Any officer, member of staff or volunteer found to be in breach of the above could be subject to disciplinary proceedings.Whilst there is no intention to restrict any reasonable exercise of your rights and freedoms, it is expected that you will conduct yourself in such a way as to avoid bringing Wiltshire Police into disrepute or compromising its effectiveness or the security of its operations or assets.Given the current climate with regards to terrorism and threat levels, careful consideration MUST be given before disclosing any private information that may compromise your safety or that of your family, friends, associates or employer.It is advised that you consider the following guidance on ways to protect your job / role, identity and reputation:1. Whilst it is ultimately your decision, for your own personal safety, it is suggested that you do not disclose your position as a Wiltshire Police employee or officer. Whatever you decide, you should avoid disclosing any personal details which may be used for identity theft, or to identify your home address, or other sensitive details about yourself or your family.Certain social media sites, including Facebook and LinkedIn, allow users to formally identify themselves as employees of an organisation. Users should carefully consider the risks associated with doing this.2. Do ensure that you make use of the privacy settings available on social networking sites. However, you must be aware that social networking websites are a public forum and should not assume that entries on any website will remain private.3. If you do disclose your association with Wiltshire Police, you must consider whether it is appropriate to discuss your role within Wiltshire Police. Never reveal the security clearances [vetting levels] of either yourself or that of other police service personnel.4. Regularly review the content of both your work and personal on-line profiles.5. You may accept payment or other inducement for your own material produced away from your Wiltshire Police employment, provided that this has been officially registered and approved as a business interest and the material does not in any way relate to policing. Failure to register and obtain approval for a business interest may result in formal disciplinary action being taken. For more information on business interests refer to the Business Interest SharePoint site and the Business Interests and Additional Occupations Policy.6. You should also bear in mind that publicly visible personal social media accounts may be monitored by members of the community where you work, media, defence legal representatives, terrorist and organised crime groups. Criminals and others may seek to use the internet and social media to identify personal information about Police officers and Police staff with a view to embarrassing, discrediting, harassing, corrupting or blackmailing them or their families.1. 
7. Be extra vigilant, when liking or sharing posts etc., that you have a clear understanding of who has raised the post and it is appropriate for you to offer an opinion.Further advice can be found in Section 8 - Keeping your private life private [page 7] of the ACPO Guidelines on Safe use of the Internet & Social Media.POLICY AIMThe aims of this Policy and guidance are as follows:ï To provide officers, staff and volunteers with clear regulations in relation to the application for, setting up and use of any Wiltshire Police social media account.ï To clarify the responsibilities of all officers, staff and volunteers when using Wiltshire Police and/or personal social media sites.ï To allow specific members of Wiltshire Police the opportunity to set-up and manage a Wiltshire Police social media accountï To incorporate and maintain the College of Policing Competency and Values Framework for Policing (CVF) when using social media.ï To ensure all Wiltshire Police social media use is primarily utilised to prevent crime and protect the public in line with our Force ‘Purpose and Mission’.ï To provide a framework for all officers, staff and volunteers when using Wiltshire Police and/or personal social media accounts.ï To provide guidance and advice empowering officers and staff to keep themselves and their families safe when using personal social media sites.APPLICABILITYThis policy and guidance is applicable to Police officers and staff including Special Constables, PCSOs, agency staff, temporary staff, volunteers and contractors who are either using or planning to use a Wiltshire Police and/or personal social media account.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEThis policy imposes duties and responsibilities upon persons employed by or who volunteer on behalf of Wiltshire Police and contractors and Wiltshire Council employees who are either using or planning to use a Wiltshire Police social media account. It has regard to other legislation, particularly around copyright, media law, protection of personal data and human rights.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSAcceptable Use of Force Systems Policy Information Security PolicyMedia Policy (APP on Media Relations)Open Source and Internet based Research and Investigation Policy ACPO Guidelines on Safe use of the Internet & Social Media College of Policing Competency and Values Framework (CVF)AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEThe College of Policing authorised professional practice carries information on the use of social media under the section entitled: ‘Engagement and Communication’.DATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, UK General Data Protection Regulations (UK GDPR) and the Force Data Protection Policy.
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000All information contained in the Wiltshire Police Social Media Policy is available to the public under the Freedom of Information Act 2000.MONITORING AND REVIEWThis policy will be reviewed every two years in the light of any national policy or procedural change or due to changes to law or Force strategy or at such other times as may become necessary. Any review will take into consideration feedback/lessons learned from the use of social media.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Head of Corporate Communications and Engagement carries overall responsibility for the policy on the corporate use of social media; the Head of Information Management & Assurance is responsible for policy and guidance on personal use of social media.Any queries regarding policy on the corporate use of social media should be directed to the Head of Corporate Communications and Engagement or the Communications and Digital Channels Manager.Queries regarding personal use should be directed to the Head of Information Management and Assurance or the Force Policy Officer.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTREATIONOwnershipDepartment Responsible:	Corporate Communications and Engagement (CCE) /Information Management and AssurancePolicy Owner:	Clare Mills (Head of CCE) Engagement) /Keith LEWIS (Head of Information Management and Assurance)Author:	Ben HOLLOWAY (Communications and Digital Channel Manager) / Andrew IRVING (Force Policy Officer)Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: Deputy Chief ConstableRevision HistoryRevision DateVersionSummary of Changes07.08.20182.6Bullet point added to personal use section re use of IM & SM to discuss operational or otherwise sensitive matters16.01.20193.0Reference to Open Source and Internet Based Research and Investigation Policy and Procedure added to Force social media accounts sectionReference to restriction on the use personal social media accounts to carry out searches on persons of interest added to personal use section.4.0Guidance on personal use and what not to do updated and clarified.ApprovalsThis document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionForce Policy Officer24.11.20224.0Keith LEWIS (Head of Information Management and Assurance)16.11.20223.5Ben HOLLOWAY (CCE Digital Services Manager)14.09.20223.3JNCC(Not required for all policies)   N/A Minor amendments onlyDistributionThis document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefE-mail to relevant affected Officers/StaffEquality Impact Assessment:ConsultationList below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionNeil COWLING (Information Security Officer)04.03.20223.1
Ben HOLLOWAY (CCE Digital Services Manager)29.03.20223.4UNISON / Police Federation10.10.20223.4Sarah HUSBAND (PSD)10.10.20223.4 / 3.5Jean COOMBES (Vetting Manager)10.10.20223.4 / 3.5Vetting Team08.11.20223.5Implications of the Policy Training RequirementsNo additional training requirements required.IT InfrastructureImpact on IT will be minimal but users may have to request changes to their profile in order to have the right access to use social media via the internet.
       WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICY and PROCEDUREStalking and HarassmentDate of Publication: January 2022 Version:	3.0Next Review Date:	July 2023
TABLE OF CONTENTSPOLICY STATEMENT	3POLICY AIM	3APPLICABILITY	3LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCE	3RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	4AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE	4DATA PROTECTION	4FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	4MONITORING and REVIEW	4WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDURE	4PROCEDURE OVERVIEW	51. INTRODUCTION	52. STALKING AND HARASSMENT LEGISLATION	62.1 Section 1 Harassment	62.2 Section 2 Harassment	62.3 Section 2A Offence of Stalking	62.4 Section 4 Fear of Violence:	62.5 Power of Entry	72.6 Racially Aggravated Harassment	72.7 Collective Harassment	73. WHO BECOMES A STALKER?	74. RISK ASSESSMENTS	84.1 Multi Agency Risk Assessment Conference (MARAC)	104.2 Multi Agency Arrangements (MAPPA) and Offender Management	105. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES	105.1 Call Handlers	105.2 Dispatcher	115.3 Public Enquiry Counter Staff	115.4 Attending Officer	125.5 Investigating Officer	135.6 Supervisors Responsibilities	135.7 Custody Officer	146. Stalking Protection Orders	14CoP Application Process Map for Stalking Protection Orders (SPOs)	157. Use of Cautions	168. Victims collecting their own evidence	169. Safeguarding	16Appendix A: Support agencies available	18DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	19
POLICY STATEMENTThe mission of Wiltshire Police is to keep people safe and protect our communities.Wiltshire Police is committed to keeping victims of stalking and harassment safe, alongside a coalition of partners, by reducing and managing the risk they face, by providing them with a high- level of service, and facilitating justice through our effective engagement with the CPS and HM Courts.To achieve this aim, this Stalking and Harassment Policy will support colleagues and partner agencies in understanding the strategic intent of Wiltshire Police. Investigating Officers should refer to the Stalking and Harassment Procedure for tactical advice and considerations for what should and should not be done when investigating offences. This can be found here: Stalking and Harassment Toolkit (sharepoint.com)Strategic IntentWiltshire Police commit to:1. Building trust and confidence in the police service for targeted individuals so that they seek our help directly without feeling like they are over-exaggerating.2. Reduce the under-reporting of all forms of Stalking and Harassment3. Provide an effective response on every occasion our help is sought; recognising & responding effectively to risk, keeping victims’ safe and holding offenders to account.4. Raise awareness and identify victims, prospective victims and perpetrators and seek to proactively engage with them.5. Demonstrate the Police Service’s leadership on the issues as well as playing an effective role in the coalition of partners to tackle Stalking and Harassment.There are also three key principles that will underpin everything that Wiltshire Police does with respect to Stalking and Harassment:ï That we treat victims compassionately, fairly, and professionally,ï That we put victims’ (and their children) safety and well-being at the heart of our initial responses and investigations; andï That their personal details will be stored, managed and handled with integrity and confidentially.POLICY AIMThe purpose of this policy is to clearly define Stalking & Harassment and provide guidance on risk management and investigation. This is done with the intent to reduce the risk of serious harm or homicide and to deliver a high-quality service to victims and their families.APPLICABILITYThis document should be considered by all members of Wiltshire Police who deal with allegations of Stalking and Harassment.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEStalking Protection Act 2019 Protection from Harassment Act 1997 Children Act 1989Criminal Justice & Police Act 2001Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004 Anti-Social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014
RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSACPO (2009) Practice Advice on Investigating Stalking and HarassmentCollege of Policing (2013) Briefing Note for Amendments to the Protection from Harassment Act 1997.Child Abuse ProcedureDomestic Abuse Policy and Procedure Missing Persons Policy and ProcedureManagement of Missing Persons and Absent Without Leave (Joint Protocol)Protocol on the appropriate handling of stalking offences between the Crown Prosecution Service & ACPO (cps.gov.uk)AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEAPP> Major investigation and public protection> Stalking or harassment APP> Major investigation and public protection > Missing PersonsAPP> Major investigation and public protection > Investigating child abuse and safeguarding children.APP > Major investigation and public protection > Domestic Abuse APP InvestigationDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this procedure will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWThis policy will be reviewed either every eighteen months; as the result of significant publications from either the Home Office or NPCC/CoP guidance/APP; or because of a significant case that has highlighted areas for improvement.The Force Lead for Stalking and Harassment will regularly monitor compliance with this policy. The Force Lead for Stalking and Harassment holds overall responsibility for the review and monitoring of this policy and will conduct all necessary reviews.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Superintendent Head of the Geographical Crime and the Force Lead for Stalking and Harassment are responsible for this policy. All queries relating to the policy and procedure should be directed to the Force Lead for Stalking and Harassment.Table of Contents
PROCEDURE“Wiltshire Police will take all reports of Stalking and Harassment extremely seriously. We will recognise that any incident, regardless of severity in isolation, can be catastrophic when added to a catalogue of other seemingly insignificant incidents. Victims will be believed and protected whilst offenders will be brought to justice.”Procedure OverviewThis document explains how Wiltshire Police will respond to crime and non-crime incidents where it is believed that Stalking and Harassment may be a factor. It will enable an effective response encompassing national guidance and best practice. Wiltshire Police will respond to all allegations of Stalking and Harassment and will ensure each case is subject to a full risk management plan.These procedures do not include investigative processes that should be considered as part of every criminal investigation with regard to the obtaining, examining, and securing of evidence, but provides a structure for considerations that are specific to dealing with incidents involving Stalking and Harassment. Statutory obligations must still be adhered to.1. INTRODUCTIONStalking in not defined in law. However, the 2018 Joint Police/CPS Protocol defines stalking as:“A pattern of unwanted, persistent pursuit and intrusive behaviour directed by one person to another, that engenders fear and distress in the victim and is characterised by an obsessive fixation with the victim”.There is no single motivation of offenders for stalking or harassment. It is a diverse and often complex field that sometimes leads to circumstances where the perpetrators pose a real threat of harm to victim.In the majority of stalking or harassment cases there will be some connection between the victim and the suspect, even if the victim is consciously unaware of who the suspect is (e.g. they have met before in passing). It is important that whenever a case of stalking or harassment falls within the definition of domestic violence, this definition is applied, and the appropriate guidance followed.Within the contexts of stalking or harassment described above, there will be different motivations for the behaviour. These can include revenge, retribution, loneliness, resentment, a desire for reconciliation, response to a perceived insult or humiliation or a want/need for control. In some cases the motivation will be the delusional belief that an individual is in love with the person harassing them.Stalking can terrify victims and cases can escalate to rape and murder. It is often misinterpreted and misunderstood to be romantic and complimentary to its victims, but stalking is about fixation and obsession. Stalking is a serious crime and can destroy the lives of those victimised; it therefore needs to be treated with the seriousness that it deserves in order to better protect victims and address perpetrators behaviour.As stated, Stalking is not legally defined, but can be understood to be characterised by an obsession and a crime of persistence; it is a pattern of repeat and persistent unwanted behaviours that is intrusive and engenders fear.Stalking is different to harassment as it relates to fixation and obsession rather than nuisance behaviour.Table of Contents
Research released by the Suzy Lamplugh Trust in 2016 indicated that around 1 in 5 women and 1 in 12 men have experienced stalking in their lifetime in the UK; while the Crime Survey for England and Wales found that 734,000 women and 388,000 men experience stalking each year, making stalking as pervasive as domestic abuse.Stalkers are most likely to target someone they know, with the largest proportion of stalkers being current or ex-partners, demonstrating a clear link to domestic abuse and high risk, with DA stalkers more likely to cause serious harm to their victim that other types of stalkers. Stalking of strangers accounted for only 10% of stalking cases reported to the National Stalking helpline in 2015; with stalkers more likely to be ex-partners, acquaintances, colleagues/ex-colleagues, and family members.Resources for advice and guidance around stalking and harassment can be found here: Stalking and Harassment Toolkit.The Police Visual Handbook is a good guide for police investigations. Advice from them on the police’s approach to Stalking and Harassment can be found here: Harassment and Stalking - Undertaking the Investigation (pvhonline.org).2. STALKING AND HARASSMENT LEGISLATION(Unless otherwise stated all references to legislation refer to the Protection from Harassment Act 1997).2.1 Section 2 PHA 1997A person commits an offence:who pursues a course of conduct which amounts to harassment, andwhich they know or ought to know amounts to harassment of another racially or religiously aggravated (if applicable)This is a summary offence - unless racially or religiously aggravated, which is an either way offence.2.2 Section 2A Offence of StalkingInserted by section 111 of the Protection of Freedoms Act 2012 with effect from 25/11/2012. A person commits an offence:who pursues a course of conduct which amounts to stalkingRacially or religiously aggravated (if applicable)2.3 Section 4 Fear of Violence:‘A person whose course of conduct causes another to fear on at least two occasions that violence will be used against him/her is guilty of an offence if he/she knows or ought to know that his course of conduct will cause the other so to fear on each of those occasions.’4A Offence Stalking prohibits a conduct relating to the offence of stalking involving fear of violence or serious alarm or distress.This prohibits a course of conduct which causes ‘serious alarm or distress’ which has a substantial adverse effect on the day to day activities of the victim. It is designed to recognise the serious impact that stalking may have on victims, even where an explicit fear of violence is not created by each incident of stalking behaviour.Table of Contents
2.4 Power of EntryOfficers have a power of entry under section 4A only. An application for a warrant to a Justice of the Peace is required under section 2A.2.5 Racially Aggravated HarassmentThe Crime and Disorder Act 1998 ‘Racially Aggravated Offences’ can apply to the Protection from Harassment Act 1997.In the case of Racially Aggravated Harassment – Section 2 - the penalty is increased to a maximum of 2 years’ imprisonment; and Section 4 increases to 7 years’ imprisonment.2.6 Collective HarassmentSection 7(3A) of the Act deals with the situation where more than one person is engaged in the harassment of another e.g. if a group decide to target a particular victim, or a stalker arranges for another person to harass the stalkers victim.This subsection was specifically passed in order to deal with situations where animal rights demonstrators were engaging in campaigns of harassment where each member only committed one act of harassment, i.e. sending a leaflet, and was therefore not engaging in a course of conduct.The subsection could also be useful in circumstances where an individual who is harassing a family or a member of that family arranges for another person to engage in acts of harassment towards the family or family member. In each such case the court can deal with all the incidents of harassment together and all parties involved can be prosecuted for every incident in the course of conduct and not just the incidents that they were personally engaged in.It is however an unusual charge and therefore where a case of collective harassment is suspected it is sensible to discuss matters with supervision and the CPS at an early stage of the investigation.3. WHO BECOMES A STALKER?A number of stalker typologies have been identified:Rejected by victimThe victim is an ex intimate partner. These stalkers will deny the end of the relationship. They are often sane but angry. They will respond to sanctions but believe that they are entitled to their partnerEarly intervention is key to prevent the stalking and protect the victimIntimacy seekerIntimacy stalkers believe they are in a relationship with their victim.This fictional pseudo relationship can be with anyone. Such a relationship can develop with anyone with whom they have had contact with. Such victims can range from a dentist to a celebrity.Incompetent suitorSuch stalkers will not have the skills to pursue a relationship, but do so anyway. They do not have the basic skills to develop and maintain a relationship.They can often be easily dissuaded from their behaviour.Table of Contents
Resentful stalkerOften typified by targeting professionals who have let them down whom they blame them for everything that has gone wrong with them.They seek to terrify and control.Cyber stalkersCyber stalking is threatening behaviour or unwanted advances directed at another using the internet and other forms of computer communications.This may take the form of identity theft / posting false profiles / provoking others to attack others by attacking the victim / direct threats through email / messaging.Online abuse reduces perpetrators inhibitions resulting in higher propensity for poor behaviour. 54% cyber stalking victims first met their attacker off line.4. RISK ASSESSMENTSA risk assessment will be completed in all cases of Stalking and Harassment regardless of whether it is Domestic related or not.When dealing with stalking and harassment Police Officers will often be presented with a set of circumstances that in isolation may not amount to stalking. Dialogue with the victim and the interrogation of police intelligence about the address, suspect and victim will assist with this identification. The responsibility will be on the attending officer to inquire if the incident is part of a series of incidents that may amount to stalking.In cases where it is related to Domestic Abuse (DA) or Child Protection (CP) a Police Protection Notice (PPN) on NICHE must be submitted. In cases where neither DA or CP are qualifiers a Stalking & Harassment Risk Assessment (Form 270) must be completed and attached to the niche occurrence. It is mandatory in all cases that this is completed by the end of the attending officers’ tour of duty.The attending officers must use their professional judgement as to the risks presented to the victim, utilising the information gathered on the PPN or form 270 and decide on the risk level as per the following.RISK OF SERIOUS HARM is defined by the Home Office as: ‘A risk which is life threatening and/or traumatic, and from which recovery, whether physical or psychological, can be expected to be difficult or impossible’Standard risk: Current evidence does not indicate likelihood of causing serious harm.Medium risk: There are identifiable indicators of risk of serious harm. The offender has the potential to cause serious harm but is unlikely to do so unless there is a change in circumstances, for example, failure to take medication, loss of accommodation, relationship breakdown, drug / alcohol misuse.High risk: There are identifiable indicators of risk of serious harm. The potential event could happen at any time and the impact would be serious.Table of Contents
In standard and medium cases the attending officer’s supervisor must review the circumstances and the immediate safeguarding actions taken. In high risk cases the duty inspector must review the circumstances and immediate safeguarding actions taken and the case must be referred to CID/PPD for investigative advice.The list below is not intended to be used as a checklist (e.g. for questioning victims) but to give operational officers an overview of the issues which are relevant in ours and multi-agency responses to harassment cases.a. The Harassmento Happening more often or getting worseo The suspect is physically present at the victim’s home, workplace or place where they can regularly be found (e.g. more than three times a week)o Directed against anyone other than the victim (e.g. partner, family, friends, children, neighbours, work colleagues)o Threats of harm being made to the victim or someone else, including indirect threatso Destruction or vandalism of property of either the victim or someone else.b. The Suspecto Intelligence or a criminal record for violence or other offending (e.g. domestic abuse, child abuse, sexual offending, other violence, theft, criminal damage)o Engaged in harassment on previous occasions against the victim or someone elseo Harmed the victim or anyone else physically or sexually (including family, anyone else they have had a relationship with, or a stranger)o Harmed animalso Breached an injunction, court order or bail conditionso Involved other people to assist in the harassment (whether they are conscious of their involvement or not)o Knowledge available about the victim, in particular, the victim’s work, home, personal lifestyle and movements (e.g. due to the relationship with the victim or access to information due to the suspect’s profession or expertise)o Occupation or interests are a source of concern (e.g. access to weapons, firearms licence holder or access to confidential information)o Threatened or attempted suicideo History of misuse of drugs (prescription or other) or alcohol.o Mental ill health and any behaviour indicating symptoms of mental ill health (e.g. evidence of delusions or hallucinations)c. The StalkingSubstantial adverse effect on day to day activities.The Home Office considers that evidence of the following are linked to risk factors:-o the victim changing their route to work patterns or employmento the victims arranging for friends or family to pick up from school (to avoid contact with stalker)o the victim putting in place additional security measures in their homeo the victim moving homeo physical or mental ill healtho the victims deterioration in performance at work due to stresso the victim stopping or changing the way they socialiseTable of Contents
d. The VictimThe investigating officer should consider all potential lines of enquiry including:-o Afraid of what the suspect might do to themselves or someone else and the degree of fear shared by the victim’s friends, family and colleagueso Any other person who has threatened the victim or who they are afraid ofo Physical or mental health affected by the stalking or harassment (e.g. whether they are feeling depressed or suicidal)o Vulnerability of the victim to stalking or harassment, such as mental ill health, disability, learning difficulties, or residence in an isolated location. (A vulnerable adult is anyone of 18 years and over who is or maybe in need of community care services by reason of mental or other disability, age or illness and who is or maybe unable to protect him or herself against significant harm or exploitation)o Whether the victim understands any risks and is capable of exercising caution and could reliably apply appropriate personal safety measures (e.g. carrying a personal alarm or securing their home)Identifying these risk factors will assist in determining a number of issues relating to risk including the likelihood of the stalking or harassment continuing, if it has stopped, if it is recurring or if there is a likelihood of it escalating to physical and/or sexual assault. This information will also help to establish whether the victim has suffered, or is likely to suffer, significant harm including psychological and/or social damage.4.1 Multi Agency Risk Assessment Conference (MARAC)MARAC are held in Wiltshire and Swindon on a regular basis for the highest risk victims of domestic abuse and stalking or harassment. It is incumbent upon all agencies to refer victims they deem to be a high risk into this process. The method of referral will be by the completion of a risk assessment document mentioned above and with liaison with the MARAC coordinator for the relevant area. High risk PPNs will automatically be referred to MARAC. Speak to PPD for advice around MARAC.4.2 Multi Agency Arrangements (MAPPA) and Offender ManagementAll agencies should be alert to the possibility of any individual being engaged in a series of incidents as a perpetrator. It should be borne in mind if a person has previously resided outside Wiltshire that there may be a history of similar offending recorded elsewhere and it is compulsory on all agencies to carry out checks where this is believed to be an issue.Any individual that causes concern for these reasons should be considered jointly in a multi-agency meeting with regards to some form of offender management being put in place and a joint decision made as to who should be informed in order that victims can be safeguarded. Ultimately the most serious offenders on conviction should be alerted to the Probation Service for consideration of their inclusion in the MAPPA process.5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILIES5.1 Call HandlersThe receipt of a report or suspicion of harassment is the beginning of an investigation.Domestic Abuse related instances must be dealt with under the Domestic Abuse Policy and Procedure.For non-domestic abuse related instances you must carry out THRIVE+ risk assessment in accordance with the Grading & Deployment Policy and Procedure.
Whilst conducting the THRIVE+ assessment you should:ï Prioritise the safety of the victim and any children, giving safety advice and any other advice as appropriate.ï Endeavour to obtain as much detail from the victim/caller as possible, where appropriate, about what has taken place in order to support an effective investigation.ï Where your THRIVE+ assessment deems it necessary open a Storm log for stalking and harassment related incidents.ï All reports of Non Domestic related stalking or harassment that haven’t been recorded on storm should be recorded on NICHE.ï Create an incident describing the nature of the call and record the first account of what the caller says has occurred (recording verbatim). Where appropriate attempt to ascertain the following:* Location, identity and contact details of the person making the report, e.g. victim, neighbour etc.* Details of all persons involved (e.g. name, gender, date of birth, home address, telephone number etc.).* Severity of any injuries and whether medical assistance is required.* Whether anyone is at further risk of injury.* Whether the incident has ended or is ongoing.* Location, identity and description of any suspect and any vehicles bring used.* Whether weapons are available to the suspect or are being/have been used.* Whether any party appears to be under influence of drink or drugs.* Details of the demeanour of the victim, suspect and others present, and any background noise.* Whether there are any special needs in respect of the victim, witness, suspect or the person that may affect the police response, e.g. disability or communication difficulties, mental health or other potential vulnerability.* Whether any court cases are pending (civil or criminal).5.2 DispatcherYou should:ï Where appropriate ensure medical assistance is on route.ï Prioritise the safety of officers and others attending the scene.ï Inform the attending officers of all relevant information and intelligence available, e.g. markers at the address, previous Harassment Information Notices (HIN’s), civil and restraining orders and conditions, child protection issues etc.ï Inform the Duty Inspector and Public Protection Department (PPD) as soon as possible if the risk to a victim is high. In the event that the incident is a threat to the organisation (e.g. stranger abuse of someone in the public eye) the duty Superintendent should be alerted immediately.ï Where a suspect is known, make sure all relevant checks are carried out.ï All storm logs related to stalking and harassment must be closed for RMS.5.3 Public Enquiry Counter StaffYou should:ï Offer the complainant the opportunity to speak in private.ï Comply with Domestic Abuse Policy and Procedure, where it is a domestic related incident.ï 
ï Consider whether others are at risk, e.g. children or other vulnerable people.ï Inform the Control Room so an incident log can be created and allocated accordingly.ï Make an accurate record of the information or incident reported.5.4 Attending OfficerYou must carry out the actions listed below:ï Assess the safety of the victim and others, including the officer(s).ï Reassure the victim that as an organisation we recognise how serious stalking and harassment is and what a detrimental impact it has on its victims. They have the fundamental right to be believed and we will protect them.ï If it is a domestic abuse related incident, follow the guidelines within the Domestic Abuse Policy and Procedure.ï Identify the suspect and, if appropriate, circulate a description of them and any vehicle.ï Establish who was and is at the scene including any children and potential witnesses and perpetrators.ï Conduct enquires with neighbours and potential witnesses, especially where a victim has been subject to periods of observation by the suspect outside their workplace or other place.ï Make accurate records of anything said by the suspect, victim, and any witnesses, including children.ï Record the demeanour of all persons present, including children.ï Obtain statements where required from witnesses.ï Request relevant checks on the address, suspect etc.ï Consider medical consent where there has been physical abuse, psychiatric harm etc.ï Consider taking photos to record evidence.ï Request crime scene examination where appropriate, manage the scene and preserve any evidence including any communication received from the suspect e.g. letters, electronic communication.ï Carry out a thorough risk assessment process with victims (PPNs or Form 270).ï Manage the risk to the victim by considering available options, e.g. home security and referring to appropriate organisations. Safeguarding must be completed with all victims before you leave the scene.ï Secure the safety of victims and children within their own home. If this is not possible, consider taking them to another place of safety, e.g. the home of a relative or a refuge.ï Consider the needs of victims who may be particularly vulnerable to harassment e.g. geographically isolated, mental ill health or physical disability, member of a minority community or at risk of honour based abuse (HBA). Any concerns must be raised with a supervisor or specialist department.ï Update relevant intelligence systemsï Seek support from the relevant Public Protection Department for all cases.ï The attending officer in all cases should add an MG11 to the casefile detailing the victim’s demeanour and behaviour at the scene following an incident. Such statements are vital when demonstrating the impact of the stalking or harassment to a court.ï If children involved a PPN should be submitted on NICHE.ï Consider whether BWC footage will assist in the investigation (See Body Worn Video Procedure).ï 
5.5 Investigating OfficerStalking requires a comprehensive and effective investigation to be conducted and as such the lines of available evidence should be considered at an early stage to ensure that this evidence is secured and preserved. This is particularly important when dealing with time critical issues for example CCTV enquiries, evidence contained on digital devices such as mobile phones and forensic evidence, or evidence that can be readily destroyed by a perpetrator. Where necessary the advice and support of the CID should be sought to set this initial investigative direction and to ensure no opportunities are missed. The following are suggested courses of action:ï Engage in the post-arrest management of suspects and ensure the risk assessment is available to the Custody Sergeant in order to identify whether bail is appropriate in relation to risk to the victim, children or other vulnerable person.ï Go through the sections listed above and ensure all necessary actions have been carried out. Complete any outstanding actions.ï Reassure the victim that as an organisation we recognise how serious stalking and harassment is and what a detrimental impact it has on its victims. They will be believed and we will protect them.ï Take all incidents seriously, regardless of how small or insignificant they may seem. Look at the case as a whole and establish as much information as possible rather than treat it as an isolated incident. Use your skills as an experienced member of PPD and dealing with high risk victims to try and gain as much background information as you can.ï A full statement should be taken from the victim where they are prepared to support a prosecution. In cases of a vulnerable or intimidated witness this should be done via a visually recorded statement.ï Ensure that the release of the suspect and/or any bail conditions are discussed with the victim prior to being made, in order to ascertain their views and any further information which may impact on the decision e.g. details of any existing court orders.ï Consider applying for a Restraining Order, seek PPD advice, and communicate the reasons to the CPS on why this would be appropriate.ï Ensure the victim is kept updated on the progress of the case.ï Consider the use of covert methods of evidence collation if relevant.ï Gather evidence from the victim’s mobile phones and computers where texting and/or cyber-stalking feature in the allegation and ensure the victim has means of communication at all times.ï Provide the victim with safety information and support.ï Provide the victim with a Harassment Diary (Form 271), where appropriate, and explain how it should be completedï Where appropriate, work with other agencies to make the victim safe within their home or go over refuge options with them again.ï Write up a safety plan around safeguarding the victim/Children. Record it on the OEL of Niche.5.6 Supervisors ResponsibilitiesYou should:ï Ensure you monitor incidents of stalking and harassment and provide support where necessary.ï Ensure cases are being progressed promptly.ï Ensure all lines of enquiry have been followed.Table of Contents
ï Ensure that the risk assessment process has been carried out effectively and in high risk cases ensure that advice from the appropriate specialist units is sort.ï Make sure there is a safety plan in place to safeguard the victim/children.ï Ensure HCR’s are completed.5.7 Custody OfficerYou must:ï Consider the suspect’s right to a telephone call and assess the suspect’s potential to harass and intimidate the victim, children, family members and potential witnesses.ï Ensure any telephone calls are supervised.ï Record if a suspect threatens to commit suicide, and include this within the custody risk assessment process for the care of the suspect in police detention.ï Consider suicide threats by the suspect as a risk factor relating to further harm being caused to the victim and children, and include as part of any decision-making process for police bail.ï Record significant statements on the custody record and invite the suspect to sign and verify them.ï Document on the custody record any intimidating, aggressive or threatening behaviour exhibited by the suspect.ï Consult victims prior to making bail decisions where possible. The victim should be updated on the investigation and informed of any decision to charge the suspect, the conditions that have been placed and what those conditions mean prior to their release.ï Refer to the victim risk assessment to justify any bail conditions set.ï Use information from suspect interviews to make decisions about custody, charging, bail, prosecution, sentencing and risk.ï Remember that there is a danger that police attention can sometimes intensify the suspect’s interest in the victim. Particular note should be made of any comments that may indicate this as a risk when deciding bail conditions.6. STALKING PROTECTION ORDERSThe Stalking Protection Act of 2019 introduced Stalking Protection Orders (SPO) as a power available to the Court to order. These orders are unusual because in addition to the normal prohibitions that can be sought (e.g. to stay away from a person) the Court can order that a person must engage with a process (e.g. behavioural programs).SPOs are a civil order. Wiltshire Police pursue these matters through a third-party solicitor (currently Weightmas), following authorisation from a Superintendent. Advice from the College of Policing, including a process map can be found here: Stalking or harassmentAdvice from the CPS on the topic can be found here: Stalking Protection Orders | The Crown Prosecution Service (cps.gov.uk)Practical advice on how to obtain an SPO has been written by Jordan De Friend and can be found here:https://wiltspolice.sharepoint.com/sites/PPDCS/Shared%20Documents/Stalking%20and%20Harra ssment/A%20Practical%20Guide%20to%20obtaining%20an%20SPO.docxTable of Contents

College ofPolicing
OFFICIAL
college police.uk
Appendix AAppUcation process map for Stalking Protection Orders (SPOs)-II SPO applicatio; heard in court :	I	 I		I	
le SP; granted I	10
SPO refused I..I..
?-If Breach court file prepared. ITI Breach heard in court.	ICll711219
7. USE OF CAUTIONSWhere a caution is administered the facts on which the caution was based cannot be used as part of the alleged course of conduct in any subsequent prosecution for harassment. The fact that a caution has been issued, however, may be relevant in the context of the bad character or reprehensible behaviour provisions for showing that the subject was aware of the provisions of the Protection from Harassment Act (PHA).The legislation allows the court to impose on conviction a restraining order. Cautioning, therefore, should not generally be considered unless there are overriding reasons why it should. The safety of a victim should never be compromised by our decision to caution an offender. In relation to domestic abuse related cases you must follow guidance within the Domestic Abuse Policy and Procedure.PIN/Warning Notices should not be used in Stalking or Harassment cases. This is following on from the advice from the “Living in Fear” report (Living in fear – the police and CPS response to harassment and stalking - HMICFRS (justiceinspectorates.gov.uk). This is the direction from DCC Mills National Lead for Stalking and Harassment.8. VICTIMS COLLECTING THEIR OWN EVIDENCEIn all appropriate cases victims should be encouraged to keep a diary/log of all the incidents (Form 271: Stalking and Harassment Diary). All information should be recorded in one diary where possible and victims should write incidents in them as soon as possible after the event to ensure they record it accurately. Good practise for recording in a diary includes:ï Time and date every entry.ï Keep a detailed record of the circumstances; where were they, who was there, what happened, anything significant such as it being dark etc.ï Do not delete anything. Keep all messages, phone calls, emails etc. stored on the electronic device.ï Record what the suspect was wearing, where they were, what they sounded like (angry, excited etc.) and any vehicle they were in.ï Ask neighbours where appropriate to also keep a log if they see suspect loitering outside address etc.ï Keep letters and parcels believed to be from the suspect.ï Use 1471 and record all phone numbers that the suspect may be using.ï Where possible record telephone conversations and save these.ï Ask colleagues, employers, building security (where appropriate) and family & friends to keep a log of any incidents they have witnessed/heard.9. SAFEGUARDINGVictims of Stalking and Harassment have a variety of safeguarding considerations available to them (appendix A) depending on the circumstances. These include but are not limited to:ï Referral to a DV outreach service.ï Referral to the National Centre for Domestic Violenceï Citizens Advice Bureauï Refugeï Change of phone numberï 
ï National Stalking Helplineï Bobby Vanï Markers on home addressï Police support with regards to housing applicationsï The fixated threat assessment centre (police use only).ï Electoral Commission website for anonymous voter registration.ï Advice regarding the victim not disposing of anything containing personal details in a dustbin but for these items to be shredded etc.ï Any children’s schools should be made aware.ï Covert tactics where appropriate.ï Victims Safeguarding Pack (Form 316)Table of Contents
Appendix ASupport agencies available:(including but not limited to)ï Splitz - 01225 775276helpdesk@splitz.org	www.splitz.orgï Swindon Women’s Aid - 01793 610610 (24 hour) office@swindonwomensaid.org	www.swindonwomensaid.orgï NCDV - 0800 970 2070 (freephone) - text NCDV to 60777 & they call back www.ncdv.org.ukï National Stalking Helpline - 0808 802 0300 www.stalkinghelpline.orgï Citizens Advice Bureau - 03444 111 444 www.citizensadvice.org.ukï Electoral Commission Website –www.electoralcommission.org.uk/ï Crimestoppers - 0800 555 111 https://crimestoppers-uk.org/ï Swindon Sanctuary (SARC) - 0808 168 0024 (24 hour) www.swindonsanctuary.co.ukï Karma Nirvana - 0800 5999 247 www.karmanirvana.org.uk/ï Stop Hate Crime UK - 0800 138 1625 (24 hour) www.stopehateuk.orgï Paladin Stalking Advocacy Service - 0207 840 8960 info@paladinservice.co.uk	-	www.paladinseervice.co.ukTable of Contents
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Geographical CrimePolicy Owner/Author:	Supt Sarah ROBBINS / DI Simon CHILDE Technical Author:	D/Insp Dean GARVINSenior Officer/Manager Sponsor: ACC Crime and JusticeRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes25.05.20182.0Data Protection section amended to reflect implementation of GDPR and new DPA.24.01.20223.0Introduction of Stalking Protection Act 2019, the introduction of stalking protection orders, changes to APP Stalking or harassment and the NPCC and Crown prosecution Service (CPS) joint protocol. Reference to PPD1 changed to PPNs. Reference to not using a PIN/warning notice added.Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionForce Policy Officer25.01.20223.0Supt. Head of Geographical Crime18.01.20223.0JNCC (Not required for all policies)N/AN/ADistribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc.):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionImplications of the Policy: Training RequirementsNoneIT InfrastructureNone
Template v3 WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE PROCEDUREStandards of DressDate of Publication: June 2019 Version:	4.0Next Review Date:	May 2023
TABLE OF CONTENTSPROCEDURE OVERVIEW	3GLOSSARY OF TERMS	3RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	3AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE AREAS ASSOCIATED WITH THIS PROCEDURE	3DATA PROTECTION	3FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	3MONITORING and REVIEW	3WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDURE	31. Legal Requirements	42. Standards of Dress and Appearance Introduction	43. Responsibility of Managers and Supervisors	44. Diversity	45. General Principles & Responsibilities of all Officers & Staff (Uniformed & Non-Uniformed)	56. Specific Responsibilities of Uniformed Officers and Staff	57. Specific Responsibilities of Non-uniformed Officers and Staff	58. Specialist Roles	69. Police Officer and Special Constabulary Layering of Uniform	6PCSO Layering of Uniform	610. Uniform and Equipment Issue, Receipt and Return Requirements	611. Security Advice for Uniformed Staff	712. Standards of Dress – Uniform Head to Toe	713. Standards of Dress – Appearance Head to Toe	11DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	16
PROCEDURE OVERVIEWThis procedure details the standards of dress required by all employees and volunteers who represent Wiltshire Police. The definition of “standard of dress” covers uniform, clothing, equipment, appearance and grooming. The intention is to inform the standards of dress required by uniformed officers, special constabulary, staff and volunteer members of Wiltshire Police and non- uniformed officers, staff and volunteer members of Wiltshire Police. For those in uniform, it details the uniform and equipment to be worn and the standards required to ensure consistency with the highest professional standards.This procedure incorporates the standard of uniform, clothing and equipment set out in Regional and National Policies.It is important to note that standards of dress is the personal responsibility of all individuals within the force in line with force values and behaviours. This procedure is not designed to be exhaustive and there maybe occurrences or circumstances which are outside of this procedure however the key principles of professionalism, personal responsibility and presenting a professional image to our public will apply in all circumstances.GLOSSARY OF TERMSTermMeaningPPEPersonal Protective EquipmentPHEPublic Health EnglandIDIdentificationStandards of Dressuniform, clothing, equipment, appearance and groomingUPPUnsatisfactory Performance ProcedureRELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSAll other Wiltshire Police Health and Safety Policies and Procedures Force Body Armour ProcedureRegional and National Clothing and Equipment Procedures Issue Resolution and Dignity at Work Policy and ProcedureUnsatisfactory Performance Procedure (UPP) or Misconduct Procedures College of Policing Appearance Standards National GuidanceAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE AREAS ASSOCIATED WITH THIS PROCEDUREThere are no associated Authorised Professional Practice areas at present.DATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this procedure will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING and REVIEWThe Standards of Dress Procedure will be monitored and reviewed annually by the Force Clothing and Equipment Working Group. The procedure will also be reviewed annually in light of legislative change and change in Regional or National standards or best practice. The Force Clothing and Equipment Working Group will be responsible for approval and monitoring the procedure document and its implementation on a regular basis.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS PROCEDUREAndrew Irving - Force Policy Officer.
1. Legal RequirementsThe Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 requires every employer, so far as is reasonably practicable, to ensure the health, safety and welfare at work of their employees and anyone else affected by their undertakings.The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999 require the employer to make a suitable and sufficient assessment of the risks to the health and safety of employees to which they are exposed whilst they are at work and the risks to the health and safety of persons not in his employment arising out of or in connection with the business conduct and undertakings. The employee has a duty to take reasonable care of themselves and to do or not to do anything that could cause a risk to others as a result of their own action.2. Standards of Dress and Appearance IntroductionThe appearance of staff is important to emphasise professionalism to our communities and colleagues and the standards are reflective of the Force’s Values and Behaviours.All staff should be aware that failure to meet the standards of dress could result in disciplinary action being taken.3. Responsibility of Managers and SupervisorsIt is the responsibility of all Managers and Supervisors to recognise their role regarding standards of dress and to set an example by maintaining high standards of personal presentation and promoting a professional image of Wiltshire Police.They must;ï ensure that staffing identified as requiring to wear a uniform (this shall be determined within the role Job Description), does so in accordance with the standards contained within this document and the risk assessment undertaken to identify the appropriate PPE for the role.ï ensure that staff do not wear unauthorised garments for example, cycle vests should be used for the purpose it was issued and in accordance with the risk assessment for that activity.ï ensure the professional appearance of staff in their area of responsibility in line with our values and behaviours,ï challenge staff that have fallen below the standards set out in this procedure.ï ensure that the personal appearance of their staff does not present a negative or unprofessional image of Wiltshire Police.ï ensure that all issued uniform and equipment is retrieved from an officer, staff or volunteer member prior to their exit from the organisation. This shall be documented on Exit Checklist Form 299 issued by People Services. The completed Form 299 and the uniform shall be bagged, labelled and returned to the Supplies Department for decommissioning and disposal so that it does not present a security risk if obtained by others. Warrant and Door Access cards, together with Parking Permits and Locker keys shall be returned to the Facilities Department so these items do not present a security risk if obtained by others.4. DiversityWiltshire Police is committed to embracing diversity needs which will always start with a personal confidential discussion with the individual concerned to understand the specific needs. The intention is that diversity requirements will be positively supported where possible and operationally safe, following the undertaking of a risk assessment in relation to the specific role to be performed. The diversity provisions within this procedure are not intended to be exhaustive and Wiltshire Police welcomes the identification of all diversity needs.Table of Contents
5. General Principles and Responsibilities of all Officers and Staff (Uniformed and Non- Uniformed)Professional appearance is the personal responsibility of each individual – in line with our force values and behaviours. Along with maintaining personal hygiene and grooming in keeping with the high standards of appearance expected and set out in this procedure. Members of Wiltshire Police shall not wear or display any items that are likely to bring Wiltshire Police into disrepute.6. Specific Responsibilities of Uniformed Officers and StaffUniformed officers, special constabulary and staff members of Wiltshire Police will wear the corporate standard uniform as issued in conjunction with their role at all times when on duty unless a specific instruction has been received by a Manager or Supervisor as a result of meeting an operational requirement. Uniform issued shall be on a best fit basis and the fit of garments in conjunction with diversity needs to be accommodated with the assistance of the Clothing Coordinator.Maternity wear options are available for uniformed officers and staff as a special order and can be provided following a consultation with the Supplies Manager.Officers and staff considering or undergoing gender reassignment will be supported by a confidential consultation with a senior leader within the organisation. Further guidance for individuals and line managers can be found within the Equal Opportunities Policy and Procedures – Transgender and The Work Place and on the Equality, Diversity & Inclusion SharePoint Page.Personal additions, alterations, replacements, or items which pose a health and safety risk are not permitted under any circumstances unless authorised by the Force Clothing and Equipment Board.Lost or stolen items must be reported to your Manger or Supervisor for security reasons. These items will be replaced upon the completion and endorsement by your manager of Form 232.7. Specific Responsibilities of Non-uniformed Officers and StaffAll clothing worn should be appropriate to the dignity and professionalism of the workplace and should not be revealing or present a possibility that colleagues or members of the public may find it offensive or embarrassing.Male officers and staff will wear trousers, shirt and tie unless there is an operational requirement not to do so.Female officers and staff will wear professional business clothing unless there is an operational requirement not to do so.Standards of dress shall reflect a professional image. The following items are examples (but not an exhaustive list) of unacceptable standards of dress unless a specific instruction has been received by a Manager or Supervisor as a result of meeting an operational requirement or specific role:Jeans/Jeggings and denim garmentsShorts unless worn under uniform for diversity needs SweatshirtsT–shirts with slogans or logos or motifs that may be considered offensive SportswearBeachwear Flip Flops Training shoesNon-uniformed officers, staff and volunteers attending training courses will wear their normal business attire unless joining instructions require a specific dress code.
8. Specialist RolesSpecialist roles will be subject to a risk assessment and clothing or equipment identified as a requirement shall be issued in accordance with the Regional and National Policies and worn as directed unless a specific instruction has been received by a Manager or Supervisor for an operational reason.Cycle wear shall be issued to those individuals where their CPT Inspector confirms this activity is undertaken for at least 20% if their role.9. Police Officer and Special Constabulary Layering of UniformPolice Officers and Special Constabulary members of Wiltshire Police will wear uniform in the following order of layers:ï Layer 1 – Black - wicking shirtï Layer 2 – Mid layer Fleece (optional)ï Layer 3 – Body Armourï Layer 4 – Police issue Softshell (when weather conditions requires to be worn over body armour)ï Layer 5 – Hi-Vis vest with appointmentsï Layer 6 - Hi-Vis Outer - Jacket (Anorak, Tabard or Blouson)A Photoshoot of how to wear your uniform correctly is available on the Supplies Department Firstpoint Portal Page.PCSO Layering of UniformPCSO members of Wiltshire Police will wear uniform in the following order of layers:ï Layer 1 – Blue wicking shirtï Layer 2 – Mid Layer Fleeceï Layer 3 – Body armourï Layer 4 – Police issue Softshell (when weather conditions requires to be worn over body armour)ï Layer 5 – Hi-Vis Outer Jacket (Anorak or Blouson)A Photoshoot of how to wear your uniform correctly is available on the Supplies Department Firstpoint Portal Page.10. Uniform and Equipment Issue, Receipt and Return RequirementsAll uniform and kit issued remains the property of Wiltshire Police during employment. Uniform and equipment will be recorded as being issued to the individual on the Force’s asset management records.Uniform and equipment is replaced on a wear and tear or contaminated basis using Form 444. Old uniform following replacement is to be returned to the Supplies Department at HQ for decommissioning and disposal so that it does not present a security risk if obtained by others.Lost, stolen or misplaced items must be reported to managers or supervisors for security reasons. These items will be replaced upon the completion of Form 232.Items of clothing which have become contaminated need to be treated as contaminated waste. These items should be bagged in yellow clinical waste bags and placed in the clinical waste wheelie bins situated at each Police hub site. Please do not return contaminated uniform to the Supplies Department for health and safety reasons under any circumstances.Table of Contents
At the end of employment with Wiltshire Police, it is the personal responsibility of the individual to return all uniform and equipment to the Manager or Supervisor undertaking the exit interview, and the personal responsibility of the Manager or Supervisor to ensure this is actually done.11. Security Advice for Uniformed StaffUniformed Police officers, Special Constabulary and staff members of Wiltshire Police should follow any specific advice about wearing uniform when travelling to and from duty, in line with the current threat level. This includes a recommendation to not wear uniform on the travel to and from work, to remove lanyards and parking permits from view and to remain vigilant and report any matter of worry or concern.If officers or staff are seen travelling to or from duty clearly displaying police identification they should expect to be challenged.12. Standards of Dress – Uniform Head to Toe HeadwearHeadwear will be worn by uniformed officers, special constabulary, PCSOs, and Staff who have been issued them, when in public view. Hats may be removed whilst in vehicles or buildings. When this is being exercised, a common sense approach will be applied when responding to an unplanned incident requiring immediate attention.Officers, Special Constabulary, PCSOs and Police Staff wishing to wear headwear for religious and cultural beliefs will be accommodated where possible subject to the undertaking of a risk assessment to the specific role.Male Constables, Sergeants and Special Constabulary equivalent ranks will wear custodian helmets whilst on foot patrol.Male Inspectors and above, and Special Constabulary equivalent ranks, will wear caps unless engaged in public order command when there is a serious public disorder, then a NATO helmet will be worn as per the PSU dress code.Male PCSOs will wear force issue caps.Female officers, Special Constabulary and PCSOs will wear force issue bowler hats.Police officers and PCSOs riding police pedal cycles whilst on duty are to wear the Force issue pedal cycle safety helmets which have the “POLICE” or “PCSO” wording on them.Police motorcyclists will wear a Force issue motorcycle helmet when on patrol.Specialist headwear such as baseball caps may only be worn in accordance with the role the officer is undertaking.Officers, Special Constabulary and PCSO members of Wiltshire Police may wear a prayer hat (kufi or topi) or skullcap (kippah). As this usually fits underneath the custodian helmet, this should have no health and safety implications.Muslim officers, special Constabulary and PCSO members of Wiltshire Police may wear the traditional headdress (hijab) underneath the standard issue hat. This will be provided by the force and will be of black matt material. The hijab will have fastenings that are suitable for quick release and will be worn in such a way that the wearer’s face, service insignia and any other identification remain available. The hijab will be worn tucked into any high-visibility clothing.
Turbans can be worn instead of the custodian helmet for standard tours of duty. However, in the event of a public order incident, the NATO style helmet must be worn to protect the health and safety of the officer, his or her colleagues and members of the public. Additionally, other policing activities which, for the same reasons of health and safety, require the wearing of protective headwear e.g. motorcycle unit, pedal cycle patrol etc will not be permitted without the wearing of full PPE including headwear i.e. motorcycle or pedal cycle helmets. There is no requirement for the force crest or chequered banding to be worn on the Turban.Neck Warmers or ScarfsNeck warmers or scarfs will only be worn by uniformed officers and uniformed police staff if issued in accordance with a specialist role or approved in support of diversity following the undertaking of a risk assessment.Shirts – Black, Blue or White?The following sets out the expectations of which colour shirt should be worn. In all cases, shirts will be worn tucked into the waist of the trouser or skirt and buttoned up to the collar.Operationally Deployed Officers - the default position is that black shirts will be worn regardless of rank.Wearing of Uniform at Court - Uniformed officers and police staff attending Magistrates Court, Crown Court and Coroners Court wear standard operational uniform (which includes Personal Safety Equipment (PPE) and body armour where appropriate). All non uniformed officers will attend court in their usual attire i.e. smart business dress.Operationally Deployed Police Staff - the default position is that blue wicking shirts will be worn. These staff groups include PCSOs, Escort Officers, Detention Officers, Forensic Support Officers, Facilities Staff, Training Staff and Vehicle Technicians.Office based Police Officers and Training Instructors – the default position is that white shirts with a black tie will be worn regardless of their rank. On those occasions when an office based officer is operationally deployed, the appropriate dress code to that role shall apply.Enquiry Officers – the default position is that white shirts with a black tie.Contact Management Police Staff - the default position is that blue wicking shirts will be worn.Special Constabulary Officers - the default position is that black shirts will be worn regardless of rank.Attendance of Office based Officers at Training Courses – the default position is that white shirts with a black tie will be worn regardless of their rank.Attendance of Operationally Deployed Officers at Training Courses – the default position is that white shirts with a black tie will be worn regardless of their rankTiesAll uniformed officers, special constabulary and staff members who wear a white shirt shall wear the Wiltshire Police issue clip on tie which shall be black or blue in accordance with the individual’s role.Ties may only be removed following specific authorisation by the control room Inspector or above in exceptional cases of hot weather. Where dispensation is given, this will apply across the whole force. Such direction is also applicable to those non uniform staff. Open neck shirts will not be worn other than the circumstances above.
Epaulettes and Slipovers/SlidersAll uniformed officers, special constabulary members and PCSOs are required to wear epaulettes with slipovers (also known as sliders) displaying their shoulder number at all times. Under exceptional operational circumstances, e.g. terrorist incident or firearms officers following a critical incident, a senior officer may instruct removal of sliders. No action should be taken to remove sliders in advance of this specific instruction from a senior officer.Uniformed staff (detention officers, escort officers etc.) are required to wear epaulettes with slipovers at all times. These staff groups do not display their shoulder number.Officers who are authorised to temporarily act up in the next rank will be required to wear their own individual epaulette and Slipover on one arm and replace the other epaulette and slipover with one showing the Acting rank. This Acting rank epaulette and Slipover will display the insignia only.If the requirement to perform Acting is longer than 46 days then the officer is to request a new set of Slipovers that show the higher rank to include the shoulder number. These Slipovers will be worn on both arms whilst performing the Temporary role.Body ArmourThe wearing of Body Armour whilst on duty, is mandatory for all operational police officers, special constabulary members, PCSO and Escort Officers. As this is fitted to your body for your safety, you must not alter the fit or adjust this garment in any way. Refer to Force Body Armour Procedure for full details of this requirement.FleecesWiltshire Police issue fleeces to Police Staff roles.SoftshellsA softshell is a Police Officer, PCSO or Special Constabulary version of a Fleece for wearing subject to weather conditions over Body Armour. The Softshell is not a waterproof garment and is intended for warmth. Softshells shall not be issued to any Police Staff roles.Hi-Visibility (Hi-Vis) Garments (Jacket with Appointments and Anoraks) – Class 3 GarmentsWith the exception of a cycle vest which does not meet the standard and must not be worn for anything other than the purpose intended, all other Hi-Vis garments meet Class 3 which is the standard required to be worn on the carriageway with a speed of 40 miles an hour or above.When the high visibility garment is worn it is required to be fastened up when in public view.For Hi-Vis Jackets, from a safety perspective and for ease of identification, officer and special constabulary members will ensure that the visibility of the reflective strip and the Police insignia are clear and not significantly damaged so as to put their identify in any doubt.When engaged on operational duties in the hours of darkness, and Night Time Economy (NTE), the wearing of a Hi-Vis Jacket with long sleeves is mandatory.The wearing of long sleeved Hi-Vis Class 3 clothing is mandatory when dealing with incidents on a carriageway with a speed of 40 miles an hour or above.TunicsTunics are not personal issue for ranks lower than Inspectors. Officers of the rank of Inspector and above may request a personal issue Tunic should their role require this. Tunics are available on a loan basis for all officers and PCSOs from the Supplies Department for temporary use at Presentations, Coroners Court and Award Ceremonies.
Lanyards, Warrant/ID Cards and Name BadgesWarrant and ID cards should contain an image reflective of the current appearance of the individual and should be updated upon significant changes to appearance.Warrant cards should be carried at all times by police officers, both on and off duty regardless of whether the role is uniformed or not and ID cards should be carried by police staff whilst at work.Only lanyards issued by Wiltshire Police shall be worn.Name badges are no longer issued by Wiltshire Police and retrospective name badges are not required to be worn.Medals and Medal RibbonsMedals, commendation with star and ribbon broach bars, should be worn on tunics only. Officers may only wear medals, orders or decorations if authorised by the Sovereign or the Chief Constable.Medal ribbons should be positioned just above the left breast pocket flap of the tunic, centred over the pocket button, and should be worn in the order of importance from right to left e.g. the Queen’s Jubilee medal first, followed by the Police Long Service, Good Conduct Medal etc.Trousers and SkirtsOnly Force issue trousers and skirts are permitted to be worn whilst on duty. Diversity alternations to the standard issue will be accommodated where possible subject to consultation with the Clothing Coordinator.Utility BeltsForce issued Utility Belts are available upon request as an alternative to the Utility Vest. Should this be the choice option, only Force issue Utility Belts shall be worn.Socks and Hosiery also known as TightsSocks and hosiery worn with uniform will be plain black or dark blue.Socks and hosiery worn with by non uniform officers and staff will be on a conservative nature which match or compliment the clothing choice.FootwearWiltshire Police issue footwear will be worn by uniformed officers, special constables and PCSOs whilst engaged in operational policing duties. Alternative footwear will be issued subject to a risk assessment for specialist roles when required, e.g. motorcyclists.Uniformed officers, PSCOs and Detention Officers will wear Force issue black boots which are appropriate for the role to be performed.Uniformed Staff will wear black footwear appropriate for the role to be performed and will have plain fronts and low flat heel. Wiltshire Police do not provide footwear for staff members unless there is a specific role requirement for PPE which shall be determined by risk assessment.Rubber or wellington boots may be worn when conditions require. The Supplies Department hold a stock, should wellington boots be required for operational use.All footwear will be clean and polished and free from coloured motifs, laces or patterns. During the course of duty, footwear inevitably becomes dirty, but it is expected that officers will report for duty with clean footwear.
If there are documented medical reasons to wear adapted footwear then this can be permitted under the authority of the Manger or Supervisor.GlovesBlack Leather slash resistant gloves are standard issue for all uniformed staff and are worn at the discretion of the individual. Gloves must not be worn during shirtsleeve order unless there is a specific operational requirement to do so.Specialist and safety gloves are provided as dictated by risk assessment and must be worn and used as intended.13. Standards of Dress – Appearance Head to Toe HairPublic facing uniformed officers and staff must wear their hair above the collar; this shall include those with diversity needs. Hair may be trimmed to comply or tied back and secured close to the head. Ponytails are not acceptable. Adornments other than slides, grips ties or bun nets should not be worn unless for diversity needs which has been subjected to a risk assessment in relation to the specific role.Unconventional hairstyles which may cause ridicule and question the professionalism of the wearer are not permitted. This could include patterns or motifs cut into the hair or conspicuously unnatural colours or structures.Non uniformed officers and staff should reflect the professional image of Wiltshire Police.Facial HairUniformed officers and staff shall present themselves for duty in a clean shaven or neatly trimmed bearded state for health and safety reasons. If a beard can be grabbed and the person pulled by it, then it is too long. This means that the development/growing of a beard must take place during rest days or annual leave.Where an individual needs to maintain a long beard for diversity needs, this will be accommodated subject to a risk assessment being undertaken in relation to the specific role.Eyebrow hair must not be shaved or styled to portray any pattern or design.Non uniformed officers and staff should reflect the professional image of Wiltshire Police.Armed PolicingThis section applies only where an officer is an Armed Policing Authorised Firearms Officer (AFO) (inc ARV-O) or National Firearms Instructor’s (NFI) and there is reasonable likelihood that individual may be deployed as part of the operational Armed Policing capability, or as an Armed Officer in response to any operational incident.Officers must parade at the commencement of each duty as clean shaven with no stubble or beard growth.Moustaches may be worn provided they are neatly groomed and do not extend beyond the upper lip or give rise to a reason to believe that it may pose a risk of interference with the seal of the respirator of a type approved and issued to AFO/NFI.Table of Contents
Officers must not parade wearing hair, including sideburns, in manner that would give rise to a reason to believe that it may pose a risk of interference with the seal of the respirator of a type approved and issued to AFO/NFI - Side burns must not extend below the lower portion of the ear and earlobe.Officers must not parade wearing cosmetic products, including makeup, gels and creams applied to the face, nor apply such products during the course of their duties. An exception is permitted for the application of cosmetic products to the eyelids, nose and mouth (inc. lips) provided it complies with other sections of this policy and provided it does not give rise to a reason to believe that it may pose a risk of interference with the seal of the respirator of a type approved and issued to AFO/NFI.No officer may parade, or wear at any time whilst on duty, any other jewellery, adornment or any other thing on or around the face, head or neck in circumstances where there is reason to believe that it may pose a risk of interference with the seal of the respirator of a type approved and issued to AFO/NFI.Exceptions to the AFO/NFI policy may be permitted in the following circumstances;ï Where compliance with this policy would lead to discrimination against a person with a protected characteristic. (subject to a risk assessment being undertaken)ï Where a Medial Exception has been sought and approved (see process below)A person may seek medical exception from the AFO/NFI policy via the below process.ï Consultation with Occupational Healthï Force Medical Advisor advice must be sought and provided to Armed Policing Portfolio Inspector.ï Armed Policing Portfolio Inspector will review and authorise or decline the medical exception in writing.ArbitrationThe final arbiter of compliance with these standards is the Armed Policing Supervisor for that shift on which the officer concerned is parading, or where no such person is available to Operational Firearms Commander. Where an individual is found to have failed to comply or meet the standards concerned, immediate rectification must be directed. Where an individual fails to meet the policy on 3 or more occasions, a report must be made in writing to the Armed Policing Portfolio Inspector who may consider further action in line with the Wiltshire Police Policy and Code of Ethics (Standards of professional behaviours, orders and instructions).Make up, Cosmetics, Perfume (also to mean aftershave and body deodorant products) and SunscreenUniformed officers and staff who choose to do so should apply makeup, cosmetics and perfume in moderation so as not to become excessive or obtrusive.  An exception shall be made where make up is used to conceal a physical disfigurement or blemish.Nail polish of a natural colour consistent across all the nails may be worn but jewellery or attachments to nails are not permitted.Sunscreen should be worn by staff on duty that are outside and exposed to the sun. The type chosen by the individual should not include vivid coloured sun blocks.Undercover officers may wear makeup commensurate with their role.Non uniformed officers and staff may wear makeup, cosmetics and perfume appropriate to their role which must remain smart and professional.Table of Contents
SunglassesUniformed officers and staff may wear sunglasses / reactive lenses when driving or on foot patrol in conditions of bright sunlight. The frame type must be plain and appropriate for police duty.Sunglasses must always be removed when speaking to or dealing with a member of the public. Wiltshire Police will accept no liability for any damage to or loss of sunglasses.All officers and staff should adopt a sensible approach when wearing sunglasses, spectacles or contact lenses, ensuring that they are not offensive or likely to present a negative image of the organisation.Chewing GumChewing gum is not permitted when in the public view when representing Wiltshire Police. Chewing gum out of the public view is permitted subject to the correct disposal of wrappers and used gum so as not to cause an environmental nuisance.Jewellery, including Wrist Watches and PinsNo jewellery should be worn which might cause offence or give reason for a member of the public to the doubt professionalism of the individual. This includes words, letters, symbols or pictures that might cause offence to individuals or our diverse communities.Uniformed officers and staff may wear wrist watches, plain rings, small tie pins. The wearing of registered charity pins and bracelets is limited to one item being worn at a time and this should not be worn in place of any police apparel. Bracelets, and necklaces other than those worn for medical reasons or diversity needs should not be visible.All items of jewellery are worn at the individuals own risk and the wearing of expensive items of jewellery is discouraged in the course of duty. Claims for any damage to a wristwatch, or fitness and activity tracker, no matter how expensive, will only be supported on presentation of the damaged item and/or a receipt up to a maximum of £200.Uniformed officers and staff may wear stud earrings whilst on duty. Managers and Supervisory officers will decide what is acceptable. Except for earrings, no visible body piercing jewellery may be worn at work other than for diversity needs where it is considered that there is no significant risk to the individual’s health and safety. Non visible body piercing is worn at the individuals own risk but is discouraged by Wiltshire Police. The individual is responsible for a self assessment of the risk associated with non visible body piercing which may become caught, detached or impaled into the body causing injury.Spacers worn by officers and staff who are public facing should be capped whilst on duty.Non uniformed officers and staff may wear jewellery which projects a smart and professional image. Jewellery which is considered excessive or unprofessional will be challenged.The wearing of the symbolic Kirpan can be worn for diversity needs at the individuals own risk but must always be concealed from view under clothing on a chain around the neck or in a small holster.Accessories and EquipmentWhen on operational duty, all uniform police officers will be responsible for ensuring that they have with them the following items:? Baton? Handcuffs
? Incapacitant Spray? Leg Restraints? Face Mask? Access to a working torch during the hours of darkness? Items of uniform and equipment that will allow them to perform their duties and respond to any standing or dynamic risk assessmentAll equipment must be carried in the pouches provided. Only authorised items may be worn/used and carried using the Utility Belt or Utility Vest.Individuals who carry their personally owned multi-media devices, e.g. mobile phones or I-pods, do so at their own risk. The Force will not reimburse for loss or damage. These items should not be used in public view and media items should not be used to stream live broadcasted performances requiring a TV licence on a police site under any circumstances. Ring tones and alerts must not be loud, distasteful or offensive and consideration should be given to colleagues, particularly in a shared or open office, with tones set to silent where possibleTattoosThe College of Policing (CoP) have amended its Appearance Standards National Guidance to state: ‘that careful consideration will be given by the organisation to any tattoo on the neck, face or hands in deciding if it is acceptable. This includes considering the size, nature and prominence of the tattoo’.One of the key priorities for Wiltshire Police is to have a diverse organisation that reflects a society that our officers and staff have a pleasure to police. In order to continue to attract and retain talent from all of our communities, it is important to embrace this diversity rather than place inhibitors and barriers which are historic and out of sync with social norms.The Chief Constable has amended Wiltshire’s policy guidelines on tattoos as he recognises that tattoos form part of many cultures and are becoming increasingly socially acceptable to express personality through body art and this tattoo policy echoes a modern society. Clearly a balance needs to be struck to ensure any such body art accords with the standards of policing.The guidelines within this policy apply equally to all Wiltshire staff, officers, police staff and volunteers, including those working in plain clothes roles when on duty.During the recruitment process for all employees of Wiltshire Police, the applicant will be required to identify existing visible tattoos. These tattoos will be evaluated by the Force and a decision on whether they meet the standards, will be made.Please note that tattoos will not be allowed on your face.It is worth noting that there will be automatic rejections to applications, both officers and police staff, should any tattoo be considered to be; discriminatory, offensive, undermine political neutrality i.e. rude, lewd, crude, racist, sexist, sectarian, homophobic or violent or not in accordance with the values of Wiltshire Police. This applies whether the tattoo is visible or not.You will be required to cover tattoos, when it is seen as appropriate for certain policing events, e.g. Royal visits, force funerals, remembrance parades and other ceremonial events.If you are thinking of getting a tattoo and are unsure whether it fits within this policy, you should get advice and authorisation from your line manager before undergoing the procedure. This is not to stifle anyone’s personal expression but is just to check and test that employees are not having offensive or insulting visible art work completed.Table of Contents
Inappropriate TattoosIt is worth noting that there will be automatic rejections to applications, both officers and police staff, should any tattoo be considered to be; discriminatory, offensive, undermine political neutrality i.e. rude, lewd, crude, racist, sexist, sectarian, homophobic or violent or not in accordance with the values of Wiltshire Police. This applies whether the tattoo is visible or not. The following are examples of tattoos that would not be acceptable:Violent	Racist/political	SexistMultiple TattoosHaving multiple tattoos across other parts of the body won’t necessarily be unacceptable, as long as they are not offensive and do not meet the automatic disqualification criteria.It is essential that tattoos must also be able to be easily covered if there is a requirement to do so, in certain policing situations.Full torso, full legs, arms and multiple tattoos on an officers / staff members hands may therefore be considered acceptableTable of Contents
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Supplies Division of Facilities Management Department Procedure Owner/Author:	Sarah Somers (Head of Health and Safety) / Lynne TAYLOR(Supplies Manager)Technical Author:Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor:	ACO Clive BARKER (Chief Finance Officer)Revision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes04.01.20213.0CSection 10 amended to include Coronavirus PPE advice and link to PPE Briefing 08.12.2020.06.01.20213.0DSection 10 amended to state mandatory use of IIR face masks in all Police and partner agency buildings.14.03.20233.0ESection 14 (page 13) amended to include mandatory rules relating to AFO’s / NFI’s.05.05.20234.0Section 10: Coronavirus face mask requirement removed. Subsequent section numbers amended accordingly.Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team25.06.20193.0Chief Constable08.05.20193.0JNCC(Not required for all procedures)Distribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this procedure (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionUNISONMay 20193.0Police FederationMay 20193.0Implications of the Procedure:Training RequirementsNoneIT InfrastructureNoneTable of Contents
STATEMENT OF SAFETY POLICYWiltshire Police and the Office of the Police and Crime Commissioner for Wiltshire and Swindon attach great importance to safeguarding the health and safety of our employees, others working on or visiting our premises and members of the public to whom we provide a service.We are fully committed to the management and discharge of our responsibilities as employers, under the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974, the Police (Health and Safety) Act 1997 and all other relevant statutory provisions and codes of practices. As the lease holder, owner or licensee of premises the Commissioner also has overall responsibility for managing health and safety matters in relation to the structure of premises.The Chief Constable has ultimate responsibility for the management and discharge of health and safety regulations in relation to policing activities, governed by the Police and Crime Commissioner. The Deputy Chief Constable has been assigned specific responsibility for co-ordinating health and safety, this includes supporting the policy with adequate financial and physical resources.We will establish suitable and sufficient risk control measures and ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the provision and maintenance of safe and healthy working conditions, equipment, safe systems of work and provide the associated training, information, instruction, and supervision.We appreciate that effective health and safety management makes good business sense. Embracing these principles and aligning them with our policing objectives will enhance our operational and business performance, through reduced absence, injuries, and ill health, reducing liabilities, unnecessary losses and protecting the environment. This goes hand in hand with delivering an effective and efficient policing service for Wiltshire and Swindon.People are our most valuable resource, and we are committed to ensuring our work activities are conducted in a manner that will, so far as is reasonably practicable, protect their health, safety, and welfare. As we continue to work through and beyond the covid-19 global pandemic, our new operating model, and agile working arrangements, alongside our infection prevention and control policy will ensure the continued health, safety, and wellbeing of all our employees. We recognise the value and implications of our young in-service workforce and continue to provide effective training, tutorship, and leadership to ensure their safety and enable them to thrive.Wiltshire Police are committed to preparing organisational procedures on new and specific health and safety issues and pursuing progressive improvements in health and safety performance beyond that required by legislation. All supervisors and managers are expected to ensure their working environment is as safe as possible, identifying significant hazards, adequately assessing, and controlling risks. Central to creating a positive health and safety culture is the need for all managers to actively consult with staff and staff association safety representatives. This will encourage their participation, co-operation and contribution to health and safety policy and will continuously improve health and safety standards. Effective communication of health and safety information, visible leadership and positive values and behaviours displayed by all employees is fundamental. As well as ensuring the health and safety competence of all employees through regular performance appraisals alongside the provision of expert safety advice.All employees irrespective of their rank, grade or position have a core responsibility for health and safety and have a unique and valuable contribution to make. All employees are expected to co-operate fully in the achievement of this policy and understand their legal responsibilities to take reasonable care of the health and safety of themselves and those other persons who may be affected by what they do or fail to do at work. Any identified breaches will be fully investigated, and employees and managers will be held to account for their actions, as appropriate.A copy of this statement will be brought to the attention of all employees and will be reviewed on an annual basis or in light of any significant changes.We give our full backing to this policy and will support all those who endeavour to carry it out.
Catherine Roper, Chief Constable for Wiltshire Police 24/05/24
Philip Wilkinson, Police and Crime Commissioner for Wiltshire and Swindon 24/05/24
Template v5WILTSHIRE POLICE POLICYSTOP and SEARCHDate of Publication: October 2022 Version:	7.0Next Review Date:	October 2024
POLICY STATEMENTWiltshire Police has undertaken to operate under the Home Office ‘Best Use of Stop and Search’ Scheme 2014. All stops and searches must be carried out in line with the rules set out in Code A of the Police & Criminal Evidence Act 1984 and in accordance with the College of Policing Authorised Professional Practice.The use of stop and search powers is a valuable and effective policing tactic to prevent crime, gain intelligence, disrupt illegal activity and secure the arrest of locally active criminals. If undertaken in the correct manner such tactics will effectively reduce crime and disorder and will have a positive impact on community relations.The police have a range of statutory powers of stop and search available to them, depending on the circumstances. Most, but not all, of these powers require an officer to have reasonable grounds for suspicion that an unlawful item is being carried.A stop and search is most likely to be fair and effective when:ï the search is justified, lawful and stands up to public scrutinyï the officer genuinely suspect that they will find the item searched for and it is objectively reasonable for them to suspect this, given the information available to them1ï the person understands why they have been searched and feels that they have been treatedwith respectï the search was necessary and was the most proportionate method the police officer could use to establish whether the person has such an item.Four core elements underpin the definition:1. The decision to stop and/or search a person must be fair.2. The search must be legal in basis and in application.3. Interaction with the public during the encounter must be professional.4. Police use of stop and search powers must be transparent and accountable.The suspicion should relate to the likelihood of the person being in possession of the item, not the likelihood that they are committing an offence. In such circumstances, finding the item and arresting the offender or, alternatively, eliminating the suspicion and avoiding an unnecessary arrest are both valid and successful outcomes.The grounds for the search should be fully explained to the person being stopped and searched, the officer must be able to give a specific explanation for suspecting the person of being in possession of the item: this should be based on specific information or intelligence, or some particular behaviour by the person. Personal factors can never support reasonable grounds for suspicion.Officers must consider alternatives to carrying out an actual search. This includes simply having a conversation with the person or asking the person to account for their whereabouts or actions, without going on to search. Officers should also give the person the opportunity to hand any item(s) over which may mean that a subsequent search is not necessary.Officers are not required to create a written record of dealings with a member of the public that merely amounts to a conversation or interaction such as asking someone what they are doing or where they are going. However, it is expected that Wiltshire Police officers will conduct themselves appropriately and treat people with courtesy and respect.1 This is an objective test in that it expects that a reasonable person given the same information would also suspect that the individual is carrying the item.
We must be proportionate and reasonable; the powers of a constable are significant and officers must be aware of the impact asking such questions may have on the individual. Officers are still expected to use their professional judgement when considering whether to record any interaction with the community in their pocket book where they consider appropriate.All stop and search encounters must be conducted with due regard to the sensitivities of the person being stopped and with regard to any local community issues regarding the use of such powers by police.Officers must fully record all Stop and Search encounters and be able to demonstrate grounds for the search within that record. All incidents of stop and searches will be recorded and maintained within existing Wiltshire Police systems in line with the requirements of Management of Police Information.All Stop and Searches must be overseen by a supervising officer. The supervisor will examine the validity of the grounds for the search, the power used in relation to the object of the search and the appropriate nature of the outcome and legitimacy of the search.The College of Policing has issued training guidance to help understanding and local training needs. Wiltshire Police has adopted and uses the College of Policing guidance as part of our Stop and Search training. More detailed guidance on an effective and fair stop and search can be found in the College of Policing Authorised Professional Practice on stop and search.Use of Body Worn VideoWhere available, body-worn video (BWV) should be used in accordance with the Body Worn Video Procedure.BWV recording must commence as soon as sufficient grounds are present to request compliance with the search. BWV should be activated so as to capture all relevant information in the time leading up to the person being detained for a search, the conduct of the search itself and the subsequent conclusion of the encounter.A BWV recording does not replace the need for a written record of the search/encounter to be completed by the searching officer and given to the subject either at the time or within any specified period.Whilst there is no specific power within PACE to take a photographic or video image of a person during a stop and search, such action is not explicitly prohibited. However, users must consider Art 8 ECHR (right to private life) and consider, if requested to stop recording by the subject, whether it is necessary to continue to do so. The presumption would be that recording a stop and search encounter is likely to be proportionate unless overriding circumstances to the contrary exist.BWV should not be used where officers conduct a search of subjects where intimate parts of the body are exposed except in the most exceptional of circumstances. The camera should be covered or directed away from the person and, where possible, audio recording should remain activated. The officer should explain to the person that the recording is for the protection of all parties and reassure them that intimate parts will not be filmed.Use of Section 60 of Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994Authorisation for the use of Section 60 will only be given by an officer of the rank of Inspector or above, who must reasonably believe that incidents involving serious violence may take place, and that such authorisation is necessary to prevent their occurrence.Once authorisation for the use of s60 has been given the authorising officer must, as soon as practicable, inform an officer of the rank of superintendent or above.
Initial authorisations will apply for a maximum of 24 hours (for any extension, an officer of the rank of Superintendent and above will authorise).Communication regarding the authorisation of a Section 60 to local communities should be (where applicable) made in advance. The outcomes should be communicated afterwards so that the public are informed of both the purpose and the result of the authorisation. Each Section 60 authorisation should have its own specific communications plan.POLICY AIMThe aim of this policy is to ensure that officers comply with the law and exercise their powers to stop and search members of the public fairly, responsibly, without unlawful discrimination and with respect for the dignity of any person being searched.Wiltshire Police’s approach to stop and search will seek to improve public confidence in policing services by:ï Demonstrating to communities the fair and proportionate use of police powersï Providing reassurance that policing encounters are managed in a way which will not negatively impact on our communitiesï Increasing accountability and transparency of police action to local communities through sharing of information on stop and search encountersï Monitoring the demographics of members of the public that are subject to stop and search encounters, and any disproportionate impact that may be evidentWiltshire Police will ensure that stop and search powers are lawful and used effectively by:ï Ensuring stop and search encounters are intelligence led, supporting Wiltshire Police in the prevention and detection of crimeï Focussing stop and search activities in locations that intelligence has identified as ‘problem areas’ï Effectively monitoring and evaluating the outcomes from stop and search encounters, including arrests made and intelligence gainedAPPLICABILITYAll police officers or staff that may undertake Stop and Search in the lawful execution of their duty.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEThe legal basis for Stop and Search encounters is set out within Code ‘A’ of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act (PACE).Wiltshire Police recognises its positive duty under Human Rights Act 1998: Article 5, the right to liberty and security; Article 8, the right to respect for private and family life; and Article 10, the freedom of expression.The policy will also take account of provisions made under the: Equality Act 2010; Road Traffic Act 1993, Misuse of Drugs Act 1971, Firearms Act 1968, Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994, Terrorism Act 2000’ Anti Social Behaviour Act 2003, Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006, Anti Social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014, Psychoactive Substances Act 2016 ss36 to 48.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSHome Office Best Use of Stop and Search Scheme Information Security PolicyFirearms Standard Operating Procedures Hate Crime Policy and Procedure Missing Persons Procedure
Ride Along Scheme Policy Community Complaints Trigger Policy Body Worn Video ProcedureAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEStop and SearchDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, UK General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWThe policy, along with Stops and Stop and Search data, will be continuously monitored, and updated to ensure full compliance with legislation. All stop searches are required to be recorded by law. Wiltshire Police will make the best use of technology to ensure every use of a power to Stop and Search is recorded accurately and efficiently..The force will continuously monitor the quality of Stop and Search and ensure the process is robust and quality assurance checks are highlighting any issues to drive improvements.Wiltshire Police will be open and transparent in our use of Stop and Search and welcomes scrutiny by independent organisations and our communities in how these powers are used.Members of the public will be given the opportunity to observe officers on duty, which might entail the conducting of Stop and Search, through the Ride Along Scheme. The Ride Along Scheme invites lay members of the public to apply to observe officers undertaking their everyday duties.Scrutiny Panels comprising members of the public and young people have been developed to review Stop and Search records and BWV on a regular basis. Wiltshire Police also has an internal panel which reviews Stop and Search information on a regular basis. Any issues raised by the panels will be directed to the force lead for stop search resolution. The panel will then receive feedback in relation to these issues.Feedback on how we perform our duties is important to us and will help improve the service we provide. Wiltshire Police expects its officers to treat all persons in a professional manner with respect and dignity . Complaints can be made through the following channels;ï Contact Wiltshire Police in person, via letter, via phone or via the websiteï Contacting the Independent Office Police Complaints.Professional standards will monitor complaints and will deal with those in the appropriate manner.This policy will be reviewed bi-annually and will examine: feedback from the Stop and Search Scrutiny Panel, changes in legislation, judicial rulings, examples of good practice from other Forces or other organisations, changes in Home Office Circulars, developments with NPCC Policy Unit and representations made by individuals.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThis policy is owned by the ACC Local Policing and Partnerships (Stop and Search Strategic Lead) and the Stop and Search Tactical Lead Insp James Williams. All queries regarding this policy should be directed to Stop and Search Tactical Lead or the Force Policy Officer.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnershipDepartment Responsible:	Operations - CountyPolicy Owner/Author:	Supt. Liz COLES / Ps 1909 Paul HarveyTechnical Author:	Andrew IRVING / Insp. James WILLIAMS Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor:	ACC Local Policing and PartnershipsRevision HistoryRevision DateVersionSummary of Changes31.07.20196.0Minor amendment to BWV section re commencing recording and directing the camera when conducting intimate searches.25.10.20227.0Authorisation level and initial timescale for s60 searches changed to Inspector and 24 hours in line with Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 andHome Office change to the Best Use of Stop and Search Scheme.ApprovalsThis document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team25.10.20227.0ACC Dave MINTY15.06.20226.4Insp James WILLIAMS (Tactical Lead)24.10.20227.0JNCC(Not required for all policies)N/AN/ADistributionThis document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersEquality Impact AssessmentConsultationList below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionInsp. James WILLIAMS,06.06.2022 /6.224.10.20226.4Pc. Thomas NEWMAN06.06.20226.2Implications of the Policy Training RequirementsFull review of training requirements is underway in the light of HMIC inspection and national thematic report on stop and search. A Stop Search Portal Page is accessible through internal Wiltshire Police systems which contain guidance for officers and supervisors and links to further reading and policy.IT InfrastructureNo major changes due to IST limitations at present – plan to remove recording from standalone database to Niche and to utilise the new mobile solution.
Template v8WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICYStudent Learner SafeguardingDate of Publication: April 2022 Version:	2.0Next Review Date:	April 2023
POLICY STATEMENTThe purpose of this policy is to set out the Wiltshire Police position on safeguarding student learners and apprentices and to inform everyone connected with the Force, and with whom it subcontracts or collaborates, of Force agreed policy with regard to the safeguarding of all individuals involved within the learning environment.All staff, officers, apprentices, learners and volunteers at Wiltshire Police have a duty under the guidance and legislation to identify anyone who may be at risk of experiencing harm or abuse at work, home, through online networks or in relationships and take appropriate action to ensure their safety.All individuals have a duty to act to ensure the welfare of those within the learning environment is paramount. Where it is known, or suspected, that an individual is experiencing safeguarding issues, this should immediately be reported to one of the below named designated Safeguarding Leads. All individuals within the learning environment have a personal and professional responsibility to ensure they understand safeguarding requirements and the processes to follow if they become aware of a safeguarding issue.Individuals will be treated sensitively and with dignity should a safeguarding incident/concern occur or an allegation of abuse be made. Wiltshire Police will treat such matters confidentially, notifying others on a ‘need to know basis’ under the direct guidance of the designated Safeguarding Lead.Whilst respecting individual confidentiality and GDPR regulations the Force must act and cannot guarantee confidentiality in all circumstances. Any individuals/organisations contacted will be done where it is believed to be in the best interests of the individual involved.All student learners and apprentices are reminded that they will abide by the Code of Ethics and conduct themselves accordingly whilst on and off duty.Wiltshire Police believe that:-ï All learners have the right to learn in a safe, open and caring environment and that their welfare is paramount.ï All learners have the right to expect staff and colleagues to listen to them.ï All learners, regardless of any Protected Characteristic(s), have the right to equal protection from all types of harm or abuse and should be valued and respected as individuals.ï Bullying in any form is strictly unacceptable and will not be tolerated.ï Working in close partnership with learners and collaborative companies/ institutions is essential in promoting a safe learning environment.ï Adopting robust safeguarding guidelines through procedures and a code of conduct for learners, staff and contractors is essential.ï It is essential to share information about any concerns raised with appropriate agencies or support networks.ï Working in conjunction with partners, Occupational Health and the Force’s Health and Wellbeing strategy is essential.ï All learners to have a ready point of contact, referral or support.ï All learners are expected to abide by the Code of EthicsThis Policy should enable consistent and effective decision making. Where operational or managerial circumstances require any decision making that would adversely affect adherence to this policy, in line with the ‘Statement of Intent’ of the Force and the police service ‘Code of Ethics’, if an officer/police staff member believes that they need to make a decision that steps outside of policy and procedure they should do so, if:
ï the officer/ police staff member raises the matter at the earliest opportunity (and ideally before any such decision is made) with their line manager declaring their intended (or actual) course of action if notification is made after the decision is taken,ï produces, in a timely manner, a signed and dated written explanation of why it is/ was deemed necessary to step outside of policy and procedure, andï maintain an adequate record of this written rationale for audit purposes appropriate to the circumstances/ contraventionï in the event that the officer/ police staff member feels unfairly treated they should report this to the designated Safeguarding Lead at the earliest opportunityROLES AND RESPONSIBILITESWiltshire Police has two designated Safeguarding Leads. The Safeguarding Leads have overall responsibility to maintain this document and make the force aware of any legislative changes.Safeguarding Lead for Student Learners - Head of People DevelopmentSafeguarding Lead for Wiltshire Police Staff and Officers - Head of Operational HREach course will have a dedicated Safeguarding Officer in the form of the lead trainer. Any issues that arise should be directed to the Safeguarding Officer who will take the necessary and appropriate action.If any person has concerns regarding another individual they should make contact with a Designated Safeguarding Officer (DSO). It is the role and responsibility of the Designated Safeguarding Officer to be aware of any changes in legislation.The Public Protection Department (PPD) are experts in Safeguarding and if DSO have any questions or concerns regarding safeguarding they should contact PPD for advice. Chapter 3 of the Working Together to Safeguard Children 2018 document outlines the statutory obligations on the Multi-Agency approach and the equal distribution between the agencies.Managers are responsible for ensuring that officers and staff follow this policy and its related procedures and, where appropriate, receive safeguarding training to support their responsibilities and level of contact with children and vulnerable adults.Officers, staff and volunteers are responsible for carrying out their duties in a way that actively safeguards and promotes the welfare of children and vulnerable adults. They must also act in a way that protects them from wrongful allegations as far as possible. They must bring safeguarding concerns to the attention of the safeguarding leads.For further advise and guidance please speak to the Duty PPD Supervisor or outside core hours the Force Incident Manager (FIM) or Duty Inspector.DEFINITIONSChild. Health & Safety Law in relation to young people at work defines the term ‘child’ as anyone who has not yet reached the official minimum school leaving age (MSLA). Pupils will reach the MSLA in the school year in which they turn 16.Young Person. The term ‘young person’ is anyone under the age of 18.The Force does not act in loco parentis for apprentices under the age of 18 and parental responsibility remains with apprentices’ parents, guardians or carers in accordance with Section 2 of the Children Act 1989. The only exception to this is in the event of an apprentice requiring urgent medical treatment, including any emergency operation, when parents, guardians or carers are unable to physically give consent.
If the guardian of an apprentice is designated as the local authority social services department, but the apprentice has been in long term care of foster parents or become very close to their foster family then, for minor issues, The Force Apprentice/Student Learner Lead should consider whether it is more appropriate to contact the foster parent in the first instance. Any serious issues will need to be discussed with social services, via the Public Protection Department (PPD).The fact that a child has reached 16 years of age, is living independently, or is in further education, does not change his or her status or entitlement to services or protection under the Children Act 2004.Student. The term ‘student’ is for any officer or police staff member that has not yet been confirmed in rank or post and is studying towards an award or accreditation, including those on an apprenticeship. (Those who are confirmed in rank or post but completing an apprenticeship will be classified as a student for the purposes of this policy and for the duration of their apprenticeship.)Vulnerable Adult. The term ‘vulnerable adult’ means a person, aged 18 or over, who is or may be in need of community care services by reason of disability, age or illness; and is or may be unable to take care or unable to protect him or herself against significant harm or exploitation.Physical abuse may involve hitting, shaking, throwing, poisoning, burning or scalding, drowning, suffocating, or otherwise causing physical harm. Physical harm may also be caused when a parent or carer fabricates the symptoms of, or deliberately induces, illness in a child.Emotional abuse may involve conveying to young people that they are worthless or unloved, inadequate. It may involve serious bullying (including cyberbullying), causing young people frequently to feel frightened or in danger, or the exploitation or corruption of children or vulnerable adults. Some level of emotional abuse is involved in all types of abuse though it may occur alone.Sexual abuse involves forcing or enticing a young or vulnerable person to take part in sexual activities, not necessarily involving a high level of violence. The activities may involve physical contact, including assault by penetration (for example, rape or oral sex) or non-penetrative acts such as masturbation, kissing, rubbing and touching outside of clothing. They may also include non- contact activities, such as looking at, or in the production of, sexual images or watching sexual activities, or grooming a child or vulnerable person in preparation for abuse (including via the internet). Sexual abuse is not solely perpetrated by adult males. Women can also commit acts of sexual abuse, as can other children and young people.Neglect is the persistent failure to meet a child’s or vulnerable adult’s basic physical and/or psychological needs, likely to result in the serious impairment of their health or development. Neglect may occur during pregnancy as a result of maternal substance abuse. Neglect may involve a parent or carer failing to provide adequate food, clothing or shelter.Discriminatory Abuse includes behaviour towards a student that is racist, sexist, based on a person’s disability and other forms of harassment.Financial or Material Abuse is stealing possessions or money from a child or vulnerable adult or bullying to force them to hand over money or possessions. Also, includes theft, fraud, exploitation, pressure in connection with wills, property or inheritance of financial transactions, or the misuse or misappropriation of property, possessions or benefits.Institutional abuse/Poor practice is inappropriate or disrespectful or insufficient care, which affects the whole setting and denies or restricts dignity, choice or fulfilment of persons at risk.
Non-Contact Abuse are abusive acts which do not involve actual physical contact; pornographic or violent films, sexual acts performed in front of the victim, violent acts with the abused present.Risk to self and/or others may include but is not exclusive to severe self-harm, suicidal tendencies or potential risk of harming others, which may or may not include children. This may be as a consequence of an individual experiencing a significant level of personal, emotional trauma and/or stress. Self-harm is a term that covers a range of behaviours used as a coping mechanism where an individual harm themselves by psychically inflicting pain or excess to deal with emotional pain.Sexual Exploitation is a form of sexual abuse where a child or young person are sexually exploited for money, power or status. It can involve violent, humiliating and degrading sexual assaults. Consent cannot be given (under the age of 18 years) even where a young person believes they are voluntarily engaging in sexual activity with the person who is exploiting them. Sexual exploitation does not always involve physical contact and can happen on-line.Sexting generally refers to the sending of sexually explicit images via text, email, MSN or through social networking sites. For example, this could be a picture of a boy or young man exposing himself or a young woman in a state of undress. “Sexting” is more common than you may think and has been found to be commonplace amongst children and young people. Young people (under 18) texting intimate pictures of themselves via social media are committing a criminal offence (distribution of child pornography) and can face police action even if their actions are entirely voluntary.Online Abuse is any type of abuse that happens on the web, whether through social networks, playing online games or using mobile phones. Children and young people may experience cyberbullying, grooming, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation or emotional abuse.Forced Marriage - forcing a person into a marriage is a crime in England and Wales. A forced marriage is one entered into without the full and free consent of both parties and where violence, threats or any other form of coercion is used to cause a person to enter into a marriage.Honour Based Violence or so-called honour-based violence (HBV) encompasses crimes which have been committed to protect or defend the honour of a family and/or community, including female genital mutilation, forced marriage and practices such as breast ironing. All forms of HBV are abuse and should be handled and escalated as such.Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) is a mandatory reporting duty and comprises all procedures involving partial or total removal of the external female genitalia or other injury to the female genital organs. It is illegal in the UK and a form of child abuse. Section 5B of the Female Genitalia Mutilation Act 2003 (as inserted by section 74 of the Serious Crime Act 2015) places a duty upon teachers/tutors to report to the Police where they discover that FGM appears to have been carried out on a child under 18 years.PREVENTPrevent is about safeguarding and supporting those vulnerable to radicalisation.Prevent has 3 clear aims:1. Respond to the ideological challenge we face from terrorism and aspects of extremism, and the threat we face from those who promote these views.2. Provides practical help to prevent people from being drawn into terrorism and ensure they are given appropriate advice and support.3. Works with a wide range of sectors (including education, criminal justice, faith charities, online and health) where there are risks of radicalisation that we need to deal with.1. 
The aim of Prevent is to reduce the threat to the UK from terrorism by stopping people becoming terrorists or supporting terrorism.Delivery of Prevent is grounded in early intervention and safeguarding. Prevent addresses all forms of terrorism and we continue to prioritise according to the threat posed to our national security. The allocation of resources will be proportionate to the threats we face. The most significant of these threats is currently from terrorist organisations associated with Al Qa’ida, Daesh, terrorists associated with extreme right-wing ideologies and lone actors inspired by such organisations. This list is not exhaustive.Risk and threat to the UK is subject to constant review and updated accordingly. The UK Government remains absolutely committed to protecting freedom of speech. But preventing terrorism will mean challenging extremist (and non-violent) ideas that are also part of a terrorist ideology, including instances of unclear, mixed or unstable ideology. Prevent also facilitates interventions to stop people moving from extremist activity to terrorist-related activity. The Counter- Extremism Strategy defines extremism as ‘the vocal or active opposition to our fundamental values, including democracy, the rule of law, individual liberty, and respect and tolerance for different faiths and beliefs. We also regard calls for the death of members of our armed forces as extremist.Wiltshire police have a clear legal responsibility to fulfil the prevent duty statement and protect its staff from material and ideologies that delivered without context or explanation could be viewed by a person and started on the path to radicalisation.When any member of staff is spoken to in a professional development manner, Wiltshire Police will demonstrate that the speaker influence will not be of a radicalising nature.Wiltshire police will offer context to all training where extremist narratives are delivered so to ensure that any narrative is balanced. They will offer support and guidance to all staff to help build resilience to any form of radicalisation.Wiltshire Police will ensure that their staff are sufficiently trained to spot the signs of a person who might be vulnerable to radicalisation whether that person is an employee of the Police Service or a person who the police come into contact with.Wiltshire Police along with colleagues from Counter Terrorism Policing will work to support any member of staff who raises a concern around a person’s vulnerability to radicalisation.POLICY AIMWiltshire Police is committed to:1) Creating a safe and secure environment for all its staff, officers, apprentices, learners and volunteers.2) Identifying, eliminating and managing any risks to health, safety and wellbeing of individuals in any of its activities.3) Identifying	a	‘Safeguarding	Lead’	who	has	the	responsibility	for	overseeing	the implementation of the policy.APPLICABILITYAll police staff, officers, apprentices and learners, including the extended police family and those working voluntarily or under contract to Wiltshire Police must be aware of, and are required to comply with, all relevant policy and associated procedures.
LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEPREVENT Duty GuidanceCounter Terrorism and Security Act 2015 Sex Offences Act 2003Education Act 2002 section 175Safeguarding Children and Safer Recruitment in Education 2011 Equality Act 2010Children Act 1989 Children Act 2004 Working Together 2018Care Act- Safeguarding Vulnerable Adults 2014RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSHealth and Safety Policy Code of EthicsDomestic Abuse Policy and Procedure Prevent PolicyPublic Protection and Safeguarding PoliciesTraining and Probationary Procedural Guidance for Student OfficersAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEThere are no associated Authorised Professional Practice areas at present.DATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEWThis policy will be reviewed every year in the light of any national policy or procedural change or due to changes to law or Force strategy or at such other times as may become necessary. Any review will take into consideration feedback/lessons learned from issues reported to and dealt by the dedicated Safeguarding Officers’ and/or Safeguarding Lead.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Head of Operational HR and the Head of the People Development are responsible for this policy. All queries relating to this policy should be directed to the Head of Operational HR, the Head of the People Development or the Force Policy Officer.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	HR Operations and People Development Policy Owner/Author:	Sarah HARDING & David EDDY / Lucy JESKE Technical Author:Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: Director of People and ChangeRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes08.04.20211.0Draft v0.3 published as substantive version 1.0.01.04.20222.0General review and inclusion of PREVENT responsibilities.Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionForce Policy Officer14.04.20222.0Head of Operational HR04/02/20210.3JNCC (Not required for all policies)08.04.20211.0Distribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: (state method here)Diversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionSarah Harding, Head of Operational HR31/03/22V 2.0David Eddy, Head of People Development31/03/22V 2.0Clair Cross, Unison31/03/22V 2.0Phillip Matthews, Federation31/03/22V 2.0Implications of the Policy: Training RequirementsNo additional training requirements.IT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure required.
  Form 535 Template v4   WILTSHIRE POLICE POLICY AND PROCEDURESubstance and Alcohol MisuseDate of Publication: March 2021 Version:	3.0Next Review Date:	March 2023
TABLE OF CONTENTS1. INTRODUCTION	32. POLICY STATEMENT	33. POWERS AND LEGISLATION	34. CONFIDENTIALITY	45. AIMS AND OBJECTIVES	56. PROVISIONS OF SUPPORT	57. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES	67.1 Individuals who suspect they have a Substance Misuse or Alcohol Misuse Problem . 67.2 Colleagues	67.3 Managers	67.4 The Occupational Health Unit	77.5 The Human Resources Department	77.6 Trade Unions and Staff Associations	88. SUBSTANCE MISUSE TESTING - SCOPE	89	SUBSTANCE MISUSE TESTING PROTOCOLS AND OUTCOMES	1010. MONITORING AND REVIEW	1411. APPEALS PROCESS	14RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	14AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE	14DATA PROTECTION	14FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	14WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICY	14APPENDIX A - Supporting a Member of Staff Who Volunteers an Issue Surrounding Their Alcohol or Drug Misuse	15APPENDIX B - Illegal Drug Misuse – Decision Making Guidance	16APPENDIX C - Possible Signs of Substance Misuse	17APPENDIX D - Drug Screening: Protocol for Testing	21APPENDIX E - Alcohol Screening: Protocol for Testing	26APPENDIX F - Guidance On and Overview of Testing Procedures	27DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	30
1. IntroductionThe misuse of alcohol and drugs can lead to reduced efficiency, increased risk of accidents, increased sickness absence and potential misconduct. This can have serious consequences for staff, their families, friends and colleagues and the wider police service.This policy and procedure applies to all police officers and staff irrespective of rank, grade or role, employed by or working under the authority of Wiltshire Police including;ï Temporary staff and traineesï Persons seconded from other forcesï Members of the Special Constabularyï Any Volunteer or Contractor acting in the interest of Wiltshire Policeï Colleagues within the OPCC2. Policy StatementWiltshire Police is committed to:ï Providing a working environment that gives consideration to the health, welfare and well-being of all individuals working within it.ï Providing a confidential environment in which individuals can raise concerns they may have. Confidentiality in principle shall be in place, unless by maintaining confidentiality, it puts the individual themselves, other colleagues or member of the public at risk.ï Providing a customer focused service to everyone in Wiltshire. This is supported by a robust and transparent approach to the Force Values and professional standards issues.Wiltshire Police does not approve of the excessive or inappropriate use of alcohol or the misuse of alcohol or the misuse of drugs, whether illegal or legal. Possessing and supplying illegal drugs are criminal offences.However, help will be offered to those who volunteer that they may have a substance misuse or alcohol misuse problem. All individuals are encouraged to volunteer that they have a substance misuse or alcohol misuse problem.This policy is aligned with that published by the National Police Chiefs Council (formerly Association of Chief Police Officers).This policy is in keeping with the force values and behaviours and wellbeing strategy.3. Powers and Legislation3.1 Discretionary Powers:Wiltshire Police has discretionary powers to undertake pre-employment screening of all staff.3.2 Disciplinary Proceedings:It should be clearly noted that with respect to substance screening, a request made under this policy for a police officer to provide a sample for analysis is a lawful order under the Police Regulations.Refusal to provide a sample for testing is a disciplinary offence and will result in formal investigation by the Professional Standards Department (PSD) or Counter Corruption Unit (CCU).Table of Contents
For:ï Police officers, it is a breach of Police Regulations (Regulations 10 and 19A); andï Police staff it is a breach of the general code of conduct, and therefore would be subject to the Police Staff Discipline Procedure.All staff should be clear of the consequences of:ï refusing to provide a sample; orï failing to make themselves available so that a suitable sample can be obtained.The presumption of possession that would arise from a ‘positive’, medically confirmed test result should be, in the case of police officers and staff, treated as discreditable conduct. Such action could potentially result in dismissal from Wiltshire Police.3.3 Primary Legislation:This policy is secondary to any primary legislation, e.g. the:ï Road Traffic Act 1988;ï Transport & Works Act 1992ï Railway and Transport Safety Act 2003;ï Misuse of Drugs Act 1971; or any future legislation that governs policy or procedures relevant to substance misuse in the workplace.Neither does it undermine the obligations on managers to investigate suspected criminal or disciplinary misconduct.This document has been drafted to comply with the principles of the Human Rights Act. Proportionality has been identified as the key to Human Rights compliance, this means striking a fair balance between the rights of the individual and those of the rest of the community. There must be a reasonable relationship between the aim to be achieved and the means used.Equality and Diversity issues have also been considered to ensure compliance with the Equality Act 2010 and meet our legal obligation in relation to the equality duty. In addition, Data Protection, Freedom of Information and Health and Safety Issues have been considered.Adherence to this policy and procedure will therefore ensure compliance with all relevant legislation and internal policies.4. ConfidentialityWhere an individual seeks help from the Occupational Health Unit (OHU), the wider Human Resources Department (HR), and/or a line manager. the matter is to be treated confidentially unless maintaining confidentiality could put the individual themselves, other colleagues or members of the public at risk.Any individual who decides whether or not to share such information is required to record their decision-making process and should record why information was or was not shared, how, when and to whom. In order to conduct a risk assessment as to whether or not to share information advice can be sought from PSD and HR.Wiltshire Police is committed to confidentiality in principle, though confidentiality would not be maintained if it could put the public at risk.Table of Contents
5. Aims and ObjectivesThe aims of this policy are to: -ï Contribute to a healthy and safe working environment.ï Maintain the integrity of Wiltshire Police and those working/serving within it.The objectives of this procedure in support of the above are to: -ï Increase awareness of the effects of alcohol and drugs and of the likely symptoms of misuse.ï Minimise the chances of people who misuse drugs entering Wiltshire Police.ï Deter individuals from substance misuse through the application of this policy that makes detection a real prospect.ï Inform individuals of their responsibilities regarding substance misuse problems.ï Encourage individuals who have a substance misuse problem to seek help at an early stage, prior to any request for a sample.ï Provide guidance as to the sources of support available to individuals with a substance misuse or alcohol misuse problem and where possible, assist those individuals to return to full health.ï Provide for fair and consistent treatment of individuals who volunteer as having a substance misuse or alcohol misuse problem.ï Provide appropriate, effective and legitimate processes for testing of individuals for substance or alcohol misuse.ï Protect individuals who may be vulnerable to malicious allegations of substance misuse or alcohol misuse and minimise the potential for corruption of any member of the Force due to their vulnerability caused by their substance or alcohol misuse.6. Provisions of SupportIt is recognised that substance or alcohol misuse problems may develop for a variety of reasons and over a lengthy period of time. They can have a significant impact upon an individual’s life and their ability to carry out work safely and effectively. Problems can, however, be successfully overcome and it is recommended that they are treated in a similar way to other ill health problems. Early identification and treatment is also important.Individuals suffering from substance or alcohol misuse problems are encouraged to seek help and treatment in overcoming them.Wiltshire Police is committed to providing advice and guidance on overcoming these problems. A referral can be made to OHU who will be able to advise regarding fitness for work issues. Individuals should be strongly encouraged to seek advice/support from their GP. OHU will be able to request medical reports from the GPs in order to maintain a partnership approach.The aim of any support will be to help move an individual with substance or alcohol misuse problems towards a full recovery with a view to facilitating a return to work to undertake the full range of duties commensurate with their role.Appropriate time off work to attend treatment for substance misuse or alcohol misuse problems, as recommended by an individual’s General Practitioner or the OHU, shall be accommodated where possible.Table of Contents
Any periods of absence as a result of treatment for substance misuse or alcohol misuse problems shall be treated as periods of sickness absence, as with any other form of ill health. Alcohol and drugs addictions are conditions which are expressly excluded from the scope of the definition of disability in the Equality Act 2010, however, an individual who suffers from ill health e.g. depression as a result of their addiction may well be deemed as having a disability and a protected characteristic under the Equality Act 2010.Appropriate Modification will be made to duties, during any period of treatment for substance misuse or alcohol misuse problems. This could be in consultation with the Occupational Health Unit, or considering advice taken from a ‘fit note’. The modification will be for a fixed period and subject to operational requirements and feasibility in line with the Attendance Management Policy.7. Roles and Responsibilities7.1 Individuals who suspect they have a Substance Misuse or Alcohol Misuse ProblemEvery individual has a responsibility under the Health and Safety at Work Act (1974) to take reasonable care for the health and safety of themselves and others and to co-operate with the Force’s requirements regarding health and safety. Individuals who have, or suspect that they have a substance misuse or alcohol misuse problem are to seek assistance as soon as possible from the OHU by contacting a member of the HR or a line manager, in order to obtain a referral. Individuals may also wish to approach a staff association or Trade Union/Federation/WEPA representative for support.When an individual is taking any medication (whether prescribed or non-prescribed) that has possible adverse side effects and they are involved in work of a hazardous nature they must notify their line manager immediately in order that work of a non-hazardous nature may be arranged.7.2 ColleaguesWhen an individual suspects that a colleague may have a substance misuse or alcohol misuse problem they should, initially, encourage that person to seek assistance. If this concern persists they should discuss the matter in confidence with a manager, a member of the HR or the CCU.If individuals do not feel able to report behaviour when they feel it is inappropriate to any of these, they can use the anonymous email electronic reporting system, this will be found on SharePoint and via the ‘Standards Portal’ (also found on SharePoint). Colleagues should not, even for the best of motives, ‘cover up’ for anyone whose work or behaviour is suffering as a result of an alcohol or drug related problem.Where an individual has reasonable grounds to believe that a colleague is involved in illegal drug related activity they must inform the Professional Standards, via ProfStand@wiltshire.police.uk or CCU@wiltshire.police.uk7.3 ManagersManagers have a responsibility to be aware of the content of this policy and procedure as they have an important role to play in identifying problems at work. Deterioration in work performance and/or changes in patterns of behaviour may be noticed by a manager with or without the obvious signs of alcohol or drug misuse (see Appendix C for further guidance). In these circumstances OHU will provide advice and assistance for managers if required but line management will continue to have overall day to day responsibility for the safety and well-being of the individual at work.
If approached by an individual declaring that they have, or may have, a substance misuse or alcohol misuse problem, managers are to offer the individual advice, support and guidance in a sympathetic and confidential manner. They should encourage the individual to seek specialist help, through the OHU (by means of a referral) their General Practitioner or direct from a specialist agency. They will maintain confidentiality where practical although it may be appropriate to disclose information on occasions.7.4 The Occupational Health UnitThe Occupational Health Unit will deal with any referrals made by a manager or member of the HR Department. They will provide a point of contact and liaison between the individual, the line manager, the relevant HR advisor/manager, the General Practitioner and any specialist agency.They will maintain confidentiality where practical although it may be appropriate to disclose information on occasions.There are, however, some circumstances in which the interests of the proper administration of justice may over-ride an absolute confidentiality. In particular, the Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 and the Code of Practice issued under it agreed between Wiltshire Police and the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) place a personal responsibility on the individual officer or member of staff to declare any matter that may affect their credibility as a witness in a court case. In some circumstances, substance misuse on the part of an officer or a member of staff acting as a witness may have to be revealed to the Crown Prosecution Service, as the damage to the credibility of the officer as a witness may be a factor to be considered in a decision whether to proceed with a prosecution.The personal responsibility under the Criminal Procedure and Investigation Act 1996 should be drawn to the attention of an officer/member of staff, by the Occupational Health Unit, at the time at which any self-declaration of a substance misuse problem is made. The need to make a declaration to CPS will not arise in every case; each should be considered on its own facts and merits. Any declaration to CPS should be properly managed, with appropriate support provided to the individual. Advice can be provided by contacting ProfStand@wiltshire.police.uk or CCU@wiltshire.police.uk7.5 The Human Resources DepartmentThe Human Resources Department will support individuals in the practical application of this procedure by offering advice to managers who are dealing with work related performance problems, by advising on reasonable targets and timescales and by advising on other available processes e.g. referrals to the OHU, disciplinary/misconduct procedures etc.If approached by an individual declaring that they have, or may have, a substance or alcohol misuse problem, members of the HR Department are to offer the individual advice, support and guidance in a sympathetic and confidential manner. It may, however, be appropriate to disclose information as outlined in the confidentiality statement in this policy. They should also encourage the individual to seek specialist help, through the OHU, their General Practitioner or direct from a specialist agency.7.6 Trade Unions and Staff AssociationsTrade Union/Staff Association representatives have agreed to encourage individuals to seek assistance in accordance with the provisions of this procedure. It may be appropriate to disclose information as outlined in the confidentiality statement in this policy or to consider and under referrals to the Occupational Health Unit. Should an individual request it, a representative may attend any discussions with a manager.
8. Substance Misuse Testing – ScopeThe testing regime will be conducted to a scale that is proportional to any identified issues surrounding drug misuse.Testing may be carried out in the following circumstances:ï Testing of Police Officers during their probationary period,ï Testing with cause (that is, where there is a reasonable suspicion of substance misuse)ï As part of a random routine testing regimeï Random screening of officers in posts identified by the Chief Officer as being Vulnerable, (safety critical) (vulnerable and security sensitive)The intention of a testing regime is preventive. The testing regime is designed to:ï Minimise the chances of substance misusers entering the police service in the first place.ï Deter officers from substance misuse through the application of a policy that makes detection a real possibility.ï Encourage those with a substance misuse problem to identify them, so that they may be supported in seeking treatment.ï Screen officers in vulnerable areas, so as to minimise any risk of operations being prejudiced by impaired judgement.ï Protect officers in vulnerable areas in which they may be subject to malicious allegations of substance misuse.There is a power to test all Wiltshire Police staff if it is suspected that a police staff member is misusing controlled drugs. For “cause” to be established, the test of “reasonable suspicion” must be satisfied. It will be made clear to the staff member that testing “with cause” may either prove or disprove intelligence or allegations made. A single and unsubstantiated allegation, particularly if made by a member of the public who may have malicious intent, would not normally amount to cause. ‘With Cause’ tests may only be conducted with the written authority of Head of Professional Standards or the Detective Inspector CCU. This authority will be recorded within the CCU.Wiltshire Police staff for the purpose of this policy is:Intelligence, which is considered to initiate with cause procedures, will where possible be audited to check its provenance and credibility.Officers (of all ranks) working in the following fields may be liable to be tested without cause.8.1 Identified Vulnerable Posts / Safety Critical Postsï Firearms officers. All officers authorised to use firearms, or who directly supervise such officers.ï Drivers and motorcyclists who have received the appropriate training to use the police exemptions under the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984. All officers who have receivedï 
the appropriate training to use the police exemptions under the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984, and holding posts in which they may be called upon to use those exemptions.ï POLSA Teams. All officers who are members or supervisors of Police Search Advisor teams8.2 Vulnerable and Security Sensitive Postsï Serious and Organised Crime Unit officersï Foundation undercover officers and coordinatorï All Superintendent Posts (due to command responsibilities)ï Firearms Commanders (ITFC, TFC and SFC)ï CCU Officersï Dedicated Source Unit Officersï All members of the Force Fortitude Teamï Special Branch Officersï New members of the Wiltshire Police (Police Officers, relevant Police Staff, members of the Special Constabulary, Officers on Transfer, and Volunteers)ï All members of the Wiltshire intelligence Unit8.3 Testing covers the illicit use of the following substances:ï Amphetamines (including ecstasy)ï Cannabisï Cocaineï Opiates (e.g. morphine and heroin)ï Benzodiazepinesï Where testing is carried out in accordance with 19A(1)(a) because the Chief Officer has reasonable cause to suspect, on the basis of intelligence, that the officer has used a controlled drug. The testing may cover one other controlled drug or drug group in addition to the controlled drugs listed above.There may be legitimate reasons for a drug being present in a specimen. Officers required to take a test must declare all medications they are taking. The content of such declarations will be confidential to the Occupational Health Unit, and to the medical officer reviewing the result of a test. It is explicit within the medical declaration form that failure to disclose fully will be regarded as a failure of the test.Where a positive result occurs, failure to make a full disclosure on the pre-test medical questionnaire will not be a reason to negate the positive result.Testing of individuals for potential substance misuse may be carried out in the following circumstances: -> Testing with cause (i.e. where there is a reasonable suspicion of substance misuse, see section on testing with cause for further guidance).> Pre-employment screening and testing in the probationary period (see below paragraph for guidance)> Random screening of officers identified by the Chief Officer as being in a vulnerable or safety critical post.> As part of a random routine testing regime.Table of Contents
Those applying for appointment as a police officer, except where on direct transfer from another force and police officer probationers will be liable to be randomly tested.In the nature of their duties, many individuals and particularly those working undercover will have close associations with criminals. Those whose duties bring them into contact with drug dealers are particularly vulnerable to malicious allegations that they are themselves drug users. A liability for such individuals to be tested enables it to be demonstrated that they remain ‘clean’. In accordance with prior SLT (now ELT) Guidance, all individuals (of all ranks or grades) working in the following safety critical posts will be liable to be randomly tested: -ï Test Purchase Officersï Undercover Officersï Drug Liaison OfficersOne additional drug or drug group (for ‘with cause’ testing only, where the reason for the test is based on intelligence and the officer has been informed of the drug(s) or drug group(s) for which he or she is being tested.9.0   Substance Misuse Testing Protocols and OutcomesSubstance misuse testing will be carried out using samples of oral fluid (saliva) and/or urine in the respect of illegal drugs and samples of breath in the respect of alcohol. Hair may be used as a sample for testing in police recruitment, for police staff recruitment, police recruits and transferees. An independent accredited company will be used to obtain and process the samples. Testing will take place in locations that are accessible to all including those with disabilities.Where an individual refuses to provide a sample in accordance with this procedure the matter will be referred to an Appropriate Authority (AA) within Professional Standards Department (Head of Professional Standards, D/Insp CCU and D/Insp PSD).Such a refusal may result in misconduct/ a disciplinary proceeding being considered due to a loss of confidence in that individual’s ability to undertake their current role. This could result in a risk assessment of their position in the organisation. The individual could be temporarily transferred from their post and an alternative posting arranged with immediate effect or the person might require suspension from the workplace.Where a positive result identifies the potential for illegal drug misuse, the case will be referred to the Head of Professional Standards Department who will assess what further action is to be taken. Each case will be decided upon its specific circumstances.The independent accredited company will send the results to the occupational health unit or the point of contact within CCU, as agreed by the Head of HR and the OHU. The results of any analysis will be immediately communicated to the individual who provided the sample and their manager in appropriate circumstances. Any decision whether or not to disclose results should be recorded.A distinction needs to be made between testing and self-declaration. An individual with a substance misuse problem should be encouraged to identify themselves and will be assisted in seeking treatment. Any self-declaration must be made before an individual is required to take a test. In particular, a self-declaration by an individual after they have been notified of the requirement to take a test cannot be used to frustrate the disciplinary/misconduct or criminal proceedings that might result from a positive test result. Prior to giving a sample, individuals will be asked to declare whether they have consulted the OHU regarding a substance misuse problem.
There may be legitimate reasons for a drug being present in a specimen. For example, the presence of morphine may indicate heroin abuse, or the use of a legitimate medicine (e.g. a painkiller or an anti-diarrhoea preparation). Individuals required to take a test should declare all medications they are taking. The content of such declarations are confidential to the OHU or the medical officer from the independent accredited company which has been agreed by the Head of HR and OHU.A substance misuse problem may be considered as an illness. Where there is reason to believe that an individual may have a substance misuse problem a medical report will be obtained. Where circumstances include potential poor performance or attendance or issues of conduct these will be considered under the relevant procedure and in light of the findings of the medical report.9.1 Substance Misuse Testing - RandomThe point of contact within the CCU will be responsible for arranging the random testing. They will establish officers that are on duty on the chosen date and provide the list of ID numbers to the independent accredited service provider on attendance at the test venue. The chosen quantity of officers will then be randomly selected from the list by the independent service provider representative.9.2 Substance Misuse Testing – ‘with cause’Wiltshire Police may request that an individual be tested if they have cause to suspect misuse of controlled drugs or alcohol. The requirement to take a test should be imposed by an officer of an appropriate senior rank. For ‘cause’ to be established, the test of reasonable suspicion must be satisfied.An officer is required to comply with such a request in accordance with police regulations. This requirement under Police Regulations does not apply to police staff however police staff are obliged to comply with all reasonable instructions and abide by all force policies in accordance with the Standards of Professional Behaviour.An individual’s non-compliance with a request for a sample will be dealt with as per Appendix D paragraph 12 below. It must always be made clear to the individual being tested that testing may either prove or disprove intelligence or any allegations made. A single and unsubstantiated allegation would not normally amount to cause unless, for example, the circumstances of the allegation were particularly significant in their potential implications or potentially linked to other allegations.Circumstances may arise through a variety of sources where colleagues have grounds to believe that an individual is involved in illegal drug abuse. Where such grounds exist, information should be immediately reported to Professional Standards so that an assessment can be made of the circumstances. All such reports will be evaluated and the action taken will be proportionate to the standard of intelligence received or the evidence gained through further investigation.Where such information is received, risk assessments will be initiated by the Professional Standards point of contact and will involve, at the appropriate time all other relevant parties, for example line manager, relevant HR Officer and the Occupational Health Unit. The nature of the risk assessment will depend upon the individual concerned and the nature of their work within the force. The development of the intelligence will invariably result in a number of options being considered by the AA, Professional Standards Department.Table of Contents
Where the intelligence is limited it may be necessary to meet with the individual concerned.In these circumstances a meeting will be arranged with the individual concerned, HR representative and a member of the Professional Standards (PSD or CCU). Such a meeting is designed to encourage self-referral prior to any escalation in the investigation process. Individuals may wish to seek advice from a Trade Union/Staff Association in these circumstances and are entitled to be accompanied at such meetings by a colleague, Trade Union official, representative of the Police Federation or member of a staff support group.Where the individual fails to comply with the above then a more formal approach will be adopted and consideration will be given to use of the relevant disciplinary/misconduct procedure.9.3 With Cause – ExtendedAn officer of at least the rank of Assistant Chief Constable may authorise a maximum of three samples of urine or oral fluid (saliva) to be required from an individual in their force (or on secondment to or from their force) where there is corroborative intelligence which gives reasonable cause to suspect that the individual has used a controlled drug over an extended period or has been under the influence of alcohol whilst at work (i.e. on more than one occasion).The three samples can be required over a maximum period of 90 days, with one day being the day on which the first sample is required and the period finishing at midnight on day 90. When calculating the 90 day period, no account should be taken of any periods of sick leave.The individual will not be given any advance notice of the requirement to provide each sample.The individual will be informed at the time that the first sample is required that two further samples may be required within the designated time period. On each occasion a sample is taken the individual will be informed of the drug(s) or drug group(s) against which his or her samples will be tested.The officer will be entitled to have a ‘police friend’ as defined in The Police (Conduct) Regulations 2020 present when the samples are being taken. However, a delay in a police friend attending will not delay the testing procedure provided that the officer has been able to consult a police friend. A member of police staff will be entitled to be accompanied as outlined in the Police Staff Disciplinary Procedure.9.4 AlcoholAlcohol is a substance which can be misused and which can impair judgement. However, it is in a different category from controlled drugs, in that its use is not illegal. Some misuse of alcohol can be an offence. For example, an individual who is drunk and disorderly in a public place or an individual who attempts to drive a vehicle whilst over the prescribed limit commits an offence.Individuals have a general responsibility to present themselves fit for duty. If their judgement is impaired by the consumption of alcohol, they are unlikely to be fit for duty. It is for a senior manager to determine whether an individual is unfit for general duties, due to consumption of alcohol. However, reporting for duty whilst having previously consumed alcohol (for example, on the previous evening) does not equate with the criminal offence of using drugs. Managerial action needs to reflect this.
As with drugs, self-declaration of an alcohol-related problem is a matter that should be managed through the Occupational Health Unit, rather than being regarded as a purely disciplinary/ misconduct matter.Officers and staff subject of random drug testing are subject to a breath test using breath testing equipment capable of taking measurements at the 13 micrograms percentage level.Any officer or staff will be considered unfit for work if they have 13mg or more of alcohol in their breath (or equivalent in urine and blood). Positive results for with cause testing and random testing may lead to criminal action or formal disciplinary proceedings.9.5 Psychoactive Substances (Legal Highs)The availability and use of new psychoactive substances (legal highs) has increased and is a developing drug market.Despite the claims of manufacturers and vendors, the contents of such products are difficult to establish and may contain Cannaboids and other controlled substances.The purchase and use of such substances is not considered appropriate for police officers and members of police staff serving with Wiltshire Police. This does not include legal products sold at reputable outlets such as Health Food Stores on the High Street.Any concerns regarding the inappropriate use of such a substance by a colleague should be reported to the CCU via the Anonymous Email facility on SharePoint.Support for users of such substances can if necessary be provided by Occupational Health.9.6 Anabolic SteroidsAnabolic steroids are misused by athletes and body builders to increase muscle bulk. As well as their anabolic (muscle building) action, they also have androgenic (masculinising) actions. There are no real acute symptoms or signs of taking anabolic steroids, but over a period of time they cause:ï Much more rapid weight (muscle) gain than usualï Increased greasiness of skin and hairï Increased spots or ‘acne’ï An increase in aggressive behaviourWhilst it is not illegal to possess steroids, there is a culture within some gymnasiums whereby there is suspected to be steroid abuse. Where employees attend such venues there is a wider issue of vulnerability to Wiltshire Police employees being accessible to members of OCG’s, there is a risk to those members of staff of exploitation which could result in infiltration.Testing for the presence of steroids is highly complex in that there are many steroids available however one test will identify all compounds. In order to conduct a test for steroids, the substance sought needs to be known to inform the laboratory testing.As with the self-declaration of the abuse of other substances, members of staff will be supported via OHU.Table of Contents
10. Monitoring and ReviewThe policy has built in procedures for the monitoring of individuals in any testing.The Head of Professional Standards is responsible for monitoring the implementation and impact of this policy.The policy contains details of how this will be recorded.Data is monitored for disproportionate impact on minority groups.The policy will be reviewed annually and the outcome of monitoring will inform this review.11. Appeals ProcessIf a member of staff has an issue with the application of this policy, they should raise this with the Head of Department, Professional Standards.Members of the public who take issue with the application of this policy have recourse to the police complaints system.RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSEvery policy is capable of having a knock on effect into other policy areas and on existing procedures. The following are related to this policy:Police RegulationsGuidance on outcomes in police misconduct proceedings College of Policing Code of EthicsPolice Staff Disciplinary ProcedureAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEProfessional standards > Complaints and misconductDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy and procedure will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Head of Professional Standards is responsible for this policy and procedure. All queries relating to this policy and procedure should be directed to the Professional Standards Department.Table of Contents
APPENDIX ASupporting a Member of Staff Who Volunteers an Issue Surrounding Their Alcohol or Drug Misuse1. Identification by the Individual1.1 An individual may choose to seek help on a completely voluntary basis prior to a request for a screening sample. If a member of staff believes that he/she has an alcohol or drug related problem they should seek specialist advice as soon as possible. The Occupational Health Unit will initiate such help if requested.2. Identification by the Manager2.1 Managers have an important role to play in identifying problems at work.Deterioration in work performance and/or changes in patterns of behaviour may be noticed by a manager with or without there being any obvious signs of alcohol or drug misuse. In these circumstances the Occupational Health Unit will provide advice and assistance for managers if required. Advice and guidance can also be accessed via Health Assured (Employee Assistance Programme) on: 0800 030 5182 and via the Wellbeing Portal Site.3. Identification by a Colleague3.1 A member of staff may notice changes in a colleague’s pattern of behaviour that leads them to suspect drug misuse. In this case it is their responsibility to draw the matter to the attention of the individual’s manager. Colleagues MUST NOT, ‘cover up’ or ignore a fellow member of staff whose work or behaviour is suffering as a result of an alcohol or drug related problem.4. Programme of Treatment4.1 When an individual agrees to undergo the programme of treatment recommended by their General Practitioner or by a specialist agency, the Occupational Health Unit will advise whether or not the individual is fit to work during the treatment period. If they are fit it may be necessary to alter the individual’s duties on a temporary basis and, once again, the Occupational Health Unit will advise the manager on appropriate adjustments. It will be the manager’s responsibility to determine whether or not such adjustments are feasible and can be accommodated within the department. If so, the manager must meet with the individual and outline his / her expectations with regard to work performance and / or behaviour.4.2 When an individual does not complete a programme of treatment successfully or defaults on a ‘contract,’ either because the treatment agency discontinues the programme due to lack of individual progress, or because the individual him / herself discontinues, the Occupational Health Unit will, accordingly, advise the manager who will then interview the individual and determine what further action should be taken.Table of Contents
APPENDIX BIllegal Drug Misuse – Decision Making Guidance1. Trigger for referral1.1 If an individual presents themselves and seeks help from the Occupational Health Unit, then support may be more appropriate than if the illegal substance misuse is revealed through the individual's action or by a third party. Between these two examples lie a spectrum of referral routes and each case should be judged accordingly.2. Nature of Misuse2.1 The early disclosure of a problem may be more easily and supportively addressed than a history of acute misuse of addictive drugs or a history of repeated lapses into substance misuse.3. Honesty and Openness3.1 The user often hides their substance misuse. Where a staff member is dishonest about their use of an illegal substance, then a misconduct investigation will normally follow.4. Attendant Circumstances4.1 Anyone involved in drug misuse with others cannot be treated as a special case. For example, buying drugs from a dealer may be aiding and abetting a serious criminal offence. Similarly, using drugs in the company of others who may be liable to prosecution is a factor, which needs to be considered in dealing with a member of staff.4.2 Even though cases of substance misuse might initially be dealt with sympathetically and in confidence, in an organisation with the security and law enforcement roles of the OPCC and Police Service, it is not possible to ignore any previous substance misuse when assessing suitability for posts in the future. Individuals will have to accept that such history may affect their suitability in relation to certain posts in the future. This will be because of security and/or health and safety reasons.Table of Contents
APPENDIX CPossible Signs of Substance Misuse1. Overview1.1 Alcohol and /or other substance misuse may manifest itself as specific acute symptoms and signs attributable to the actions of alcohol or the substance itself, but these only last for at most a few hours after taking the substance. If the misuse becomes a regular occurrence or develops into addiction, then non-specific changes in behaviour normally develop over a period of time. Examples of acute observable symptoms and signs are detailed below:-2. Cannabis2.1 The potential abnormal observations of someone who has recently taken cannabis are:ï Distinctive smellï Poor co-ordination and balanceï Impaired perception of time and distanceï Reddening of whites of eyesï Poor attention spanï Relaxed inhibitionsï Possibly dilated pupils2.2 Observed symptoms and signs start almost immediately on taking cannabis and can last up to 6 hours.3. Opiates3.1 These include Codeine, Heroin, Methadone, Morphine and Opium. Potential abnormal observations of someone who has recently taken opiates include:ï Very small pupilsï Slow speech and reflexesï Sleepyï Facial itchingï Dry mouthï Possibly euphoria3.2 Observed symptoms and signs start within a few seconds of taking opiates and last up to 8 hours (24 hours with Methadone).4. Central Nervous System Stimulants4.1 These include Cocaine and Amphetamines. Potential abnormal observations of someone who has recently taken these include:-ï Dilated pupilsï Restless and anxiousï Difficulty keeping quietï Easily irritatedï 
ï Eyelid tremorsï Euphoria4.2 Observed symptoms and signs start almost immediately on taking CNS stimulants and last about 90 minutes with Cocaine and 6 hours with Amphetamines.5. Central Nervous System Depressants5.1 These include Alcohol and Benzodiazepines (anti-anxiety medication like Valium and sleeping pills like Mogadon). Potential abnormal observations of someone who has recently taken these include:ï Unresponsive normal sized pupilsï Drowsinessï Thick, slurred, slow speechï Slow, sluggish reactionsï Poor co-ordinationï Watery eyes5.2 Observed symptoms and signs start within about 30 minutes of taking CNS depressants and last up to 14 hours.6. Hallucinogens6.1 These include LSD, Ecstasy and “Magic Mushrooms”. Potential abnormal observations of someone who has recently taken these include:ï Hallucinationsï Synthesthesia (sensations may be transposed from one sensory mode into another, e.g. sounds may be interpreted as sights or odours)ï Dazed appearanceï Poor balanceï Distorted time and distance perceptionï Nausea and sweatingï Paranoiaï ‘Goose bumps’6.2 Observed symptoms and signs start within 20 to 60 minutes and last 3 to 12 hours according to the substance taken.7. Inhalants7.1 These will include Petrol, Glue, Solvents, Aerosols and Paint. Potential abnormal observations of someone who has recently taken these include:ï Smell or residue around the faceï Dizziness or light headedï Bloodshot, watery eyesï Confusionï Flushed, sweaty appearanceï 
ï Slow, slurred speech (often non-communicative)ï Distorted time and distance perceptionï May complain of intense headache7.2 Observed symptoms and signs start almost immediately and last from a few seconds to 2 or more hours according to the substance and quantity inhaled.8. Anabolic Steroids8.1 Anabolic steroids are misused by athletes and body builders to increase muscle bulk. As well as their anabolic (muscle building) action, they also have androgenic (masculinising) actions. There are no real acute symptoms or signs of taking anabolic steroids, but over a period of time they cause:ï Much more rapid weight (muscle) gain than usualï Increased greasiness of skin and hairï Increased spots or ‘acne’ï An increase in aggressive behaviour8.2 All of the above are specific to the substance taken and, apart from anabolic steroids, are of limited duration.8.3 Someone who is regularly misusing alcohol and / or other substances may show typical persistent patterns of behaviour that develop over a period of time.9. Poor Attendance9.1 All aspects of attendance tend to be affected including:ï Frequent,	short	term	sickness	absence,	especially	in	relation	to	other	leave (weekends/rest days, bank holiday, etc.)ï Poor time keeping; late in to work, late returning from lunch, late for appointments, early leaving work.ï Unexplained absences or disappearing from the workplace.10. Poor Work Performance10.1 The main areas of work performance affected by substance misuse are:ï Lack of concentration and poor memoryï Frequent mistakes and errors of judgementï Unreliability and difficulty meeting deadlines11. Frequent Accidents11.1 Substance misusers tend to suffer more accidents than normal, warning signs to look out for are:ï Smelling of alcohol or something to disguise the smell of alcohol like mints or strong after-shave/perfume.ï 
ï Hand tremor, slurred speech, facial flushing, especially after a weekend or rest day, a prolonged lunch break or unexplained absence from the workplace.ï Poor relationships with colleagues, possibly to the avoidance of company altogether.ï Always short of money and may attempt to borrow money from colleagues.ï Tendency to blame others for shortcomings at work and to over-react to real or imagined criticism.ï Moodiness, apathy, depression, irritability.ï General neglect of appearance including cleanliness and personal hygiene.11.2 If an officer / member of staff displays any of the above behavioural changes, it must not be automatically assumed that this is proof of a substance misuse problem, as there could be other explanations for any of the above including, among other things, stress and mental ill health.Table of Contents
APPENDIX DDrug Screening: Protocol for Testing1. Recruits and serving officers1.1 There are some differences that may apply to the procedures used for testing potential recruits and serving officers. If a potential recruit does not wish to submit to a test, he or she may withdraw from the recruitment process. An officer is obliged to submit to a test, if so required, and may, as a consequence, have to declare information about medications that he or she is taking. These declarations may have the effect of disclosing personal information that the officer is entitled to expect will be treated in confidence by Occupational Health. A serving officer may not be recalled to duty for the purpose of testingBy contrast, all aspects of the collection and on-site screening of samples from potential recruits, including the taking of information about medications, may be undertaken as a part of the human resources function.2. Conducting the test2.1 There will be a secure chain of custody through collection, analysis and medical review. Laboratory analysis will be undertaken by an independent agency. Collection of samples, and initial on – site screening, may be undertaken by an independent agency, or by suitably qualified staff in force. Samples will either be posted to, or collected/obtained by, the independent agency.2.2 For the purpose of the physical administration of the test, a suitably qualified person will be a trained person, officer or member of staff of the Force, or a member of the Occupational Health Unit. Where completion of the paperwork by an officer involves disclosure of medication being taken, only occupational health staff and/or the person administering the test should see that paperwork. It follows that where the paperwork is not completed by the officer personally, (i.e. it is completed in response to questions put to the officer, and then signed by the officer) that task should be undertaken by occupational health staff or the suitably trained person administering the test. It is essential that information about medications taken prior to the test is recorded at the time of specimen collection, and not at any later stage.3. On-site screening and laboratory testing3.1 Any test that may be relied upon in disciplinary proceedings should be conducted through laboratory analysis, not on site testing. On - site testing, using portable testing kits, may be used to screen out persons tested. However, if there is a positive indication at any screening stage, the residual specimen of hair, urine or oral fluid (saliva) (remaining after the screening test) should go forward to full laboratory analysis and medical review.Where testing is carried out with cause, the specimen may be submitted directly to the laboratory, without conducting a screening testTable of Contents
Split samplesProvision should always be made to allow the donor of the hair, urine or Oral fluid (saliva) an opportunity to have an independent analysis of the specimen to challenge the outcome of the laboratory analysis. A split sample (at the time of collection) provides an effective means of providing this opportunity.There are currently two methods in which samples are obtained and tested. The first method involves the direct submission of a sample for laboratory analysis without on-site screening taking place. The second involves an on-site indication followed by submission for laboratory analysis.3.2 Direct submission for laboratory analysis without an on-site indication is the usual testing procedure though both procedures are available subject to circumstance.3.3 Any test that may be relied upon in disciplinary/misconduct proceedings should be subject to laboratory analysis.3.4 The results of any test will be provided to the officer at the first available opportunity. Laboratory analysis provides results usually within 48 hours and either the officer supervising the test(s) or a line manager of the officer will inform the officer of the test result.4 Material to be tested4.1 In the case of a serving police officers and officers transferring between forces either oral fluid (saliva) or urine may be tested. The decision as to which of these are to be tested will be dependent on the relevant circumstances but is that of the Force.4.2 In the case of new recruits to the police service oral fluid (saliva), urine or hair sample may be tested.4.3 Oral fluid (saliva) may be regarded as the least personally intrusive option. Blood does not form part of routine testing, where there is no grounds for suspecting misuse, as the procedures are disproportionately intrusive.Testing Procedures:5. Self-declaration5.1 An Officer or member of staff with substance misuse problems should be encouraged to identify themselves, and should be assisted in seeking treatment. However, self-declaration cannot be used to avoid the consequences of a positive test. Any such declaration must be made before an officer is notified of any requirement to take a test. A self-declaration made after an officer is notified of the requirement to take a test cannot be used to frustrate the disciplinary proceedings that might result from a positive test result.Table of Contents
6. Random and routine testing6.1 The scale of testing should be risk based. Any sample of officers selected for testing in an individual area or department within the force should be chosen on a random basis. A routine testing regime may involve selecting a higher proportion of officers for testing in an area or department where the risk is assessed as high.6.2 The scale of testing will be determined at Force level. “Having regard to perceived risk and costs. Scale” encompasses size of sample and frequency of testing. If initial testing produces a nil or low number of positive results, then the scale of testing will be low. On the other hand, a higher proportion of positive results would indicate a need for larger scale future testing. “Risk” encompasses the risk inherent in the consequences of impairment of judgement or performance, and the risk of incidence of misuse. In some vulnerable posts (safety critical) the former risk will usually be high, even if the latter risk is low.7. Vulnerable posts7.1 Testing will be routine. If a high degree of risk is assessed, universal testing covering all officers in the vulnerable category might be appropriate. If the assessment of risk is low, then the sample of officers to be tested will be selected at random. For the avoidance of doubt, the liability to be tested applies in national agencies as well as to posts in local forces.8. With cause; - extended sampling8.1 An officer of at least the rank of ACC may authorise a maximum of three samples of urine or oral fluid (saliva) to be required from a police officer in their force (or on secondment to or from their force) where there is corroborative intelligence which gives reasonable cause to suspect that the officer has used controlled drugs over an extended period (i.e. on more than one occasion).8.2 The three samples can be required over a maximum period of 90 days, with day one being the day of the first sample with the period finishing at midnight on day 90. When calculating the 90 day period, no account should be taken of any periods of sick leave.8.3 The officer will not be given any advance notice of the requirement to provide each sample. The officer will be informed at the time of the first sample that two other samples will be required within a designated time period. The officer will be informed on all occasions the drug or drug(s) group(s) against which his or her samples will be tested.8.4 The officer will be entitled to have a ‘police friend, as defined in the Police (conduct) Regulations 2020 present when the samples are being take. However, a delay in a police friend attending will not delay the testing procedure provided that the officer has been able to consult a police friend.9. Consultation and monitoring9.1 The scale of testing adopted, and the identification of vulnerable posts, will be the subject of consultation with the local staff associations. All random samples will be monitored by ethnicity, faith, gender, disability and sexual orientation to ensure that no unintended bias arises from the sampling technique.5.1 
10. Immediate consequences of positive test results on serving Police Officer at the on-site screening stage10.1 Only suitably qualified staff will carry out on-site drug screening tests. The person being tested should be advised that any positive screening test results provide a provisional indication only, and are subject to further laboratory analysis and medical review, either of which could result in the final result being negative.10.2 An officer’s manager should be informed immediately of a positive on-site screening test result, as there may be a risk in continuing to deploy the officer on the full range of police duties. At this stage there is no final result, as this can only be provided by laboratory analysis, so the language used to describe the outcome of an on-site test is very important. In particular, the manager should not be told that “a test has been failed” as this is not the case.10.3 It is for the manager to assess the risk in relation to the duties due to be undertaken by the officer, but there would be a presumption of removal from duties involving contact with the public. Formal suspension would be appropriate only if a positive result was confirmed following laboratory test and medical review.10.4 Difficulties arise, inevitably, for both the officer and management from a positive result that occurs when on site screening is undertaken. A confirmed result, either positive or negative, will not be available until the completion of laboratory analysis and medical review, a process that is likely to take two or three days. Any difficulties arising from this delay are outweighed by the benefit that screening allows an instant confirmation of a negative result.11. Handling confirmed positive results11.1 A positive laboratory analysis will be subject to medical review, as explained more fully in Appendix G. Medical review involves a medical practitioner reviewing the test result and the medical history of the individual to determine if there is a legitimate explanation for the presence of a drug in the sample.11.2 Test results following laboratory analysis and medical review will be returned to the Detective Inspector, CCU and/or Head of Professional Standards. Where the result is negative the officer and his or her manager should be informed without delay. It is particularly important that a confirmed negative result after any initial on-site positive screening result is communicated to the officer and management without delay.11.3 A positive result from a test administered as a part of the pre-employment process should be notified to the Recruitment and Selection Manager, so that the candidate may be rejected.11.4 A positive result from a member of staff who had self-declared a substance misuse problem prior to being tested should be reviewed by Occupational Health to assess whether the result was consistent with rehabilitation treatment being undertaken. If the result suggested that an agreed programme of rehabilitation was not being followed, then reference to Professional Standards should be strongly considered. Any such person will be subject of an ongoing risk assessment prepared by the individual’s SHRA in conjunction with their senior manager.5.1 
11.5 All other positive results will be referred to an Appropriate Authority with Professional Standards for action. It is for Professional Standards to notify both the officer and the line manager of the result, and of any immediate action, including suspension from duty where appropriate.11.6 Any claim by the officer concerned that there was a reason (other than a medical reason) for the positive result should be dealt with by PSD/CCU through formal disciplinary proceedings. Appeals should be handled through normal appeals process.12. Liability12.1 An officer who has misused controlled drugs suffers a double jeopardy. He or she is at risk of disciplinary proceedings that might lead to dismissal and may also be at risk of criminal prosecution. Because of this double jeopardy, and whether or not criminal proceedings are contemplated, cautioning and interviewing should be to the standards required under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act (PACE).12.2 The penalty for refusal to take a test is no less than the penalty for failing a test. The liability to take a test is established in Police Regulations, thus a failure to take a test when required to do so is a failure to obey a lawful order. There is no substantive criminal offence of having an unlawful substance in the body, only a presumption that the offence of “possession” must have been committed beforehand. Such a presumption may be rebuttable by medical evidence that the positive test resulted from use of a lawful medication. The presumption of possession that would arise from a positive, medically confirmed test result should be treated as misconduct. The maximum penalty for both failure to obey a lawful order and discreditable conduct, is the same.12.3 Any penalty would take into account both Proportionality and Public Interest.Table of Contents
APPENDIX EAlcohol Screening: Protocol for Testing1. Overview1.1 There is a presumption that a person is unfit to work in a Vulnerable (safety critical area) if they have more than 29 mg% in blood (39 mg% in urine, 13 micrograms% in breath). This compares with a limit of 80 mg% in blood for driving.1.2 Where testing is carried out, it should be conducted using breath testing equipment capable of making measurements at the 13 micrograms% level (equivalent to the 29 mg% blood level). Officers should never be tested on apparatus held in a custody suite, unless the suite is cleared of all other users.1.3 Each “breath test” should consist of two consecutive breath specimen tests from the officer, with the final result being declared as the lower of the two results.1.4 If a supervising officer or member of staff smells alcohol on the breath of an officer liable to alcohol testing, a breath alcohol test can be administered after a wait of 15 minutes. (This is to deal with the eventuality that at the time the suspicion of excess drinking is aroused, a proportion of the alcohol consumed may still be in the officer’s stomach. Alcohol must be absorbed into the body to register in a breath alcohol test.)1.5 It should always be open to an officer to declare that they suspect they might have inadvertently exceeded the limit. Any such declaration should be made before the officer is notified of any requirement to take a test. Such declarations should not result in the officer being penalised, provided there is no pattern of continuing excess. A declaration may be particularly appropriate in circumstances of an unexpected change of duty, for example being allocated to driving duties involving possible use of the police exemptions under the Road Traffic Act, due to a staff shortage.1.6 Any subsequent discipline procedure will take into account all of the relevant surrounding circumstances, (i.e. level above limit) and each case will be dealt on an individual basis.Table of Contents
APPENDIX FGuidance On and Overview of Testing Procedures1. Overview of Drug Testing Procedures1.1 The outcome of a drug test is expressed as “Positive” or “Negative”.1.2 The purpose of drug testing is to establish whether the donor of the specimen has consumed a controlled drug at some time prior to the collection of the specimen. The identification of a drug in a specimen is not the complete picture as there may be legitimate reasons for the drug being present.1.3 For example, the presence of morphine in a urine specimen may indicate that the donor is a heroin user (heroin is converted to morphine in the human body) but equally it may indicate only that the donor had legitimately taken an anti-diarrhoea preparation that contained morphine as its active ingredient.1.4 Drug testing involves three integrated stages; collection, analysis and medical review.1.5 All final drug positive test results should arise from analysis conducted in an accredited laboratory. On-site screening tests may be used to screen out negative results, but a positive indication at the screening stage must go forward to full laboratory analysis and medical review.1.6 The first stage of the drug testing procedure is the collection of the specimen. The collection of a specimen from a donor is straightforward, but it must be conducted in such a way as to maintain the Chain-of-Custody of the specimen, with full documentation at all stages. The collector must be properly trained, with the standards applying being those that would apply to any other procedure in which it is important to maintain the integrity of an exhibit.1.7 Analysis is the process of seeking to detect drugs in the collected specimen. If no drugs are found in the specimen, the drug testing procedure is complete at that stage, and the Force will be advised of the "negative” outcome. The results of any test will be provided to the officer at the first available opportunity. Laboratory analysis provides results usually within 48 hours and either the officer supervising the test(s) or a line manager of the officer will inform the officer of the test result.1.8 If the analysis identifies one or more drugs in the specimen, further work is required. The positive analytical results need to be interpreted in the light of any factors that may provide a legitimate explanation for the presence of the drugs (e.g. medications taken by the specimen donor in the days before the test). This process is referred to as “Medical Review” and is conducted by a medical practitioner (the “Medical Review Officer”); in case there is a need for a medical discussion with the donor. The medical practitioner reviews the evidence and arrives at an opinion as to the origins of the drugs identified. If their presence can be explained by the use of prescribed or proprietary medication the Force will be advised of a "negative” outcome. The Head of Professional Standards and/or D/Insp CCU will be informed of this outcome.1.9 If the presence of drugs in the specimen cannot be accounted for in this way, the force will be advised of a "positive” outcome. The “positive” outcome reported will include the details of the drug(s) identified. In any case where there is any doubt, the overriding principle of the medical review process is to give the benefit of that doubt to the specimen donor. Again the Head of Professional Standards and/or D/Isnp CCU will be informed of the outcome.1.1 
1.10 In summary, the outcome of a comprehensive drug testing procedure involves three integrated stages: collection, analysis and medical review. A “negative” result for a specimen indicates that no illicit drug use has been identified. A “positive” result indicates that there is evidence of illicit drug use that cannot be explained by any of the legitimate medications used by the donor.2. Chain-of-Custody Collection2.1 The general principles of Chain-of-Custody collection can be summarised as	follows:ï To ensure that the donor understands the procedure.ï To document medications taken by the donor.ï To maintain the Chain-of-Custody.ï To avoid cheating by the donor (specimen dilution, adulteration, substitution etc).ï To allow the donor to provide a specimen in appropriate circumstances (e.g. privacy for urine collection).ï To adopt procedures which allow the donor to have confidence in the procedure.ï To allow the donor to observe the whole procedure by which the specimen is packaged ready for transport to the laboratory.ï To ensure that the specimen is untouched at any stage, thereby avoiding contamination.ï To ensure that the specimen is sent to the laboratory in tamper-evident packaging.2.2 The collection process is facilitated by the use of a special Chain-of-Custody collection kit. The documentation is usually provided by a multi-part, duplicating Chain-of-Custody form. The documentation is completed by, or in the presence of the donor, who will sign to confirm that the urine, hair or oral fluid (Saliva) specimen is theirs. The sample will be sealed in the presence of the donor. Any information provided about medication will be confidential to the testing laboratory, a medical review officer, the trained person administering the test and the Occupational Health Unit.2.3 The urine testing kit usually contains two containers and, after collection, the specimen is divided between the two and these are both labelled and sealed with tamper evident security seals in preparation for dispatch to the laboratory for analysis. Both specimen containers remain together. One container, the “A” sample, is used at the laboratory for drug analysis whilst the second is stored at the laboratory under secure conditions, on behalf of the donor, as a backup in case he/she wishes to challenge a positive laboratory result. The donor has the right to challenge the results of a drug test using the second part of the split specimen. In the case of a challenge, the sealed “B” sample will be sent to an independent accredited laboratory of the donor’s choice. The donor is required to meet the cost of the transfer and subsequent analysis, but these costs will be reimbursed in the event that the test on the “B” sample is negative.2.4 The top copy of the Chain-of-Custody form is forwarded with the specimen to the analysis laboratory while copies of the form go to the donor, the collector and to the responsible manager in the Force. A further copy of the form, bearing the details of recent medications goes to the Medical Review Officer.2.5 The general principles of Chain-of-Custody oral fluid (saliva). Hair and urine collection are the same. The major difference is that an oral fluid (saliva) Hair specimen does not have to be provided in privacy, which reduces the measures that need to be adopted to minimise the risk of “cheating”. A further difference is that the small volume of the sample means that specimens are not always split, so an alternative approach may be taken to providing the donor with an opportunity to have an independent specimen analysis.Table of Contents
3. Principles of Laboratory Drug Analysis3.1 Sample reception3.1.1 On arrival at the laboratory the specimens and their packaging are examined to check that the security seals on the containers are intact, and that there are no other signs of tampering. Further checks establish that the Chain-of-Custody paperwork has been fully completed. Once these sample integrity checks have been done, one of the specimens (the “A” sample) is opened ready for analysis.3.2 Drug analysis3.2.1 The analysis of drugs in urine or oral fluid (saliva) at the laboratory must be conducted using appropriate high quality scientific techniques. This generally involves an initial immunoassay screening test followed by a confirmation analysis using mass-spectrometry. This not only confirms the exact identity of any drug present, but also indicates how much is present.3.3 Quality standards3.3.1 Any drug testing laboratory used by a police force, or nominated by an officer for the independent testing of a sample, must be specifically accredited for drug-testing work through appropriate national standards (UKAS and BSI).3.3.2 Any drug testing company used by a police force must satisfy the minimum chain of custody requirements set out above.4. Guidance to Alcohol Testing Procedures4.1 Impairment of judgement increases with increasing blood alcohol concentration. Different people can demonstrate very different degrees of impairment with comparable concentrations of alcohol in their bodies. Experimental studies have shown that for most people some degree of impairment can be measured at a blood alcohol concentration of 40 to 50 mg%, and for some individuals first impairment could be detected at a concentration as low as 30 mg%. At these levels, the individual may not be aware of any impairment, but it may nevertheless be present.4.2 In line with these experimental observations, a workplace alcohol limit of 29 mg% in blood has been adopted in respect of safety critical areas, where any risk of impairment is unacceptable.4.3 An alcohol limit of 29 mg% in blood does not preclude moderate drinking, for example during the evening before a period of duty that commences the following morning. The relationship between alcohol consumption and blood alcohol concentration will depend on many variables, such as the pattern of consumption, the type of beverage consumed, and the individual’s body mass, metabolism and gender. Nevertheless, as with guidance given in relation to the 80 mg% blood alcohol limit for driving, broad indications can be provided to help individuals avoid situations in which they might exceed a workplace alcohol limit.4.4 An average 70 kg male consuming 2 units of alcohol (e.g. one pint of moderate strength beer, 3.5% v/v) could achieve a theoretical maximum blood alcohol concentration of 30 mg%. (The actual concentration is likely to be lower, as the alcohol is not absorbed instantaneously.) The body eliminates alcohol at about the rate of 15 mg% per hour; thus an average person might expect a blood alcohol concentration of 30 mg% to fall to zero over a period of approximately 2 hours. It must be emphasised that these figures are only illustrations and provide only broad indications of alcohol levels for an average individual.Table of Contents
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Professional StandardsProcedure Owner/Author:	Supt. Head of Professional Standards Technical Author:	D.Insp CCUSenior Officer/Manager Sponsor: Deputy Chief ConstableRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes25.05.20182.0Data Protection section amended to reflect implementation of GDPR and new DPA.15.03.20213.0Minor amendments: Police (Conduct) Regulations 2020, Counter- Corruption Unit updated, further clarity provided regarding reporting processes.Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team15.03.20213.0Head of Professional Standards15.03.20213.0JNCC(Not required for all procedures)   N/A Minor amendments onlyDistribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOther: SharePointDiversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this procedure (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionImplications of the Procedure: Training RequirementsNo additional training required.IT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure required.
WILTSHIRE POLICETRAINING AND PROBATIONARY PROCEDURAL GUIDANCE FOR STUDENT OFFICERSDepartmentPeople Development & People ServicesVersion3.0Date of PublicationApril 2021Review DateApril 2023Technical AuthorNatalie Strong
Table of Contents1.1 Glossary of Terms	41.2 Related Policies, Procedures and Other Documents	41.3 Authorised Professional Practice	41.4 Law Relating to this Document	41.5 Data Protection	41.6 Freedom of Information Act 2000	41.7 Monitoring & Review	41.8 Who to contact about this procedure	42. Introduction	63. Intention	64. Statement of Procedure	65. Overview	65.1 Police Constable Degree Apprenticeship (PCDA)	65.2 Degree Holder Entry Programme (DHEP)	65.3 Pre Join Degree	66. Working Practices	76.1 Probation	76.2 Student Officer Training Programme…	76.3 PCDA Standard Journey	86.3.1 Year 1	86.3.2 Year 2	86.3.3 Year 3	86.4 DHEP Standard Journey	96.4.1 Year 1	96.4.2 Year 2…	96.5 Tutorship	106.6 Annual Leave	106.7 Occupational Competence portfolio (OCP)	106.8 Assessment of Student Officers	116.9 Posting of Students	136.10 Students Officer Attachments	136.11 Maintaining Standards	132.1 
6.12 Breaches of Standards of Professional Behaviour	136.13 Standards of Professional Behaviour	136.14 Academic Terms and Conditions	137. Reasonable Adjustments	148. Student Officer Unsatisfactory/UnacceptablePerformance	149. Student Officer Unsatisfactory/UnacceptablePerformance – JRFT/PST	1710. Student Officer Unsatisfactory/UnacceptablePerformance – Attendance	1711. Misconduct	1912. Suspension of a Student Officer	1913. Resignation of a Student Officer	1914. Training Staff	2015. Tutors	2016. Flexible Working	2018. Record Keeping and Confidentiality	2218.1 Document Administration	2218.1 Ownership	2218.2 Related Documents and Useful Links	2118.3 Revision History	2118.4 Approvals	2318.5 Distribution	2318.6 Diversity Impact Statement…	2318.7 Consultation	2318.8 Training Requirements	2318.9 IT Infrastructure	23Appendix 1 – USW Academic Misconduct process flow chart	24
1.1 Glossary of TermsTermMeaningPEQFPolice Education Qualification Framework – College of Policing and Police Vision 2025PCDAPolice Constable Degree Apprenticeship – Entry route for those with Functional Skills in English and Math (Level 2) and an A level or level 3 (or relevant experience)DHEPDegree Holder Entry Programme – Entry Route for those with a degree in any subjectSOATStudent Officer Assessment teamOCPOccupation Competence Portfolio1.2 Related Procedures & DocumentationA tool kit and quick reference guide has been produced to accompany this procedure.	Other policies, procedures and other related documents that are linked to this procedure are:ï JRFT and Officer Personal Safety Policyï Student Learner Safeguarding Policy1.3 Authorised Professional PracticeNone applicable.1.4 Law Relating to This DocumentLeading statutory authority1.5 Data ProtectionAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded because of this procedure will be processed in accordance with the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).The General Data Protection Regulation requires employers to comply with principles for processing personal data, including to protect against unauthorised access of personal data. Personal data that is inappropriately accessed or disclosed may constitute a data breach. The GDPR requires organisations to keep a record of all data breaches and, where the breach is likely to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of individuals, the organisation must notify the Information Commissioner within 72 hours of becoming aware of the breach. If the data breach results in a high risk to the rights and freedoms of individuals, those individuals must be notified without undue delay1.6 Freedom Of Information Act 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.1.7 Monitoring And ReviewMonitoring the effectiveness of the procedure will be undertaken in conjunction with Human Resources to establish the type of queries that arise. It is the responsibility of Human Resources to ensure this procedure is updated in line with any legislative changes and will ensure it is reflective of best practice.1.8 Who to Contact About This ProcedureBoth the People Development and People Standards and Support departments are responsible for this procedure. All queries should be via the People Services Centre.
2. Introduction2.1 The aim of this Guidance is to set out the practice that Wiltshire Police (WP) and its Contracted HEI Partner, University of South Wales (USW) will follow to train, support and develop Student Police Officers in order that they have the best opportunity to achieve and become effective and efficient police officers, delivering a service to the community to the standards expected of the service and the priorities contained in the current Police and Crime Plan.2.2 Student Officer training is a vital part of police business. People Development is responsible for the implementation and oversight of Student Officer training processes throughout the officers’ probationary period.2.3 The training programme is regularly reviewed to ensure the validity of the programme by environmental scanning - which identifies any changes in legislation, national best practice and addresses any needs of the Force.3. Intention3.1 Wiltshire Police and their Contracted HEI Partner (USW) recognise its legal and moral responsibility to clearly define how it will manage Student Officer training, the standards required and how individuals will be trained, developed and assessed.4. Statement of Procedure4.1 This procedure aims to cover the Student Officer Training programme (PCDA and DHEP), the assessment and related Operational Competence Portfolio (OCP). Alongside this it is important to consider Student Officer postings and attachments.4.2 The main body of this procedure is aimed at providing clarity for training staff and the student officer themselves on police regulations such as Reg 12 and 13 and how it may apply to them. This will include breaches of professional behaviour, unsatisfactory performance, unsatisfactory attendance, suspension and resignation5. OverviewPolice Constable entry programmes from June 2020 comprise:5.1 Police Constable Degree Apprenticeship (PCDA) - Apprenticeship. follow an apprenticeship in professional policing practice. This route normally takes three years with both on and off-the-job learning. On successfully finishing the programme, you complete your probation and achieve a degree in Professional Policing Practice.5.2 Degree Holder Entry Programme (DHEP) - Degree-holder entry. For those who have a degree in any subject, follows a work-based programme supported by off-the-job learning. This route normally takes two years and is recognised in a Graduate Diploma in Professional Policing Practice when probation is completed.5.3 Pre- Join Pre-join degree. For those who have already completed a degree in professional policing at an HEI, follow a shorter on-the-job training programme with a 2 year probation period.1.1 
6. WORKING PRACTICES6.1 Probation6.1.1 All Student Officers will be required to complete a probationary period, during which time they must satisfy the Chief Constable of their ability to become physically and mentally fit to be a Police Constable and to pass their Student Officer Training Programme both academically and practically.6.1.2 There are certain circumstances under which a Student Officer’s probationary period may be extended and when a Support Plan and Regulation 13 notice may be required. This will be authorised by the People Intelligence Board (PIB) as delegated to them by the Chief Constable.6.1.3 There are occasions when variations in the programme may be allowed or an application is made to extend the probationary period owing to prolonged absence from core policing duties, sickness being an example. The Chair of the People Intelligence Board as the delegated authority, with the HEI has discretion, in any case, to extend the probationary period as the course length can be extended.6.1.4 Student Officers will be under continuous assessment to ensure that they are both physically and mentally fit for Police duty, efficient and well conducted.6.1.5 Officers re-joining Wiltshire Police may be required to undertake a period of probationary service. The Force will decide the duration of this period of probation after considering any training or development needs.6.1.6 The probationary period for Student Officers is determined under Police Regulations 2003 Annex C Determination for Regulation 12 – and shall be on probation for the first 2 years of their service unless they join under the Police Constable Degree Apprenticeship (PCDA) whereby they will be on probation for 3 years.6.2 Student Officer Training Programme6.2.1 Student Officers will follow the PEQF (Police Education and Qualification Framework) training programmes via one of the three initial entry routes named above in Overview.6.2.2 These entry programmes will be subject to an initial training phase, tutorship phase and ongoing continuous development with assessment. All entry routes will be delivered via a collaboration between Wiltshire Police alongside the contracted HEI Partner, University South Wales (USW).6.2.3 Reviews and assessments will be carried out at various times throughout the probationary period. These reviews and assessments will be documented within the Occupational Competence Portfolio (known as OCP). Student Officers are expected to demonstrate competence against the OCP and be fully competent against the Professional Policing Framework and The Code of Ethics. The requirements for this will be set out in the OCP (which is an electronic portfolio).1.1.1 
6.3 PCDA Standard Journey6.3.1 YEAR 1Initial Training Phase Day 1/2 – AttestationWeeks 1 – 23 Initial learning including 2 weeks leave and 6 x modulesï To complete knowledge, understanding and practical elements of Year 1 curriculum.ï Police specific training e.g. IT, Officer Safety, Driving Courseï Employer led delivery to ensure programme meets organisational needs.ï All academic assessments to be managed by the USW ensuring learning outcomes are met and learning meets academic standards.ï Student development will be supported by a qualified tutor constable in the workplace until the student has evidenced the competence to patrol independently.Operationally DeployedWeeks 24 – 35 – Tutoring Phaseï 1:1 Tutoring Period gathering evidence towards achievingï Independent Patrol Status in Occupational Competency PortfolioWeeks 36 – 52 – IPS Phaseï Mentoring Period on shift. Gather evidence towards Full Occupational Competence in Occupational Competency Portfolioï USW will continue to assess the academic capability through a series of assignments based on the students’ operational experience.GATEWAY 1 – INDEPENDENT PATROL & 120 CREDITS - LEVEL 46.3.2 YEAR 2Months 13 – 24 Continuous Developmentï Professional Deployments - Response Policing • Neighbourhood Policing • Policing the Roads • Information and Intelligence • Conducting Investigationsï Students should complete the OCP by the end of Year 2 (week 104)ï USW will continue to assess the academic capability through a series of assignments based on the students’ operational experience.GATEWAY 2 – COMPLETION OF THE OCCUPATIONAL COMPETENCY PORTFOLIO & 120 CREDITS - LEVEL 56.3.3 YEAR 3Months 25 – 36 Continuous Developmentï Advanced Professional Development - Response Policing • Neighbourhood Policing • Policing the Roads • Information and Intelligence • Conducting investigationsï Apprentices will be required to complete 3 academic modules to trigger the End Point Assessment process, which consists of an evidence-based project and a review of their Occupational Competency Portfolio.GATEWAY 3 – FULL OCCUPATIONAL COMPETENCE & 120 CREDITS
6.4 DHEP Standard Journey6.4.1 YEAR 1Initial Training Phase Day 1/2 – AttestationWeeks 2 – 23 Initial learning including 2 weeks leave and 6 x modulesï To complete knowledge, understanding and practical elements of Year 1 curriculum.ï Student development will be supported by a qualified tutor constable in the workplace until the student has evidenced the competence to patrol independently, ordinarily this will be over a 12 week period, but maybe extended if deemed appropriate.ï Police specific training e.g. IT, Officer Safety, Driving Courseï Employer led delivery to ensure programme meets organisational needs.ï All academic assessments to be managed by the USW ensuring learning outcomes are met and learning meets academic standards.Operationally DeployedWeeks 24 – 35 – Tutoring Phaseï 1:1 Tutoring Period gathering evidence towards achievingï Independent Patrol Status in Occupational Competency PortfolioWeeks 36 – 52 – IPS Phaseï Mentoring Period on shift. Gather evidence towards Full Occupational Competence in Occupational Competency Portfolioï USW will continue to assess the academic capability through a series of assignments based on the students’ operational experience.GATEWAY 1 – INDEPENDENT PATROL & 60 CREDITS - LEVEL 66.4.2 YEAR 2Months 13 – 24 Continuous Developmentï Consolidated Learning linked to Full Occupational Competence Advanced Professional Development in a specified area - Response Policing • Neighbourhood Policing • Policing the Roads • Information and Intelligence • Conducting Investigationsï Students should complete the OCP by the end of Year 2 (week 104)ï USW will continue to assess the academic capability through a series of assignments based on the students’ operational experience.ï Submission completion of the completed portfolio, including final review (week 90)ï Students will achieve FOC by evidencing both academic achievement and demonstrating operational competence in the workplace.GATEWAY 2 – FULL OCCUPATIONAL COMPETENCE & 60 CREDITS - LEVEL 6CODE OF ETHICS AND USW STUDENT RULES MUST BE MAINTAINED THROUGHOUT BOTH COURSES.
6.5 Tutorship6.5.1 Student Officers will undertake a 12-week period of tutorship following their successful competition of their Initial Learning Phase (ILP), unless they are able to show previous accredited experience that would be ‘recognised prior learning’ (RPL).6.5.2 The tutorship phase will be managed by the Community Policing Team (CPT), the Student Officer has been posted to, overseen by the People Development (SOAT) and supported by the Human Resources team. All students will be tutored by a trained tutor constable.6.5.3 During the 12-week tutorship period, the student should be able to demonstrate that they are able to operate independently at a level deemed safe and lawful. The competencies are recorded in the OCP (Operational Competence Portfolio). The student must have successfully completed all underpinning learning linked to IPS (Independent Patrol Status) before final assessment of IPS is made via an appropriate holistic (integrated) assessment.6.5.4 It is the responsibility of the Community Policing Teams allocated Tutors and Line Manager to make sure that the students have enough exposure across the functional areas of the role to enable them to have the opportunities to deal with the requisite policing incidents/events associated with their academic and OCP criteria. Attachments through rotations across operational functions should be considered to ensure that all students are given equal opportunity in this respect.6.6 Annual LeaveA Student Officer’s leave should be allocated so that it does not conflict with the courses or learning events that form part of the training programme, the programme will be published in plenty of time to facilitate this.The PCDA and DHEP students have a week’s leave included in the initial learning period and another week before tutorship begins.Any Student Officer wishing to absent themselves from a course, in exceptional circumstances, must submit a report via their line manager to the Training Manager for approval, outlining the reason. The Apprenticeship Consultant and USW should be informed of any absences.6.7 Occupational Competence Portfolio (OCP)6.7.1 All Student Officers will be allocated an electronic OCP document.6.7.2 This document will be managed by an assessor from the SOAT team from Professional Development. The Student Officer and relevant line managers will be regularly updated regarding the progress being made in achieving competence against the OCP.6.7.3 The OCP should be used to provide the Student Officer with a system of guidance and feedback, which enables individual development to take place in a structured and effective way, through action planning and practice. The OCP will store feedback and development documents for easy access and referral.6.7.4 The OCP is designed to give an accurate picture of the Student Officer’s development and training needs providing evidence of their suitability for confirmation at the end of their probationary period. A Student Officer will be required to show evidence of competency of each of the criteria for the OCP on the number of occasions specified in their portfolio.1.1.1 
6.7.5 PCDA students should achieve full operational competence (FOC) to pass through the gateway into year 3 and before completing their End Point Assessment. It is expected that the student would have completed 100% of their OCP by week 104.6.7.6 If a Student Officer has not completed all the above prior to their final review, they cannot be recommended for confirmation at this stage or to pass through the gateway for End Point Assessment (PCDA) or complete their Diploma and Probation (DHEP). They should be placed on a Support Plan(s) to complete the areas where they have not yet achieved competence. It is expected that should the student not be on target for completion, that Support Plans are put in place with a realistic timescale to complete any outstanding tasks prior to final review. This process should have at least three reviews and last no longer than 12/15 weeks.6.7.7 In evidencing their competency, Student Officers must also show effective performance within the Professional Policing Framework for their role.6.8 Assessment of Student Officers6.8.1 In addition to being assessed against the Forces’ values, Student Officers will be assessed against the following sets of standards; PEQF OCP, Professional Policing Framework, Professionalising the Investigation Process (PIP) and The Code of Ethics. Assessment will be holistic and will test knowledge, understanding, skills, attitudes and behaviour against The Code of Ethics.6.8.2 Students undertaking the PCDA will also receive ongoing academic assessment from the contracted HEI partner. These will be set at relevant intervals throughout the programme. Please refer to the USW Student Handbook and programme specification for more information.6.8.3 Throughout the probationary period, Student Officers will be subject to performance reviews which will be carried out at regular intervals. Please see Assessment, Quality Assurance and Learner journey document for PCDA/DHEP or Pre-Join for further information. These reviews will be stored in their personal portfolios on completion of their probationary period. Each review will include comment on the student’s attendance record and any Management Intervention Thresholds met, if a concern.6.8.4 Student Officers undertaking tutorship will be assessed against the PEQF OCP made up from several criteria and the Professional Policing Framework. Independent patrol status will be achieved on satisfactory completion of this portfolio demonstrating competence against this criterion.6.8.5 Toward the end of the tutored patrol, the supervisor(s) responsible for overseeing the tutor phase, in liaison with the Tutor Constable will assess the Student Officer’s progress and make recommendations to the SOTAT (Student Officer Training and Assessment Team Supervisor) as to the suitability of the Student Officer to be able to demonstrate competence for ‘safe and lawful’ independent patrol.6.8.6 If the Student Officer has not demonstrated competence in the 12-week tutored patrol phase a meeting will be convened by the Training Manager involving all relevant parties, including the Student Officer, to discuss the development needs of the Student Officer concerned. The possible outcomes at this stage are:1.1.1 
a. To extend the period of tutorship for a further five weeks, this period should be considered to be ‘up to’ 6 weeks; therefore if the Student Officer achieves Safe and Lawful within the 6 week period a request to sign them off for independent patrol status may be submitted early, this will include a suitable Support Plan that details clearly to the Student Officer what they need to do to address the concerns and shortfallsb. To recommend dismissal under Reg.13 Police Regulations 2003 via a written report (see Reg 13 step by step).6.8.7 At the end of the extended period, if not signed off as safe and lawful for independent patrol, the Training Manager will chair another meeting involving all relevant parties, the following outcomes are available:a. Competency not achieved but progress enough to justify a further period of Tutored patrol of up to another 6 weeks, tailored to need with a development support plan;b. To recommend dismissal under Reg.13 Police Regulations 20036.8.8 Student Officers on independent patrol will continue to collect evidence of their competence against the PEQF OCP. Assessors will be responsible for assessment decisions based on direct observations and witness testimony from line managers and non-probationary Police Officers and peers. Student Officers who successfully achieve OCP will also have achieved competence against PIP level 1.6.8.9 The final review will take place at week 90 for DHEP and Pre-Join. This will involve submission completion of the completed portfolio, including final review, via the SOAT team and submission to the command team who will make their recommendations on confirmation of appointment. If a Student Officer has not completed all the OCP and their portfolio prior to their week 90 review, the Student Officer cannot be recommended for confirmation at this stage. They should be placed on a Support Plan(s) to complete the areas where they have not yet achieved competence. This process should have at least three reviews and last no longer than twelve/fifteen weeks.6.8.10 The HR team will specifically comment upon the sickness record of each Student Officer, who have met or exceeded management intervention thresholds should be subject to the procedures in accordance with Regulation 13. If this is not the case, a detailed report should be prepared that will include a firm recommendation regarding their suitability for confirmation. If after consideration of any protected characteristics, there are doubts that the Student Officer is fit, physically or mentally, to perform the duties of their office, or that they are not likely to become an efficient or well conducted constable, then it should recommend that the individual's services are dispensed with, or if relevant, that the probationary period is extended to allow further time for improvement.6.8.11 To achieve FOC (full operational competence), the student must have collated enough evidence in their OCP for the assessor and the contracted HEI partner (USW) to begin the process of making a collaborative assessment judgement on their overall competence in role.6.8.12 Under the PEQF PCDA programme SO’s are expected to achieve competence at specific gateways. These include IPS by end of year 1, FOC by end of year 2 before entering the EPA and achievement of academic levels at the end of year 1, 2 and 3. If any of these gateways are not met (for performance, academic or unacceptable behaviour) then consideration must be given to following the reg. 13 process. Back-coursing will only be1.1.1 
acceptable in extenuating circumstances. Strict timelines will need to be adhered to when creating development plans for PCDA students in close consultation with the contracted HEI partner to ensure gateways are adhered to. HR, Finance and the Apprenticeship Consultant will need to be consulted with for all PCDA students who do not pass their gateways, as per ESFA funding rules.6.9 Posting of Student OfficersStudent Officers are allocated to the relevant CPT during the IPL training phase according to organisational need. Posting may change dependant on organisational need but will comply with force policy.6.10 Student Officer AttachmentsDuring their probation, Student Officers may undertake several attachments to internal specialised departments. Each attachment will be subject of a risk assessment and an agreed exit strategy will be in place if appropriate. Each placement will meet agreed learning outcomes.6.11 Maintaining Standards6.11.1 Student Officers are required to study to prepare for their duties and training courses. All officers must demonstrate a good knowledge of the law, Police powers and procedures.6.11.2 The employing Force and the contracted HEI partner (USW) will be intrinsic to any decision making where academic or professional concerns are raised by either party. See attached Plagiarism Policy of USW.6.12 Breaches of the Standards of Professional Behaviour6.12.1 Standards of Professional Behaviour are subject to and regulated by Police Conduct Regulations 2020, the Home Office Guidance – Conduct, Efficiency and Effectiveness Procedures and are underpinned and informed by the Code of Ethics:6.13 Standards of Professional Behaviour Honesty and IntegrityPolice officers are honest, act with integrity and do not compromise or abuse their position.Authority, Respect and CourtesyPolice officers act with self-control and tolerance, treating members of the public and colleagues with respect and courtesy.Police officers do not abuse their powers or authority and respect the rights of all individuals.Equality and DiversityPolice officers act with fairness and impartiality. They do not discriminate unlawfully or unfairly.Use of ForcePolice officers only use force to the extent that it is necessary, proportionate and reasonable in all the circumstances.Orders and InstructionsPolice Officers only give and carry out lawful orders and instructions.Police Officers abide by Police Regulations, Force policies and lawful orders.Duties and ResponsibilitiesPolice Officers are diligent in the exercise of their duties and responsibilities.ConfidentialityPolice Officers treat information with respect and access or disclose it only in the proper course of Police duties.
Fitness for DutyPolice Officers when on duty or presenting themselves for duty are fit to carry out their responsibilities.Discreditable ConductPolice Officers behave in a manner which does not discredit the Police service or undermine public confidence in it, whether on or off duty.Police Officers report any action taken against them for a criminal offence, any conditions imposed on them by a court or the receipt of any penalty notice.Challenging and Reporting Improper ConductPolice Officers report, challenge or act against the conduct of colleagues which has fallen below the Standards of Professional Behaviour.6.13.2 Any potential breach of the Police Conduct Regulations 2020 / Standards of Professional Behaviour by a Student Officer at any time during their probation should be dealt with in accordance with the Police Conduct Regulations 2020, the procedures as set out Home Office Guidance and reported to the Professional Standards Department for an assessment. The General Training Manager and Apprenticeship Consultant should also be informed.6.14. Academic Terms and Conditions6.14.1 Students enrolled on a university course (such as PCDA\DHEP) will be subject to the University’s terms and conditions, the Student Charter and rules around academic misconduct.6.14.2 In some cases, concerns may be raised with or by the contracted HEI partner that there may be academic misconduct relating to their studies. The HEI will notify the force as soon as possible. The SO will be referred to the HEI student services for advice and guidance. The HEI will create an academic Individual Student Plan (ISP) and consider further academic and study skills coaching and mentoring sessions, which may include after-hours advisory and upskill sessions. Clinic style tutorial opportunities may also be offered. If the misconduct is deemed as a serious breach of professional standards then dismissal under the Police Conduct Regulations must be considered (See section 11) and the Apprenticeship Consultant should be informed.7. Reasonable Adjustments7.1 Throughout, the SOAT, HEI and supervisors will need to bear in mind both the HEI and the Force’s obligations under the Equality Act 2010, in particular to make reasonable adjustments when dealing any level of disability.7.2 It is important to note that the duty to make reasonable adjustments places the responsibility firmly on Wiltshire Police as the “employer” to identify and initiate any adjustments. The HEI provider, SOAT and line managers with the support and guidance of Human Resources and Occupational Health, should work with the Student Officer in regards to what these adjustments could look like.8. Student Officer Unsatisfactory/Unacceptable Performance8.1 Once on independent patrol, if a Student Officer is failing to meet the required levels of performance at set reviews, or serious under performance is evidenced at any other time, their supervisor and Trainer will liaise with a view to initiating the Reg 13 procedure (Please see step by step).1.1 
8.2 The contacted HEI partner (USW) will share relevant information with the originating force should the student fail to meet the required level of academic performance at set reviews or there has been a serious breach of any standard, or there is evidence of malpractice. Should this occur, a meeting will be convened between the contracted HEI, the Apprenticeship Consultant. SOAT and HR to discuss any appropriate action. If deemed appropriate, a report may be submitted to the Professional Standards Department.8.3 If it is identified that the student needs additional support and development in any areas, a Support Plan will be prepared by the People Development Department and performance monitored (in collaboration with the contracted HEI partner where applicable).8.4 Regulation 13 Police Regulations 2003 and the management of unsatisfactory performance will be led by Wiltshire Police. However, it is recognised that the contracted HEI partner (USW) also has responsibility for an individual’s academic performance which is distinct from unsatisfactory performance procedures for an individual in their role as a Police Officer. Any management of unsatisfactory performance may include the contracted HEI provider where required.8.5 Should either the tutor or the Sergeant have concerns in regards to the SO’s performance, these should be addressed with the SO informally in order to identify issues and further training needs. An informal support plan should be put in place with the SO and regular reviews should be conducted and recorded to reflect improvements or deterioration. A 3 month period of assessment will normally be sufficient time but may be extended dependent on nature of issues.8.6 Following informal support, should the requirements of the support plan not be met, or if there is continued unsatisfactory performance following the conclusion of the informal assessment period, a Formal Performance Review Meeting should be convened. As with the Attendance Review Meeting, this should be chaired by the Inspector and may involve input from the Training Manager and/or SOAT supervisor responsible for overseeing the student’s development at the time as well as the Tutor and Sergeant as appropriate. In the interests of openness and fairness the Student Officer and their federation representative or Police Officer friend will be given copies of any documentation and a copy of this policy at least 5 days in advance of the Performance Review Meeting in order that they can have a proper opportunity to consider their response. In this situation, the Apprenticeship Consultant should be informed.8.7 The Inspector will review the evidence submitted by the Sergeant in respect of a recommendation to dispense with the services of a Student Officer. The Student Officer has the right to be accompanied by a Police Federation representative or Police Officer ‘friend’ if the officer wishes.8.8 At the end of the Performance Review Meeting there are three possible outcomes:a. No Further Actionb. Formal Support Plan(s) with Reg 13 notice giving clear guidance on areas for improvement and what will be put in place to support this.c. Recommend the Student Officer’s services be dispensed with under Regulation 13 (exceptional circumstances at this stage)8.9 Where all necessary informal support has been put in place and the requirements of support plans and/or Regulation 13 notices have not resulted in the required progress (or if there has in fact been a deterioration of performance), the Sergeant may inform the SO that they will be recommending their services be dispensed with under Regulation 13 and1.1 
the required notice under regulations (Regulation 13 Police Regulations 2003) shall be signed by the Inspector and served on the Student Officer and the Apprenticeship Consultant should be informed.8.10 If the Sergeant considers at any time during the probationary period that a Student Officer is not fit physically or mentally to perform the duties of the office, or they are not likely to become an efficient or well-conducted Constable, they may recommend that the Chief Constable dispense with their services. The Student Officer will be served with a notice informing them of that possibility and be afforded the support of a Police Federation representative or Police Officer ‘friend’ if requested.8.11 The Sergeant is responsible for ensuring the SO’s progress towards the agreed support plan is formally documented and regularly discussed with the SO. Daily events sheets should be used to record the progress as these will be reviewed to assist in determining whether the SO has achieved the required standards of performance. Up to 3 reviews can be set with time for the student to develop (12-15 weeks between reviews).8.12 The Inspector will review the evidence submitted by the Sergeant in respect of a recommendation to dispense with the services of a Student Officer and shall require that officer attend a 2nd Formal Performance Review meeting with them. The Student Officer has the right to be accompanied by a Police Federation representative or Police Officer ‘friend’ if the officer wishes. At this point, the Apprenticeship Consultant and HEI should be informed.8.13 On appearing before their Inspector, the Student Officer may make their representations, after which the Inspector may decide to:a. Recommend the Student Officer’s services be dispensed with under Regulation 13, orb. Instruct a further Formal Support Plan is put in place providing clear detail of the areas of development and expectations on what the Student Officer must do to address these. This should include specific but realistic timeframes for achievement with regular, documented reviews and should not exceed a 3 month period unless there are extenuating circumstances to justify a longer period.c. Should the existing formal support plan still be live, this could be extended for no longer than 3 months unless there are extenuating circumstances to justify a longer period.8.14 In the event the Inspector informs the SO that they will be recommending their services be dispensed with under Regulation 13, the required notice under regulations (Regulation 13 Police Regulations 2003) shall be signed by the Inspector and served on the Student Officer.8.15 The Student Officer will be formally invited to attend a formal Regulation 13 hearing with the Chief Constable so that he can fully consider this recommendation.8.16 The Student Officer will be advised of his/her right to be supported by a Federation representative or a Police Officer ‘friend’ if the officer wishes at this meeting. (See Regulation 13 step by step guidance).8.17 Should the Chief Constable confirm the Student Officer’s services are being dispensed with, they shall receive either one month’s notice, or one month’s pay in lieu thereof. Both the Apprenticeship Consultant and the HEI should be made aware of this decision.1.1 
9. Student Officer Unsatisfactory/Unacceptable Performance – JRFT/PST9.1 Student Officers will be required to complete a Job-Related Fitness Test (JRFT), Personal Safety training (PST) and Conflict Management Training in addition to five fitness assessments spread throughout their probationary period.). The JRFT should be successfully passed prior to the Student Officer attending the Personal Safety and Conflict Management Training.9.2 Should the Student Officer fail to successfully complete the either the JRFT or PST, they will be given a Formal Support Plan and given 2 further opportunities to pass this test.9.3 The Support Plan will detail what support will be provided and detail the responsibility of the officer to ensure level of fitness can be attained to pass on the next attempt. If following all the support being provided, the Student Officer fails on the 3rd occasion, they will be served a Regulation 13 notice and their services dispensed with under the Regulation 13 procedures. The Apprenticeship Consultant and the HEI should be informed.10. Student Officer Unsatisfactory/Unacceptable Performance – Attendance10.1 If a Student Officer’s attendance reaches the force threshold or in the event of attendance concerns, a meeting should be held with a representative from the HR team, OHU, SOAT Trainer, the Apprenticeship Consultant and the Student Officer’s Sergeant and/or Inspector. Where concerns exist regarding an individual’s attendance, decisions should not be made until Occupational Health advice has been obtained and consideration given to any underlying medical condition and potential disability.10.2 Should either the tutor or the Sergeant have concerns in regards to the SO’s attendance, these should be addressed with the SO informally in order to identify issues. An informal support plan should be put in place with the SO and regular reviews should be conducted and recorded to reflect improvements or deterioration. A 3 month period of assessment will normally be sufficient time but may be extended dependent on nature of issues.10.3 Following informal support, should the requirements of the support plan not be met, or if there is continued unsatisfactory attendance following the conclusion of the informal assessment period, a Formal Attendance Review Meeting should be convened. As with the Performance Review Meeting, this should be chaired by the Inspector and may involve input from relevant parties as well as the Tutor and Sergeant. At this point, the Apprenticeship Consultant should be informed. In the interests of openness and fairness the Student Officer and their federation representative or Police Officer friend will be given copies of any documentation and a copy of this policy at least 5 days in advance of the Attendance Review Meeting in order that they can have a proper opportunity to consider their response.10.4 The purpose of such a meeting will be to openly discuss the Student Officer’s attendance record (this may include their wider performance if appropriate) and to establish all the facts and to come to a fully informed decision as to the recommendations considering the Force visions and values.10.5 At the end of the Attendance Review Meeting there are three possible outcomes:a. No Further Actionb. Support Plan(s) with Reg 13 notice giving clear guidance on areas for improvementa. 
c. A report recommending dismissal under Reg. 13 Police Regulations 2003 (exceptional cases only)10.6 Where all necessary informal support has been put in place and the requirements of support plans and/or Regulation 13 notices have not resulted in the required progress (or if there has in fact been a deterioration in attendance), the Sergeant may inform the SO that they will be recommending their services be dispensed with under Regulation 13 and the required notice under regulations (Regulation 13 Police Regulations 2003) shall be signed by the Inspector and served on the Student Officer.10.7 If the Sergeant considers at any time during the probationary period that a Student Officer is not fit physically or mentally to perform the duties of the office, or they are not likely to become an efficient or well-conducted Constable, they may recommend that the Chief Constable dispense with their services. The Student Officer will be served with a notice informing them of that possibility and be afforded the support of a Police Federation representative or Police Officer ‘friend’ if requested.10.8 The Inspector will review the evidence submitted by the Sergeant in respect of a recommendation to dispense with the services of a Student Officer and shall require that officer attend a 2nd Formal Attendance Review meeting with them. The Student Officer has the right to be accompanied by a Police Federation representative or Police Officer ‘friend’ if the officer wishes.10.9 On appearing before their Inspector, the Student Officer may make their representations, after which the Inspector may decide to:a. recommend the Student Officer’s services be dispensed with under Regulation 13, orb. Instruct a further Formal Support Plan is put in place providing clear detail of the expectations. This should include specific but realistic timeframes for achievement with regular, documented reviews and should not exceed a 3 month period unless there are extenuating circumstances to justify a longer period.c. Should the existing formal support plan still be live, this could be extended for no longer than 3 months unless there are extenuating circumstances to justify a longer period.10.10 In the event the Inspector informs the SO that they will be recommending their services be dispensed with under Regulation 13, the required notice under regulations (Regulation 13 Police Regulations 2003) shall be signed by the Inspector and served on the Student Officer.10.11 The Student Officer will be formally invited to attend a formal Regulation 13 hearing with the Chief Constable so that he can fully consider this recommendation.10.12 The Student Officer will be advised of his/her right to be supported by a Federation representative or a Police Officer ‘friend’ if the officer wishes at this meeting. (See Regulation 13 step by step guidance).10.13 Should the Chief Constable confirm the Student Officer’s services are being dispensed with, they shall receive either one month’s notice, or one month’s pay in lieu thereof. Both the Apprenticeship Consultant and the HEI should be informed of this decision.1.1 
11. Misconduct11.1 Where there is concern that a Student Officers conduct is serious in nature, a report will be submitted to the Professional Standards Department who will assess as to what level of misconduct it is to be treated. If deemed so serious that it could amount to Gross Misconduct and therefore dismissal is a potential outcome, then as stated within Section 7 of the Home Office Guidance, the misconduct will be dealt with under the Police Conduct Regulations 2020 and not under the Regulation 13 process.11.2 The Force must be advised promptly by the contracted HEI provider of any concerns about a Student Officer’s conduct. The contracted HEI provider will not take any unilateral action in relation to disciplinary matters and the above procedures should be followed.11.3 In the event a Student Officer is dismissed under the Police Conduct Regulations, they will be placed on the Barred List as set out in Regulation 3 of the Barred List Regulations (Section 7, page 232). https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ data/file/863820/Home_Office_Statutory_Guidance_0502.pdf )11.4 Student Police Officers, who are dismissed via the Police Regulations 2003 Regulation 13 procedure will not be included on the barred list. However, it is important that the formal disciplinary process is used where appropriate rather than Regulation 13, to ensure that relevant information is included on the lists and is available for future vetting purposes.12 Suspension of a Student Officer12.1 The consideration of suspending an officer from the office of Constable are set out in Regulation 10 of the Police (Conduct) Regulations 2020 and must only occur where redeployment is not appropriate and could impede the investigation or it is the public interest that an officer should be suspended.12.2 It should be considered whether placing an officer on restricted duties and therefore allowing learning to continue, would be a suitable alternative in the circumstances of the case. This discussion should take place in consultation with the Apprenticeship Consultant and the HEI.12.3 In some cases, if suspension is considered the only viable option, then this may also need to apply to learning, unless learning can be facilitated independently from the rest of the cohort. Depending on the nature of and severity of the matter, it may be considered that allowing a person to study with colleagues who are involved in or aware of an incident or investigation would compromise them, colleagues or the investigation. However, if suspended, it should not be automatic that learning is also suspended. Any decision in this regard should be shared with the Apprenticeship Consultant and the HEI.13 Resignation of a Student Officer13.1 A Student Officer who has been referred to the Chief Constable for consideration for dismissal under Regulation 13 Police Regulations and Determinations 2003, would not normally have their services dispensed with if they give written notice of voluntary resignation to take effect on or before the date on which Wiltshire Police would dispense with their services. The normal requirement for one month’s notice is then waived consequently the officer will only be paid up until their actual last day (which may be less12.1 
than 1 month). The option to resign remains until the commencement of the appearance before the Chief Constable.13.2 Should a Student Officer indicate their intention at any time whilst they are subject to Support Plans that they wish to resign, their notice will be accepted by the Training Delivery Manager and the Head of People Development to be informed. The officer will not perform operational duty but may be required to complete any outstanding work under close supervision. The Apprenticeship Manager and HEI should be informed.13.3 Resignations by Student Officers under circumstances unrelated to Support Plans will be dealt with in the usual way and on a case-by-case basis. Depending on the circumstances, consideration may be given to re-appointing a Student Officer to their former Police staff role with Wiltshire Police should there be a vacancy. Student Officers should be invited to consult the Police Federation and if appropriate Welfare, Human Resources or friends and family. In terms of notice and pay, the normal requirement for one month’s notice may be waived (depending on the need to complete any outstanding work) therefore an officer will only be paid up until the actual last day (which may be less than 1 month) in this scenario. The Apprenticeship Consultant and HEI should be informed.13.4 Where a Student Officer wishes to resign whilst under investigation for potential gross misconduct under the Police Conduct Regulations, they will be made aware that should their resignation be accepted, a post-employment hearing will take place to which they will be invited to attend. Should they decline this invitation, the hearing will be conducted in their absence. Should the hearing find that the Student Officer “would have been dismissed”, they will be included on the Barred List as detailed within 11.3.14. Training StaffAll trainers involved in PEQF delivery will receive Recognised Teaching Status awarded by the USW and will be working towards or have achieved a recognised training qualification at level 4 or above, or other significant and relevant experience authorised by the Head of People Development.15. Tutors15.1 All Tutors will have completed a Tutor course and relevant CPD. SOAT assessors will be working towards or qualified with an assessor qualification (TAQA).15.2 All Tutors should be confirmed in the office of Constable and be recommended by their line manager for the role. They will have completed a Tutor course and the annual CPD events.Please see the College of Policing role profiles for more details.16. Flexible WorkingFlexible working arrangements for all officers are laid out in the Force Policy. Student Officers may apply for flexible working arrangement subject to the following constraints:a. Any application for flexible or part time working will only be considered after the completion of the tutorship phase.b. The application will be discussed with the HEI partner and the Apprenticeship Consultant to agree extending the length of the course.c. All mandated training will be completed on a full-time basis as set or full weeks.a. 
d. A Student Officer’s probationary period will be a minimum of two years (DHEP and Pre-Join) or three years (PCDA), but this will be extended on a pro-rata basis to match the reduction in average hours worked to a maximum of 6 years for PCDA. This may require a rescheduling of fitness testing and review dates.e. To ensure that a Student Officer has an opportunity to gain experience in all aspects of policing, there is a presumption that they will work a rotating shift pattern including night shifts.f. Shift patterns may be subject to “reasonable adjustment” where this can be negotiated locally and subject to both the needs of the division, the Student Officer’s developmental needs, and any other personal issues such as caring responsibilities.g. Where a Student Officer works part-time, their shift pattern should be consistent with that of a named supervisor to ensure continuity of supervision.h. Student Officers who work on a reduced hour’s basis will have their progress reviewed at intervals not exceeding six-months. This should include an annual review of working patterns.17. Record Keeping and Confidentiality17.1 All records regarding the student’s development and progress will be clear, use straightforward language, be concise, accurate in fact and stored confidentially and securely in line with the Data Protection Act and General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).17.2 GDPR and the Data Protection Act is not a barrier to sharing information for the purpose ensuring the ongoing support and development of the student. Any information shared will be shared in line with the Information Sharing: Practitioner’s Guide [2015] document. Records of developmental needs will be securely stored by Professional Development. These will be chronological, factual and kept in accordance with data protection regulations and Wiltshire Police strategy. Records will be destroyed after 3 years.17.3 Whilst respecting confidentiality and data protection, Wiltshire Police will share data where relevant with their contracted HEI partner (USW). This data sharing will ensure the development and progress of the student is monitored in accordance with GDPR whilst providing support for the student. Where applicable, the contracted HEI partner will also share relevant data regarding performance with Wiltshire Police.17.4 By enrolling on the programme with the contracted HEI partner and accepting an offer of appointment by the employing force, the Student Officer will agree to Wiltshire Police and the contracted HEI to share information with each other on their development via a Tripartite agreement. PCDA students will also sign an apprenticeship agreement. The purpose of the agreement is to identify the occupation, apprenticeship standard, expected dates of training and required off the job training for the apprenticeship.17.5 Professional Standards Admin will record any Regulation 13 warning or disciplinary action and outcomes on Centurion (the force system for recording all complaints, conduct and formal performance matters).Should the Student Officer leave the Force, these details will remain on record.
18. DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION18.1 OwnershipDepartment Responsible:	People Development and People Services Technical Author:	Natalie Strong, HR Manager, Standards                              Jen Bailey-Hobbs/Sarah Hiscocks, People Development Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor: Suzie Thompson, Head of HR Strategy & PolicyDave Eddy, Head of People Development18.2 Related Documents and Useful LinksUniversity South Wales – Student Handbook Regulation 13 Process Flow ChartJRFT & PST PolicyCollege of Policing Guidance - https://www.college.police.uk/What-we- do/Learning/Policing-Education-Qualifications-Framework/Pages/Policing-Education- Qualifications-Framework.aspx18.3 Revision HistoryEffective From:	September 2020Next Review Date:	September 2022Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes06.11.20131.0Title changed from Regulation 13 Policy to Regulation 13 – student Officers Policy.25.05.20181.0Data Protection section amended to reflect implementation of GDPR and new DPA.01.10. 20202.0Entire new section to cover the 2020 Police Constable entry programmes including the involvement of the HEI University of South Wales01.10.20202.0More detailed process to ensure clarity in relation to unsatisfactory performance and attendance management01.10.20202.0Policy Title Change to “Training and Probationary Procedural Guidance for Student Officers”.31.03.20212.1Change of Student Officer Training & Assessment Team (SOTAT) to Student Officer Assessment Team (SOAT)31.03.20212.1Amend – 5.3 Pre-join degree 2 years probationary31.03.20212.1Inclusion of leave during initial learning period and also another pre tutorship31.03.20212.1Inclusion of 6.8.1231.03.20212.1Expansion of 6.14.231.03.20212.1Inclusion of 7.11 (amended to 8.11)31.03.20212.114.b Flexible working and extension to course (amended to 16.b)31.03.20212.1Inclusion of 15.5 (amended to 17.5)13.04.20212.2Inclusion of Section 713.04.20212.2Inclusion of Section 1113.04.20212.2Inclusion of 13.4

18.4 ApprovalsThis document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionHead of Strategy and PolicyAugust 20202.0Head of HR OperationsAugust 20202.0JNCC(Not required for all policies)September 20202.018.5 DistributionThis document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefN/AEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersFebruary 20212.018.6 Diversity Impact Assessment18.7 ConsultationList below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionFederationFebruary 20202.0W.E.P.AFebruary 20202.0JNCC ratification for changesApril 20213.018.8 Training Requirements - No requirement18.9 IT Infrastructure: No requirement14.1 
Appendix 1 – USW Academic MisconductStudent is suspected of academic misconduct.Is there potentially a case to answer?
No case to answer – case is dismissedORPoor academic practice – student is interviewed and advised; note of discussion given to student within 5 working days and kept on the student record.PF informed of outcome.
How serious is the case?
			
Has the student committedacademic	Nomisconduct?
Has the student committed academic misconduct?
	
Can AMO issue penalty?
PF informed of AMP decision and penalty issued

NoAMO refers case to AMP
Student Officer has the right to request a review of the decision within 10 working days
WILTSHIRE POLICE FORCE POLICYUnmanageable DebtDate of Publication:	March 2021 Version:	3.0Next Review Date:	March 2022
TABLE OF CONTENTS1. POLICY STATEMENT	32. AIM OF THE POLICY	33. DEFINITION OF UNMANAGEABLE DEBT / BORROWING	34. RESPONSIBILITIES	34.1 Individual Responsibility	34.2 Managers and Heads of Department	45. DISCLOSURE PROCESS	46. NON-DISCLOSURE	57. CONFIDENTIALITY	58. SEEKING SUPPORT	5APPLICABILITY	6LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCE	6RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	6AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE	6DATA PROTECTION	6FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	6TRAINING REQUIREMENTS	6MONITORING AND REVIEW	6WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICY	7APPENDIX A: The Unmanageable Debt Process Flowchart	8DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	9
1. POLICY STATEMENTThe 2020 NCA National Strategic Assessment identifies 'financial hardship' as a corruption risk to police officers and staff.While it is accepted that an individual employee of Wiltshire Police may be burdened with unmanageable debt through little or no fault of their own, unmanageable debt / borrowing can make members of the Police service vulnerable / susceptible to improper influence or undue pressure, fraud, blackmail or extortion by criminal individuals or groups.This policy highlights the requirement for Police Officers to discharge all lawful debts in accordance with the terms and conditions directed by the lender and sets the same standards on unmanageable debt to all Police Staff, Special Constabulary and embedded 3rd party representatives.2. AIM OF THE POLICYThis policy is intended to reassure all members of Wiltshire Police that should they get into financial difficulty they will receive support from the Force and signposting to appropriate support agencies if required. However, to receive the support from the force, the individual must understand their personal responsibility to disclose (see s4.1 below).All members of Wiltshire Police should be aware that indebtedness and unmanageable borrowing can pose a risk to the integrity of individual members of Wiltshire Police. In some instances individuals may become vulnerable to corruption. Any undue pressure, improper influence or manipulation of Wiltshire Police employees by criminal individuals and organisations could cause significant damage to public trust in the Police service.3. DEFINITION OF UNMANAGEABLE DEBT / BORROWINGPersonal debt can be considered unmanageable when the level of required payments cannot be met through normal income streams. This would typically occur over a sustained period of time, causing overall debt / borrowing levels to increase to a level where repayments become impossible to manage.It is recognised that the assessment of debt issues is a subjective one and each case should be looked at on its own merits. Factors such as the different categories of debt (e.g. student loans, maintenance settlements, gambling or other lifestyle issues) should all be taken into account.However, the prime consideration is that the debt issue is being acknowledged and addressed; that the individual is taking responsibility and taking appropriate steps to manage the situation; rather than the issue being ignored in the hope that it will “go away”.4. RESPONSIBILITIES4.1 Individual ResponsibilityAll Police Officers, Special Constables, Police Staff, and embedded 3rd party representatives directly or indirectly involved in the delivery of policing services, have a personal responsibility to ensure their financial circumstances are kept within their control and that they maintain agreed repayment schedules and amounts with lenders.All Police Officers must be aware that under the Police (Conduct) Regulations 2020, they have a mandatory responsibility to disclose any unmanageable debt/borrowing and must discharge all lawful debts in accordance with the terms and conditions directed by the lender.
Police Staff have obligations to discharge their borrowing repayments in accordance with consumer lending expectations. Also, the College of Policing Vetting Authorised Professional Practice recommends that the same standards of vetting including financial checks are applied to Police Staff.All personnel in receipt of security clearance are required to notify Force Vetting of any significant change to their personal and financial circumstancesAll personnel must:ï Familiarise themselves and comply with this policy, complementary polices and other policies issued from time to timeï Notify the Force that they are experiencing unmanageable debt as soon as it is practicable to do so (see 5 below).4.2 Managers and Heads of DepartmentAll Heads of Department & Departmental Managers have a duty of care for Officers and Staff under their management control. Managers are expected to discuss the risks posed by indebtedness and unmanageable borrowing with their staff by way of an Integrity Health Check conducted at least annually during one-to-one meetings or as part of the ePDR process. Therefore, all supervisors should be fully aware and able to inform individuals of the support mechanisms in place to support colleagues experiencing financial and attendant difficulties.Those employees affected by debt will be dealt with as a welfare concern unless the debt is linked to criminality or there is wilful neglect in the discharge of it. The focus will be on encouraging the individual to take action to manage their financial position.Under no circumstances should any individual provide or offer financial advice to colleagues experiencing financial difficulties.Managers should notify the Counter-Corruption Unit (CCU) of anyone they know to have unmanageable debt or who they suspect to be vulnerable through addictive or obsessive behaviours (for instance gambling or on-line shopping) that make them susceptible to corrupt practices or influences.All notifications will be treated in confidence and no further disclosures will be made unless there is a statutory requirement to do so or the risk of not sharing information (for example from a health and wellbeing perspective and / or ensuring compliance with Police Regulations / Standards of Professional Behaviour) is greater than the benefit of observing confidentiality considerations. In all cases, colleagues will be treated with respect, dignity and compassion and a non-judgemental posture will be maintained at all times.Although managers should always seek to actively support their staff through any issues with unmanageable debt and borrowing, it will not be unreasonable to point out the consequences should an individual refuse to take ownership of their situation and fail to complete a notification. In circumstances such as this, the supervisor must refer the matter to the CCU as soon as practicable.5. DISCLOSURE PROCESSWhere Police Officers, Police Staff and embedded 3rd parties incur levels of debt / borrowing that is, or is likely to become unmanageable, they must:ï Ensure that all methods employed to resolve the situation are lawful and in accordance with current recognised proceduresï 
ï Discuss the situation initially with ManagementProblems outside work can affect a person’s ability to perform effectively at work and it is therefore important that line management is given the opportunity to consider the welfare of the member of staff and put in place support locally, where appropriate.ï Disclose the matter to CCUMake contact with the CCU to disclose - this can be done by email CCU@wiltshire.police.uk or by direct contact with CCU staff.ï Consider seeking support from Occupational Health UnitWhere appropriate, contact should be made with OHU to ensure a clinical assessment is performed. This will be to assess if any underlying health issues may be contributing to, or as a result of, their financial situation and to provide the clinician with an opportunity to advise on whether the individual is fit to fulfil their current role.This process will follow in line with the Occupational Health Unit Policy and Occupational Health Unit Confidentiality Statement.ï Consider seeking support from Federation/UNISON/WEPAStaff Associations / Trades Unions will be able to signpost and support individuals.6. NON-DISCLOSUREWiltshire Police officers and staff must be aware of the risk to their integrity that unmanageable debt/borrowing brings and this can therefore impact on public trust in the organisation.It is therefore important for our employees to know that a failure to disclose to the Force could have a significant impact on them. By definition, this could have a detrimental effect on an individual’s security clearance or even continued suitability for employment.In all cases, where there is evidence that an individual has wilfully failed or neglected to discharge lawful debt / borrowing, consideration will be given as to whether any misconduct proceedings are appropriate.7. CONFIDENTIALITYAll information obtained, collected, processed or disclosed under the auspices of this policy will be managed in accordance with prevailing legislative and regulatory expectations and minimum standards8. SEEKING SUPPORTThose in need of support as a consequence of unmanageable debt are encouraged to seek support at the earliest opportunity.Whilst Wiltshire Police is unable to recommend any one support organisation, individuals (or managers seeking to support an individual) will be able to obtain support from:ï Occupational Health Unitï Police Federationï UNISONï Wiltshire Ethnic Police Associationï 
APPLICABILITYThis policy applies to all Police Officers, Special Constables, Police Staff, and embedded 3rd party representatives directly or indirectly involved in the delivery of policing services. While this policy may not apply to all third Party personnel, they should be made aware of their responsibility to comply with the principles enshrined in the Code of Ethics.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEï Police Act 1996ï Data Protection Act 2018ï Police (Conduct) Regulations 2020ï Police (Complaints and Misconduct) Regulations 2020ï Human Rights Act 1998ï Employment Rights Act 1996ï Official Secrets Actsï Standards of Professional Behaviourï Code of Ethicsï Vetting Codes of Practice / APPRELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSGifts & Hospitality Policy Vetting APPEthical Interviews ProcedureNPCCAG Abuse of Position for a Sexual Purpose strategy Force ValuesAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEAPP > Professional standards > Vetting.DATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this procedure will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.TRAINING REQUIREMENTSWhile there are no specific training requirements under this policy, it is referenced as part of the annual Integrity Health Check to be conducted by all supervisors with their staff.Therefore, all line managers should be familiar with the content of this policy and its relevance to the prevention of corruption and be prepared to provide members of their staff having issues such as this with support and signposting to enhanced support and advice.MONITORING AND REVIEWThe Counter-Corruption Unit will maintain data in relation to members of Wiltshire Police and individual’s subject of this policy. This will be treated confidentially and stored securely and will not be available on the Force wide system.
This information, along with feedback on the content of the policy from policy users, will be used to monitor the efficiency and effectiveness of the policy.This Policy is owned by the Professional Standards Department. The Head of the Professional Standards Department will ensure that this policy is reviewed annually.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Head of Professional Standards is responsible for this policy. The DI CCU is responsible for all Unmanageable Debt reports into Professional Standards. Contact can be made with the department by the following means – Email: CCU@wiltshire.police.uk
APPENDIX 1Unmanageable Debt	August2021* Unless there is a statutory requirement to disclose the information or if the risk of not disclosing the information (for example, from a Health and Wellbeing perspective or if there is a risk of non-compliance with Police Regulations / Standards of Professional Behaviour) outweighs the benefit of keeping the information confidential.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Professional Standards Department Policy Owner/Author:	Supt Steve Cox / DS Troy SMITH Technical Author:Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor:	Deputy Chief ConstableRevision History:Revision DateVersionSummary of Changes26.06.20182.0Layout restructured and additional text added to provide more clarity in relation to individuals responsibilities, the importance of acknowledging a debt problem and the disclosure process. No substantive changes made.15.03.20213.0Restructured, greater clarity provided in line with 2020/2021 changes to both national policy, local policy and internal processes.Approvals:This document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team22.03.20213.0SCT/ACC/ACO**(Delete as appropriate) N/A no substantial amendments made.JNCC(Not required for all policies) N/A no substantial amendments made.Distribution:This document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersOtherDiversity Impact Assessment:Consultation:List below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionImplications of the Policy: Training RequirementsSee Training Requirements section above.IT InfrastructureNo additional IT infrastructure required.