MenuHome Crime, justice and law  Policing  User guide to statistics on firearm and shotgun certificatesHome O?ceThis guide provides additional information to support the statistics on firearm and shotgun certificates in Eng land and Wales. These statistics contain information on the number and type of certificate issued by police forces in England and Wales under the Firearms Act 1968 (as amended).Details of upcoming publications can be found on the  statistics release calendar. The release reports on legally-held firearms and shotguns only. No o?cial estimate of illegally-held firearms and shotguns in England and Wales is available.1. Uses of the dataThese statistics may be used by those with an interest in firearms to monitor trends in the number of firearm and shotgun certificates on issue, the number of guns held on certificate and the number of certificate holders in England and Wales. Specific uses of the data are included below.Informing the general publicFigures on firearm and shotgun certificates and related statistics are used by the media, interest groups and the public for information, and to scrutinise trends and police force area comparisons.Statistics on firearm and shotgun certificates are routinely requested via parliamentary questions (PQs) and freedom of information (FOI) requests.Policy making and monitoringThe figures are used by policy makers and advisors to: monitor the number of firearm and shotgun certificates, and related statistics  monitor the performance and e?ectiveness of police forces monitor the performance and e?ectiveness of government policy  inform policy and operational decisions by ministersThe statistics provide a national and regional level picture of firearm and shotgun certificates, giving some insight into policing activities and contribute to decisions on police force funding.Support third sector activity - lobbyingLobby groups use firearm and shotgun certificate data, and related statistics, to protect the rights and civil liberties of citizens, and to support the use of legally-held guns in the farming community. For example, the British Association for Shooting and Conservation (BASC) use these statistics to monitor the legal possession of weapons, and to promote and protect sporting shooting in the UK.2. GlossaryCoterminous certificateA coterminous certificate allows the certificate holder’s firearm and shotgun certificates to expire on the same day. Only shotgun certificates can have their expiry date changed to expire with a firearm certificate. Combining the certificates reduces fees for the certificate holder and reduces the burden on police firearms licensing teams.Firearms Act 1968 (‘the 1968 Act’)It is, with certain statutory exceptions, an o?ence to possess, purchase, or acquire any firearm, shotgun or ammunition to which section 1 or 2 of the  Firearms Act 1968 applies, without holding a certificate. Section 1 of the 1968 Act applies to all firearms except a shotgun, an air gun, or a weapon prohibited under section 5 of the 1968 Act.FirearmAccording to the 1968 Act, a firearm means a lethal barrelled weapon of any description from which any shot, bullet or other missile with a kinetic energy of more than one joule at the muzzle of the weapon can be discharged. It includes any prohibited weapon, any component part of such a weapon and any accessory to such a weapon designed or adapted to diminish the noise or flash caused by the firing of the weapon.Firearm certificateThe certificate lists the number, type and serial number of each weapon held and any conditions attached (a standard condition is that weapons and ammunition are held in a secure place when not in use).HandgunHandgun refers to the length of the firearm. Any firearm which either has a barrel less than 30 cm in length or is less than 60 cm in length overall is generally prohibited. The intention is to prohibit dangerous firearms which are easy to conceal (hide). However, the police may issue a firearm certificate allowing the possession of certain handguns, for example those of particular historic interest, muzzle-loading pistols or those used for the humane killing of animals.Lost or stolen firearms and shotgunsSection 34 of the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1997 requires holders of a firearm or shotgun certificate to inform the chief o?cer of Police who granted the certificate within 7 days of the theft, loss, deactivation or destruction of any firearm or shotgun, and or the theft or loss of ammunition relating to the certificate.Muzzle-loading pistolThe ammunition is loaded via the muzzle of the firearm (the open end of the gun’s barrel). They are not quick to load, and therefore, do not pose the same threat as some other types of guns.Registered firearms dealerA dealer is defined in the 1968 Act as a person or a corporate body whose trade or business is to manufacture, sell, transfer, repair, test or ‘prove’ firearms or ammunition to which section 1 of this Act applies, or shotguns. A dealer or corporate body’s trade or business may include the manufacture, sale transfer, repair or test of air weapons.Firearms dealers are not authorised to ‘trade in’ prohibited weapons without the Secretary of State’s authority.RifleA rifle under section 57(1) of the 1968 Act has spiral grooves in the barrel, uses bullets as ammunition and is typically used for target shooting or for the control of vermin.ShotgunA smooth-bore gun (not being an air gun) which: has a barrel not less than 24 inches in length and does not have any barrel with a bore exceeding 2 inches in diameter either has no magazine (cartridge holder) or has a non-detachable magazine incapable of holding more than 2 cartridges is not a revolver gunOther smooth-bore guns may require a firearm certificate. It is, with certain statutory exceptions, an o?ence for a person to possess, purchase, or acquire any shotgun without holding a shotgun certificate. A shotgun uses cartridges containing shot as ammunition and is typically used for clay pigeon shooting or for the control of vermin.Shotgun certificateThe certificate includes the description of the shotguns including, if known, the identification number of the guns.Section 1 shotgunContains a magazine holding more than 2 rounds. This is held on a firearm certificate.Section 2 shotgunMay have a magazine restricted to no more than 2 rounds. This is held on a shotgun certificate.Sound moderatorAn accessory to a lethal barrelled weapon or a prohibited weapon, designed to diminish the noise or flash caused by firing the weapon.Temporary permitChief o?cers of Police are authorised by section 7 of the Firearms Act 1968 to issue temporary permits in certain limited circumstances to temporarily enable the possession of firearms or shotguns where it may not be necessary or desirable to issue a certificate or, exceptionally, where a certificate holder’s application for renewal of a firearm and or shotgun certificate cannot be processed before the certificate expires. In addition, a temporary permit may be issued to authorise the temporary possession of firearms, shotguns or ammunition by a relative, executor of a will or receiver or liquidator of a bankrupt’s estate.Visitors’ permitThe 1968 Act allows the sponsor of a visitor to Great Britain to apply for a permit on their behalf allowing the visitor to possess a firearm, shotgun or ammunition without a firearm or shotgun certificate. A sponsor may be a private individual or the representative of for example, a club, shooting syndicate, country estate or national shooting organisation. Permits cannot exceed 12 months. Visitors’ permits are usually granted to allow the holder to attend organised shoots, such as deer stalking or competitive target shooting events. Group applications may be made for up to 20 people (section 17 of the  Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988).3. Legislation and regulationsThe Home O?ce g uide on firearms licensing law provides guidance on firearms licensing legislation. It is not a definitive statement of the law, but should be read alongside the  statutory g uidance for chief o?cers of police.3.1 Possession of firearms by persons previously convicted of crimeA person sentenced to a term of imprisonment for 3 years or more cannot possess firearms, shotguns, antique firearms, or ammunition for life.A person sentenced to a term of imprisonment for 3 months or more but less than 3 years cannot possess firearms, shotguns, antique firearms, or ammunition until 5 years after the date of their release.A person with a suspended sentence of 3 months or more must not possess firearms, shotguns, antique firearms, or ammunition for a period of 5 years from the second day after the date on which sentence has been passed. (A suspended sentence is served in the community instead of in prison provided the o?ender does not commit any further o?ences and complies with any conditions imposed by the courts).3.2 Firearm certificatesFirearm certificates are issued for weapons covered by section 1 of the 1968 Act, which include: rifles muzzle-loading pistols firearms used for the humane killing of animals, flare pistols and vintage pistols held as war trophies or collectors’ items section 1 shotguns section 1 air rifles, which are air rifles with a muzzle energy greater than 12 foot- poundsFor information on the prohibition of weapons and special exemptions, see the  Firearms (  Amendment) Act 1997.3.3 Shotgun certificatesShotgun certificates, covered by section 2 of the 1968 Act, allow the holder to own any number of shotguns. These can include pump-action and self-loading weapons with a magazine (cartridge holder) incapable of holding more than 2 cartridges, but excludes large magazine smooth-bore guns.3.4 Age of a firearm and or shotgun certificate holderThe 1968 Act places restrictions on the purchase, acquisition, possession and use of firearms by, and the transfer to, young people. The subject of minimum age to possess a firearm or shotgun is complicated. This is explained further in Appendix 4 of the Home O?ce g uide on firearms licensing law, including exemptions. The table in appendix 4 is a legal summary on the type of firearms or shotguns that may be held by those aged 17 and under.4. Quality and methodologyData in the firearm and shotgun certificates in Eng land and Wales statistical release is collected as part of the statutory Annual Data Requirement (ADR) between the Home O?ce and police forces. The ADR is a list of all mandatory data requests made to police forces in England and Wales under the Home Secretary’s statutory powers.4.1 Data coverageThe main statistics on firearm and shotgun certificates include: certificates on issue - collected once in 1971 and in every year since 1983  new and renewal applications - collected every year since 1983 new and renewal coterminous applications - collected every year since the year ending March 2018 the number of firearms and shotguns covered by certificates on issue - collected every year since 1995 firearm and shotgun certificate revocations - collected every year since 1992  firearm dealers - collected every year since 1995 visitors’ firearm and shotgun permits - collected every year since the year ending March 1995 the number of people who hold a firearm and or a shotgun by age and gender - collected every year since the year ending March 2016 firearm and shotgun weapon types held on certificates - collected every year since the year ending March 2016 lost and stolen firearms and shotguns - collected every year since the year ending March 2021 temporary firearm and shotgun permits - collected since the year ending March 20234.2 Data sourceThe statistics on firearm and shotgun certificates are taken from the National Firearms Licensing Management System (NFLMS). The NFLMS is used to record the details of people who have applied for, been granted, refused or who have had their firearm or shotgun certificate revoked.NFLMS data is administrative information, input by individual police forces. As the data is taken from a live operational database, numbers may change as information on that system is updated.Data has been taken from the NFLMS each year since the year ending 31 March 2008. Prior to this, data was collected through statistics provided by each force.Gender is reported as provided by the applicant on the certificate application form. Options are ‘female’ and ‘male’; missing data is reported as ‘unknown’.4.3 Quality assurance processThese statistics are compiled by statisticians within the Home O?ce. Statisticians undertake a wide range of quality assurance checks on the data with each England and Wales police force.These checks follow the QAAD (Quality Assurance of Administrative Data) guidance and include: compiling the administrative data to highlight values within the dataset that vary greatly from the others (outliers) and possible errors variance checks, such as investigating substantial changes in figures compared with the previous year checking that the data makes sense and working with police forces to improve the quality if not making sure data quality and checks are explained to users and what e?ect these have on the statisticsFollowing checks with police forces, data tables are compared by a second statistician against the checked data. The prepared text is also checked against the tables.Statisticians are responsible for checking that the commentary appropriately describes the trends seen in the data and is not biased.4.4 Data qualityThe data quality for the total numbers of firearm and shotgun certificates is considered to be high. In addition to the checks outlined in the quality assurance process, these data undergo a reconciliation process and are examined closely as part of the performance monitoring of the Home O?ce.E?ects of COVID-19A range of restrictions relating to the COVID-19 pandemic began on 12 March 2020, and the first UK ‘lockdown’ measures were announced on 23 March 2020. Some figures presented for the year ending 31 March 2021 and year ending 31 March 2022 will have been a?ected by this, and therefore comparisons with these years are likely to reflect temporary changes in firearm and shotgun certificate data due to COVID-19, rather than permanent shifts in trends.Accredited o?cial statistics statusThese statistics are accredited o?cial statistics (National Statistics in the Statistics and Registration Service Act 2007) which means these statistics have been independently reviewed by the regulator and found to comply with the standards of trustworthiness, quality and value in the Code of Practice for Statistics. The statistics last underwent a full assessment against the code of practice in 2012. It is our responsibility to maintain compliance with these standards.Since the latest review by the O?ce for Statistics Regulation, we have continued to follow the Code of Practice for Statistics and make improvements.We have worked with NFLMS users at the National User Group meeting to improve our understanding of how the statistics and recording system are used, so that they remain relevant and suitable for their purpose.We have also previously worked with Home O?ce Digital, Data and Technology to improve the NFLMS. Changes made to the recording system will help to reduce human error when entering data and will prevent users from leaving fields empty. These changes will help to increase the quality of published data and will allow a more accurate representation of the people that hold firearm and shotgun certificates in England and Wales.In 2023, following user feedback, statistics on temporary permits were included in the firearm and shotgun statistical publication. They were classified as  o?cial statistics in development for the first year of their publication (year ending March 2023) as the processes around data collection and the quality of the data were developed. The o?cial statistics in development label was removed from the year ending March 2024 statistics to indicate that:the statistical methods involved in analysing the data are now well established coverage has improvedfeedback indicates that the statistics are useful and credible the development phase has endedquality limitations are known, and the impact of these are understoodPrior to the introduction of the NFLMS in 2006, the variety of police force data collection systems meant some police forces were unable to prevent double counting of weapons shared between 2 certificate holders. Due to the change from in-force data collection systems to NFLMS during 2006, accurate data relating to the financial year ending 31 March 2007, and numbers of weapons and persons covered by certificates for the following year, are not available.Following the change to the NFLMS, the main types of errors in the data are thought to relate to recording and classification errors.Shotgun certificates recorded as coterminous have been investigated as part of the regular, ongoing quality assurance work on the underlying data.We are aware that due to the method of data entry on the NFLMS, in a small number of cases, weapons may have been incorrectly categorised on NFLMS. There are now plans to introduce further data validation to the NFLMS to prevent this error from occurring in the future.In 2023, an additional data quality exercise was conducted. This involved identifying certificates that had been revoked, cancelled or had expired and asking forces to ensure they were updated and accurate on their systems.4.5 RevisionsIt is standard practice across all Home O?ce statistical releases to include revisions to previous years’ data in the latest release. Corrections and revisions follow  the Home O?ce’s statement of compliance with the Code of Practice for O?cial Statistics.4.6 RoundingData is mainly provided unrounded in the data tables to provide detail for users. However, caution should be used when comparing small di?erences between time periods.Percentages greater than 1% are presented to the nearest percent. All percentages less than 1% are rounded to the nearest significant figure, for example 0.43% would be presented as 0.4%.5. Statistics on certificates in Scotland and Northern IrelandScotlandPolice Scotland publish annual statistics on the number of firearm and shotgun certificates granted, renewed and revoked in Scotland. The figures are considered to be broadly comparable with those for England and Wales, due to the common legislation in the certification process.Northern IrelandThe Police Service of Northern Ireland lists its statistical outputs on the statistics page of its website, but there are no series that are directly comparable to those for England and Wales.6. Feedback and enquiriesWe are keen to improve the accessibility of our documents. If you have any problems or feedback relating to accessibility, or general enquiries, please email:Policing Statistics@homeo?ce.gov.uk.6.1 Media enquiries via Home O?ce news deskTelephone: 0300 123 3535Services and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking, jobs and pensionsGet involved
Code of Practice for Victims of Crime in England and WalesNovember 2020
Code of Practice for Victims of Crime in England and WalesNovember 2020Presented to Parliament pursuant to section 33 of the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004
© Crown copyright 2020This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence,visit: nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.This publication is available at: www.gov.uk/official-documentsAny enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at: victims.code@justice.gov.uk ISBN 978-1-5286-2253-0CCS 1120529734	11/20Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimumPrinted in the UK by the APS Group on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ContentsSummary of Victims’ Rights	1Introduction	3Enhanced Rights	10Right 1: To be able to understand and to be understood	12Right 2: To have the details of the crime recorded without unjustified delay	13Right 3: To be provided with information when reporting the crime	15Right 4: To be referred to services that support victims and have services andsupport tailored to your needs	17Right 5: To be provided with information about compensation	20Right 6: To be provided with information about the investigation and prosecution	22Right 7: To make a Victim Personal Statement	25Right 8: To be given information about the trial, trial process and your roleas a witness	27Right 9: To be given information about the outcome of the case and any appeals	29Right 10: To be paid expenses and have property returned	32Right 11: To be given information about the offender following a conviction	33Right 12: To make a complaint about your Rights not being met	38
Summary of Victims’ RightsTo be able to understand and to be understoodYou have the Right to be given information in a way that is easy to understand and to be provided with help to be understood, including, where necessary, access to interpretation and translation services.To have the details of the crime recorded without unjustified delayYou have the Right to have details of the crime recorded by the police as soon as possible after the incident. If you are required to provide a witness statement or be interviewed, you have the Right to be provided with additional support to assist you through this process.To be provided with information when reporting the crimeYou have the Right to receive written confirmation when reporting a crime, to be provided with information about the criminal justice process and to be told about programmes or services for victims. This might include services where you can meet with the suspect or offender, which is known as Restorative Justice.To be referred to services that support victims and have services and support tailored to your needsYou have the Right to be referred to services that support victims, which includes the Right to contact them directly, and to have your needs assessed so services and support can be tailored to meet your needs. If eligible, you have the Right to be offered a referral to specialist support services and to be told about additional support available at court, for example special measures.To be provided with information about compensationWhere eligible, you have the Right to be told about how to claim compensation for any loss, damage or injury caused as a result of crime.To be provided with information about the investigation and prosecutionYou have the Right to be provided with updates on your case and to be told when important decisions are taken. You also have the Right, at certain stages of the justice process, to ask for decisions to be looked at again by the relevant service provider.
To make a Victim Personal StatementYou have the Right to make a Victim Personal Statement, which tells the court how the crime has affected you and is considered when sentencing the offender. You will be given information about the process.To be given information about the trial, trial process and your role as a witnessIf your case goes to court, you have the Right to be told the time, date and location of any hearing and the outcome of those hearings in a timely way. If you are required to give evidence, you have the Right to be offered appropriate help before the trial and, where possible, if the court allows, to meet with the prosecutor before giving evidence.To be given information about the outcome of the case and any appealsYou have the Right to be told the outcome of the case and, if the defendant is convicted, to be given an explanation of the sentence. If the offender appeals against their conviction or sentence, you have the Right to be told about the appeal and its outcome.To be paid expenses and have property returnedIf you are required to attend court and give evidence, you have the Right to claim certain expenses. If any of your property was taken as evidence, you have the Right to get it back as soon as possible.To be given information about the offender following a convictionWhere eligible, you have the Right to be automatically referred to the Victim Contact Scheme, which will provide you with information about the offender and their progress in prison, and if/when they become eligible for consideration of parole or release. Where applicable, you also have the Right to make a new Victim Personal Statement, in which you can say how the crime continues to affect you.To make a complaint about your Rights not being metIf you believe that you have not received your Rights, you have the Right to make a complaint to the relevant service provider. If you remain unhappy, you can contact the Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman.
IntroductionWhat is the Victims’ Code?The Code of Practice for Victims of Crime1 (Victims’ Code) sets out the services and a minimum standard for these services that must be provided to victims of crime by organisations (referred to as service providers) in England and Wales.Who is a ‘victim’ under this Code?This Code acknowledges that the terms ‘complainant’ and ‘survivor’ are often used in the criminal justice system to describe a person who has made a criminal allegation to the police. However, for the purpose of this Code, the definition of a ‘victim’ is:? a person2 who has suffered harm, including physical, mental or emotional harm or economic loss which was directly caused by a criminal offence;3? a close relative4 (or a nominated family spokesperson) of a person whose death was directly caused by a criminal offence.You can also receive Rights under this Code if you are:? a parent or guardian of the victim if the victim is under 18 years of age;5 or? a nominated family spokesperson if the victim has a mental impairment or has been so badly injured because of a criminal offence that they are unable to communicate or lacks the capacity to do so.All service providers must have the victim’s best interests as their primary consideration and take the victim’s age, maturity, views, needs and concerns fully into account.Which Rights will apply to you?Which Rights apply to you will depend on whether the crime is reported to the police, if the case goes to court, and whether the defendant is convicted, as well as your personal needs and circumstances. Rights 1, 4 and 12 apply to all victims. The remaining Rights only apply where a crime has been reported to the police. The relevant service provider will tell you which Rights apply to you.1 The Victims’ Code is issued by the Secretary of State for Justice under section 32 of the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004.2 Legal persons (e.g. businesses or other enterprises such as charities) are not included within the definition of a victim. However, businesses and other enterprises such as charities can receive the services in this Code and make an impact statement where a criminal offence has been committed against them, subject to provision of a named point of contact to the relevant service provider. More information about how to make an Impact Statement for Business is available at: www.gov.uk/government/publications/impact- statements-for-business/impact-statements-for-business-guidance3 For the purposes of this Code a ‘criminal offence’ means an offence that is committed, or subject to criminal proceedings, in England and Wales.4 This normally refers to the spouse, the partner, the relatives in direct line, the siblings and the dependants of the victim. Other family members, including guardians and carers, may be considered close relatives at the discretion of the service provider.5 Unless the parent or guardian is under investigation or has been charged by the police in connection with the crime or if, in the reasonable opinion of the service provider involved, it is not in the victim’s best interests for your parent or guardian to receive such services.1 
How can I expect to be treated?You have the Right to:? be treated with respect, dignity, sensitivity, compassion and courtesy;? make informed choices that are fully respected;? have your privacy respected by service providers in accordance with their obligations under the relevant privacy and data protection laws; and? have services provided to assist you and your family to understand and engage with the criminal justice process and that are offered in a professional manner, without discrimination of any kind.Support for witnessesIf you have suffered harm, including physical, mental or emotional harm or economic loss, as a direct result of witnessing a crime, you are a victim of crime for the purposes of this Code and are ableto access services that support victims. You do not need to have provided a statement to or been interviewed by the police, or be required to attend court as a witness.All other witnesses can access services provided under the Witness Charter,6 rather than under this Code.Resident statusYou have the Right to services under this Code regardless of your resident status. However, if the crime was committed in England or Wales but you live elsewhere, you should access support services where you live. If you are required to give evidence in court in England or Wales, you will be able to access support services while you are in England or Wales.Families bereaved7 by murder or manslaughter abroadFamilies bereaved by murder or manslaughter of a British national committed outside of the United Kingdom should contact the Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office. They provide support and information about processes in the country where the incident occurred, including repatriation of the deceased. They may also be able to refer the deceased’s family to specialist support services. Further information is available by calling: 020 7008 50008 or at: www.gov.uk/government/publications/ helping-british-people-abroad-murder-and-manslaughterThere is a Memorandum of Understanding to help clarify the role of the Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office, the police and coroners in England and Wales, when a British national is a victim of murder, manslaughter or infanticide abroad. The Memorandum focuses on both the deceased and their family and explains what type of support is available.How can I ensure I receive the best service?Service providers will try to minimise the number of different people you have contact with during your case, and wherever possible, offer you a single point of contact for information. To assist them in delivering your Rights under this Code, you should:? let them know if your contact details or preferences change;6 www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-witness-charter-standards-of-care-for-witnesses-in-the-criminal-justice-system7 This refers to the spouse, the partner, the relatives in direct line, the siblings and the dependants of the victim. Other family members, including guardians and carers, may be considered close relatives at the discretion of the Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office.8 Available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. If you are not in the United Kingdom, you can find the contact details of the nearest British embassy, high commission or consulate online at: https://www.gov.uk/world/embassies1 
? ask them questions if you are unsure about anything related to your case or the criminal justice process; and? give service providers your views on the services they are providing to help them deliver and tailor a high-quality service.What if I do not want to receive the Rights offered under this Code?You may decide that you do not want some or all of the Rights under this Code. You should discuss this with the relevant service provider.You can choose to opt back in to receiving Rights under this Code at any time while the case is under active investigation, or prosecution, or the offender is serving their sentence. This does not apply to the Right to access support to help you to cope, and as far as possible, recover from being a victim of crime. This Right is available regardless of whether anyone has been charged, convicted of a criminal offence and regardless of whether you decide to report the crime to the police or you do not wish to cooperate with the investigation.Your Right to be protectedYou have the Right to be protected from re-victimisation, intimidation and retaliation during and after the investigation and proceedings. If you are concerned for your immediate safety, you should contact the police on: 999.In the unlikely event that the suspect (pre-trial) or offender (following conviction) escapes from custody, the police will contact you. If it is assessed that the suspect or offender poses a significant risk of harm to you, they will take any necessary measures to ensure your on-going protection.If you are receiving unwanted contact from an offender in prison, you should contact Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service Victim Helpline9 on: 0300 060 669910 or email: victim.helpline@justice.gov.ukIf you receive unwanted contact from an offender who is on licence in the community, you can contact the police or if you have one, your Victim Liaison Officer. If the offender is under 18, you can also report any unwanted contact to the police, but if you know they are being supervised by a Youth Offending Team, you may wish to contact the team directly. Contact details for Youth Offending Teams are available at: www.gov.uk/government/collections/youth-offending-team-contact-detailsInformation provided under this CodeService providers must include information about this Code on their websites. This information must also signpost victims to the relevant pages on: GOV.UK.Where required to share information under this Code, service providers must do so effectively and in accordance with their obligations under the Data Protection Act and General Data Protection Regulation 2018 and other relevant legislation.Where there is a high number of victims involved in a case, such as large-scale investment frauds with multiple investor victims, or in other exceptional cases, the service provider may communicateinformation11 that a victim has the Right to under this Code through alternative channels, such as their website, rather than contacting each victim individually.9 Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service must maintain a telephone helpline (the Victim Helpline) to ensure that victims have a number to ring if they receive unwanted contact from a prisoner.10 Monday – Friday, 9.00am – 4.00pm.11 This may include communication information under Rights 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9 and 11 of this Code.1 
Nothing in this Code requires a service provider to provide information to the victim where its disclosure:? could result in harm to any person;? could affect the proper handling of any criminal investigation or prosecution, or could otherwise prejudice any civil or criminal case, or parole proceedings; or? would, in the service provider’s view, be contrary to the interests of national security.What if I am contacted by the media?Generally, journalists can attend and report events that happen in court. Sometimes the media may take an interest in a case and approach you and/or your family for comment. There is no obligation to speak to them. However, you should be careful that you do not do anything to risk unfairly influencing the outcome of a court case and being in contempt of court.12If you have any concerns or would like some advice, you can speak with the police or a victim support provider. Alternatively, you can contact the Independent Press Standards Organisation at: www.ipso.co.uk, who will talk to you about your concerns and give practical advice and guidance.Access to medical supportIf you have been the victim of crime and have a physical or mental health need as a result, you can access National Health Service services. You do not need to have reported a crime to the police in order to access these services.If someone is seriously ill or injured and their life is at risk, call the emergency services on: 999. If it is not a life-threatening emergency, there are several options you can take. You can:? Call 111 (National Health Service England) or 0845 46 47 (National Health Service Wales) non-emergency medical helpline;? go to your local National Health Service walk-in centre or local urgent care centre/minor injuries unit or your local Accident and Emergency (A&E) service department;? visit or call your General Practitioner, who can refer you to specialist services including mental health support; or? talk to a pharmacist.More information about National Health Service services is available at: www.nhs.uk or www.wales.nhs.uk, or by calling: 111/0845 46 47 in (England/ Wales) or by visiting your General Practitioner.12 www.gov.uk/contempt-of-court1 
As well as being referred by the police, you can also refer yourself to a Sexual Assault Referral Centre.13 These centres have specially trained professionals who can give you both physical and mental health support if you have experienced rape or sexual assault, regardless of whether you choose to report the crime to the police or not.You can also access a wide range of psychological and emotional counselling and therapeutic approaches provided in a wide variety of settings, for instance, the National Health Service, voluntary sector agencies and private practice.If you are not ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom, you should note that some health services are exempt from payment, such as primary care services; services for the treatment of a physical or mental condition caused by torture, female genital mutilation, domestic violence, sexual violence or if you are determined a victim of modern slavery or human trafficking. Further details are available at: www.gov.uk/guidance/nhs-entitlements-migrant-health-guideCoronersCoroners are not included as service providers under this Code. This is because inquests are not criminal proceedings and bereaved family members already have interested person status in inquests which gives them certain statutory Rights. This includes the Right to ask relevant questions of the witnesses and to receive disclosure of documents and other evidence. Bereaved family members of a victim of crime who are involved in an inquest should instead consult the guidance on coroners’ investigations for bereaved people which is availableat: www.gov.uk/government/publications/guide-to-coroner-services-and- coroner-investigations-a-short-guide13 www.nhs.uk/live-well/sexual-health/help-after-rape-and-sexual-assault/1 
Who is responsible for meeting the Rights under this Code?The following organisations are required to deliver the Rights under this Code:
? Police and Crime Commissioners? All police forces in England and Wales, the British Transport Police and the Ministry of Defence Police? Police Witness Care Units14? The Crown Prosecution Service? Her Majesty’s Courts and Tribunals Service? Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service? 
The National Probation Service? The Parole Board for England and Wales? The Criminal Cases Review Commission? The Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority? The UK Supreme Court? Youth Offending Teams? 
Under this Code some victims will receive their Rights through a combination of the service providers listed above and other service providers, including:
? The Competition and Markets Authority? Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (Criminal Enforcement)? The Environment Agency? The Financial Conduct Authority? The Gambling Commission? The Health and Safety Executive? Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs? Home Office (Immigration Enforcement)? 
The Information Commissioner’s Office? Independent Office for Police Conduct? The National Crime Agency? The National Health Service? Natural Resources Wales? The Office of Rail and Road? The Serious Fraud Office? 
Other service providers can also have a role in relation to the investigation and/or prosecution of crimes.15 However, unlike the police and the Crown Prosecution Service, who have a broad remit to investigate and prosecute crimes, these service providers are limited to investigating and prosecuting specific types of offences committed in certain circumstances. This will determine the way in which, and frequency with which, they come into contact with victims.The Rights in this Code only apply where other service providers (such as those listed above) accept formal responsibility for conducting a criminal investigation or making a decision to prosecute. However, not all functions undertaken by other service providers are identical to those carried out by the police and the Crown Prosecution Service. Where functions are equivalent to a service provider under this Code (for example the other service provider is investigating or prosecuting an alleged offence), they must deliver the same Rights without unjustified delay, regardless of whether the other service provider is listed above.14 Witness Care Unit is the generic name to describe a police led function which provides information and support to victims and witnesses in cases progressing through the criminal justice system. This unit may be known by another name in your local area. The police will tell you the name of the unit who deliver the Rights assigned to the Witness Care Unit in this Code.15 This only applies to the extent that the service provider has formally accepted responsibility for conducting a criminal investigation into the crime or has formally accepted responsibility for making a decision to prosecute that crime.1 
The role of Police and Crime CommissionersPolice and Crime Commissioners are locally elected to secure efficient and effective policing. They have a legal duty to consult with victims in setting the policing priorities in their area and to hold the Chief Constable of the police in their area to account. They are responsible for commissioning many of the services that support victims outlined in this Code.The role of the Commissioner for Victims and Witnesses (Victims’ Commissioner)The Victims’ Commissioner is not listed as a service provider under this Code. This is because the Commissioner has a statutory duty to keep this Code under regular review. It is part of theCommissioner’s role to listen to the views of victims, understand the criminal justice system from the victims’ point of view and try to help improve the services and support available. The Victims’ Commissioner cannot help with individual cases or challenge criminal justice agencies to make different decisions.
Enhanced RightsThis Code acknowledges that victims who are considered vulnerable or intimidated, are a victim of the most serious crime (including a bereaved close relative) or have been persistently targeted are more likely to require specialised assistance (some victims may fall into one or more of these categories). Such support may include being offered a referral to a specialist support service, being contacted sooner after key decisions and having access to special measures (see Right 4) Within each individual Right this Code highlights where such Enhanced Rights apply.Once a service provider has identified that you are eligible for Enhanced Rights, they must ensure that this information is passed to other service providers with responsibilities under this Code and, where appropriate, to services that support victims.If you do not fall within the categories outlined above, a service provider may decide to provide access to certain Enhanced Rights depending on your circumstances or the impact of the crime.Vulnerable or intimidated victimsYou are eligible for Enhanced Rights under this Code as a vulnerable16 victim if:? you are under 18 years of age at the time of the offence,17 or? the quality of your evidence is likely to be affected because you:ï suffer from mental disorder within the meaning of the Mental Health Act 1983;ï otherwise have a significant impairment of intelligence and social functioning; orï have a physical disability or are suffering from a physical disorder.You are also eligible for Enhanced Rights under this Code as an intimidated victim if the service provider considers that the quality of your evidence will be affected because of your fear of distress about testifying in court.18When assessing whether a victim is intimidated, the service provider must consider:? the behaviour towards the victim on the part of the suspect, members of their family or associates, or any other person who is likely to be a suspect or witness in the case;? the victim’s age;? if relevant, the victim’s social and cultural background, religious beliefs or political opinions, ethnic origin, domestic and employment circumstances;? the nature and alleged circumstance of the offence to which the case relates (victims of a sexual offence or human trafficking will be considered to be intimidated); and? any views expressed by the victim.16 This is based on the criteria in section 16 of the Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999 for the court to determine eligibility for special measures.17 For general Enhanced Rights under this Code. However, in order to be eligible for special measures under section 16 of the Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999, you must be under 18 at the time of the hearing.18 This is based on the eligibility criteria for special measures in section 17 of the Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999.1 
Victims of the most serious crimeYou are eligible for Enhanced Rights under this Code as a victim of the most serious crime, if you are a close relative bereaved by a criminal offence, a victim of domestic abuse, hate crime, terrorism, sexual offences, human trafficking, modern slavery, attempted murder, kidnap, false imprisonment, arson with intent to endanger life and wounding or causing grievous bodily harm with intent.Additional Enhanced Rights that are available for bereaved close relatives are highlighted separately within each individual Right of this Code.Persistently targeted victimsYou are eligible for Enhanced Rights under this Code as a persistently targeted victim if you have been targeted repeatedly as a direct victim of crime over a period of time, particularly if you have been deliberately targeted or if you are a victim of a campaign of harassment or stalking.
Right 1: To be able to understand and to be understood1.1 You have the Right to be helped to understand what is happening and to be understood.In considering appropriate measures, service providers must consider any relevant personal characteristics which may affect your ability to understand and to be understood. All service providers must communicate in simple and accessible language and all translation or interpretation services must be offered free of charge to the victim.1.2 If, due to the impact of the crime, you need assistance to understand or to be understood, you can be supported by a person of your choice, unless the service provider considers that it would not be in your best interests or that it would impact the investigation or prosecution. In these circumstances, the service provider will tell you why.1.3 If you have difficulty understanding or speaking English, you have the Right to use an interpreter19 to help you understand, when:? reporting a criminal offence;20? being interviewed by the police; and? giving evidence as a witness.1.4 You can also receive the translation of any document where it is essential for the purposes of the interview or court proceedings to read a document that is given to you, including:? the written acknowledgment of the reported crime;? where it is essential for the purposes of the interview or court hearing to see a particular document that is disclosed to you, a copy of the relevant parts of the document;? communication informing you of the date, time and location of the trial;? the outcome of criminal proceedings and, where available, the reasons for the decision; and? the response to any complaint or request made under the Victims’ Right to Review Scheme.211.5 You can also receive an oral translation or summary of any of the documents listed above, unless doing so would prejudice the fairness of the proceedings.1.6 For cases heard in Wales, you have the legal Right to use Welsh when giving evidence and the court will make the necessary arrangements.22 You also have the Right to submit a VictimPersonal Statement to the Parole Board in Welsh, irrespective of the location of the offender, and to ask for a summary of the parole decision to be provided in Welsh.19 This includes both spoken and non-spoken interpreting, for example if a victim is deaf or hard of hearing.20 You have the Right to report the crime in a language you understand or with the necessary linguistic assistance if you do not speak English.21 See Right 6 for explanation of the Victims’ Right to Review.22 Section 22(1) of the Welsh Language Act 1993 provides: “In any legal proceedings in Wales the Welsh language may be spoken by any party, witness or other person who desires to use it”. No prior notice to use the Welsh language is required in magistrates’court proceedings. However, sometimes it is necessary for interpretation to be arranged, and prior notice will be given to the Welsh Language Unit to make necessary provisions.
Right 2: To have the details of the crime recorded without unjustified delay2.1 You have the Right to have details of the crime recorded by the police without unjustified delay after the incident. When you report an incident, you will be asked to provide details about the crime.2.2 If you are asked to make a witness statement, the police will explain to you that this may result in you needing to give evidence at court, if the case goes to trial.2.3 If you are asked to be interviewed, any interview should take place without unjustified delay, the number of interviews should be kept to a minimum and where possible be conducted by the same person. The police must take any steps necessary to ensure that you (and your family) do not have unnecessary contact with the suspect.2.4 The police must consider whether you would benefit from additional support, for example, the assistance of an interpreter, and that any interview is carried out by or through professionals trained for that purpose. They must also seek to ensure that it takes place in premises designed or adapted for the purpose. If this is not possible, the police will tell you why.2.5 You also have the Right to request to bring a person of your choice to the interview. If this is not possible, the police will tell you why.2.6 If the police or the Crown Prosecution Service believe that the quality of your evidence may be adversely affected by a vulnerability, they must consider whether you are eligible for support from a Registered Intermediary (see Right 4) and make any other reasonable adjustments based on your needs.
2.7 If a medical examination is required for the purposes of the criminal proceedings, these must be kept to a minimum and are subject to your consent.2.8 If you are a victim of sexual violence, gender-based violence or domestic abuse, you have the Right to request that the police officer conducting the interview is of a gender of your choice. The police must meet your request unless doing so would prejudice the fairness of the proceedings. If this happens, the police will tell you why.2.9 If you are considered vulnerable, for example under 18 years of age or intimidated (see Enhanced Rights on Page 10 of this Code), the police will ask you, or your parent/guardian, if you would like your police interview to be video recorded to make it easier for you to tell them what happened. This may be presented as your evidence in court. You may also be able to have your court cross- examination evidence pre-recorded at a time earlier and separate to the trial. The police will discuss this option with you. If you do want to give your evidence at the trial, if eligible, a court may allow you to give your evidence and be cross-examined via a live-link room away from the court or a remote site, to minimise the risk of meeting the defendant. However, if you would prefer, you can give your evidence in court. Prosecutors should make witnesses aware that while they can consider how they might like to give evidence, it will be subject to an application to the court and the final decision is made by a judge.2.1 
Right 3: To be provided with information when reporting the crime3.1 If you report a crime to the police or have an allegation reported on your behalf, or if you are contacted as a victim in the course of investigations, you have the Right to written confirmation of your allegation. This will include the basic details of the offence, a crime reference number and the contact details of the police officer dealing with your case. The confirmation could be a letter, email, text message, or it could be written by hand.3.2 Where the police consider there may be a risk of harm to you from sending the written confirmation, for example in domestic abuse cases, they must provide confirmation in a way that does not potentially risk your safety.3.3 The police will explain where you can get further information about the criminal justice process and your Rights as a victim. This will include information on where and how to get advice and support. For example, where appropriate and available, how to seek compensation (see Right 5) access to medical support, specialist support, such as psychological support (including pre- trial therapy and counselling), and alternative accommodation. The police will also explain what arrangements are available if you do not live in England and Wales.
3.4 If the offender is an adult, you have the Right to receive information about Restorative Justice from the police and how to access Restorative Justice services in your local area. If the offender is under the age of 18, you have the Right to receive information about Restorative Justice from the Youth Offending Team.233.5 Although the police are responsible for providing you with information on Restorative Justice initially, all service providers must consider whether you would benefit from receiving this information at any stage of the criminal justice process.What is Restorative Justice?Restorative Justice is a process that brings those harmed by crime, and those responsible for the harm, into communication. It enables everyone affected by a particular incident to play a part in repairing the harm which can be valuable in finding a positive way forward. The communication may take many forms, for some this may mean meeting the offender face-to-face, for others, this could be communicating via letter, recorded interviews or videos. Whichever form of Restorative Justice is most suited to you, trained facilitators will prepare and support you throughout.Restorative Justice is voluntary for all parties and it must be agreed by all involved, including facilitators, that it is safe and appropriate to proceed. It will only happen if you and the offender, having acknowledged the basic facts of the case, both want to take part. You do not have to take part and you can withdraw at any time. You can ask to participate in Restorative Justice at a time that is right for you. You may be offered the opportunity to take part because the offender has been referred and it is assessed as safe.3.6 All information under this Right must be provided within 5 working days (1 working day underEnhanced Rights – see Page 10 of this Code) of reporting the crime.23 Youth Offending Team is a multi-agency team which works with children between the ages of 10 and 17 who have offended or may be at risk of offending. They are coordinated by a given local authority and as part of the youth justice system are monitored by the Youth Justice Board.1 
Right 4: To be referred to services that support victims and have services and support tailored to your needsNeeds Assessments4.1 When you report a crime to the police, you have the Right to be offered support. This will include an assessment of whether you are entitled to receive the Enhanced Rights as set out on page10 of this Code. The more information you are able to provide during this assessment will ensure that service providers are able to offer help and support that better meets your needs.4.2 Throughout your case, all service providers must give you the opportunity to be re-assessed if you tell them how your needs have changed.4.3 If you are required to attend court to give evidence, you will be offered a separate needs assessment by the Witness Care Unit to determine whether you require any further help and support before the trial and at the court.Referral to Services that support victims4.4 Services that support victims are there to help you cope and, as far as possible, recover after a crime. Access to support is free, even if the crime hasn’t been reported to the police. For further information about the support in your area, contact your local Police and Crime Commissioner24 or visit: www.gov.uk/get-support-as-a-victim-of-crime4.5 If you report a crime to the police, you have the Right to be referred to a service that supports victims, including Restorative Justice services. The police will tell you about all the support services available in your local area. You will be referred to a support service within 2 working days, and these services will endeavour to provide timely access to support based on availability.4.6 If you choose not to report the crime to the police, you still have the Right to access support services at any time. You can contact local support services directly. To search for a support service near you, contact your local Police and Crime Commissioner24 or visit: www.gov.uk/get- support-as-a-victim-of-crime24 www.apccs.police.uk/find-your-pcc/1 
4.7 If you are a bereaved close relative, you have the Right to have a Family Liaison Officer assigned to you by the police, where the Senior Investigating Officer considers this to be appropriate (this will happen in most cases). Your Family Liaison Officer will normally act as the single point of contact between you and service providers. If your case involves an allegation of murder or manslaughter, you also have the Right to be referred to the National Homicide Service and any other relevant specialist support service. This offer will normally be made through your Family Liaison Officer.4.8 Depending on your needs and the nature of your case, you may be offered specialist support, for example from an Independent Sexual Violence Advisor or an Independent Domestic Violence Advisor. Your advisor will normally act as your single point of contact throughout the case and communicate with the police, Witness Care Unit and the Crown Prosecution Service on your behalf.4.9 If you are required to give evidence in court, you have the Right to be offered a referral to a Witness Support Service (see Right 8).4.10 At the end of your case, regardless of the outcome, you have the Right to be offered a referral to a support service even if you haven’t accessed them previously. To search for a service that supports victims near you, contact your local Police and Crime Commissioner25 or visit: www.gov.uk/get-support-as-a-victim-of-crime25 www.apccs.police.uk/find-your-pcc/1 
Special Measures4.11 You have the Right to have your needs assessed by the police or Witness Care Unit to determine whether you are eligible and would benefit from giving evidence using special measures.26 The police or Witness Care Unit will explain what special measures are available and will ask for your views about which you might like to apply for.What are special measures?Vulnerable or intimidated victims and witnesses can ask for special measures to be used during the trial to help them give their best evidence in court and help to relieve some of the stress associated with giving evidence. If eligible, a court will decide whether special measures should be granted.Common special measures include: having a screen/curtain around the witness box or giving evidence by live video-link, either from a separate room within the court or a dedicate live-link site outside the court building, so you do not have to face the defendant and court observers.Other special measures include:? giving evidence in private with no press or public allowed in the court room;? removing of wigs and gowns worn by the judge, and the defence and prosecution advocates in the Crown Court;? the use of communication aids or having the help of an intermediary to understand questions; or? providing evidence or being cross-examined through pre-recorded video, which means the witness does not need to give evidence at the trial (witnesses are not able to change their minds from pre-recorded to attending trial to give evidence).4.12 The judge or magistrate will decide whether special measures should be granted following a request from the prosecutor. The Witness Care Unit will tell you the judge’s or magistrates’ decision (see Right 8) and Her Majesty’s Courts and Tribunals Service court staff will ensure that any special measures granted are available for you at court.26 The Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999 introduced a range of measures that can be used to facilitate the gathering and giving of evidence by vulnerable and intimidated witnesses. The measures are collectively known as ‘special measures’. Special measures help to relieve some of the stress associated with giving evidence and apply to prosecution and defence witnesses, but not the defendant.1 
Right 5: To be provided with information about compensationCourt ordered compensation5.1 If the defendant pleads or is found guilty, the judge or magistrate may order them to pay you compensation for any loss, damage or injury caused as a result of the crime. You have the Right to be told by the police how to seek compensation and you may be asked to provide evidence of any loss or damage, for example receipts or quotes for repairing the damage caused during the crime.Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme5.2 If you have suffered a serious physical or mental injury as a direct result of a violent crime, you may be entitled to compensation through the Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme (the Scheme).27 The Scheme is for those injured in England,Wales and Scotland. You have the Right to be told by the police how to apply for compensation through the Scheme28 (see Right 3).5.3 The Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority is responsible for administering the Scheme.5.4 Do not delay your application. You must apply as soon as reasonably practical. This should normally be within two years of the date of the incident. The Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority can only extend the time limits where there are exceptional circumstances.29 Different rules apply if you were aged under 18 years of age at the time of the incident. To be eligible for compensation, you will need to meet the wider eligibility criteria set out within the Scheme.5.5 You should not wait for the outcome of a criminal trial to apply. Your claim is not dependent on the conviction of an offender. However, the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority may put your application on hold until you know the outcome of the trial, if they do not have sufficient information to be able to progress your claim.5.6 The Scheme is one of last resort. Where the opportunity exists to pursue compensation elsewhere, you should do so. An award under the Scheme will take account of other compensatory payments made to you, such as court ordered compensation or a civil personal injury award. The Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority may defer making a decision on a claim until you take reasonable steps to seek compensation through other routes available to you and await the outcome of those steps.27 If you are considering making an application for criminal injuries compensation to the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority, you should be aware that an award will be withheld unless you have cooperated as far as reasonably practicable in bringing the assailant to justice.28 Eligibility for compensation from the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority may depend on your residency or nationality unless you are conclusively identified by a competent authority as a victim of trafficking in human beings or granted asylum under Immigration Rules made under section 3(2) of the Immigration Act 1971.29 Due to exceptional circumstances an application could not have been made earlier; and there is evidence available that a crime of violence occurred and a claims officer can make a decision without further extensive enquiries.1 
5.7 Once you have applied, the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority will confirm that your application has been received and respond to all written correspondence regarding your application within 20 working days of it being received.5.8 Having considered your application, you will be provided with information on the Right to review the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority’s decision, including the procedure and time limits for reviewing that decision.5.9 Further information about applying for compensation can be found at: www.gov.uk/claim- compensation-criminal-injury, from the police, your local support service, or by contacting the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority on: 0300 003 3601.305.10 Whilst it is outside of the scope of the Code, UK victims injured in terrorist attacks abroad may also be entitled to compensation through the Victims of Overseas Terrorism Compensation Scheme. Further information about applying for compensation can be found at: www.gov.uk/ compensation-victim-terrorist-attack, or by contacting the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority on: 0300 003 3601.30Civil (non-criminal) compensation5.11 It may be possible to seek compensation from the suspect or offender outside of the criminal justice process. If you want to consider applying for civil compensation, you should seek legal advice and assistance from a solicitor.Getting legal advice/assistance on claiming compensation5.12 If you need legal advice and/or assistance you should contact a solicitor. If you are on a low income or benefits you may be able to get Legal Aid to help cover the cost. More information on whether you are eligible for Legal Aid is available at: www.gov.uk/legal-aid5.13 To find a local solicitor you should contact the Law Society at: www.lawsociety.org.uk30 Monday – Friday, 10:00am – 3:00pm1 
Right 6: To be provided with information about theinvestigation and prosecution6.1 You have the Right to be told by the police when key decisions on the investigation are made and, where applicable, to have the reasons explained to you within 5 working days (1 working day under Enhanced Rights – see page 10 of this Code) of a suspect being:? arrested;? interviewed under caution;? released without charge; and? released on police bail or under investigation or if police bail conditions are changed or cancelled.6.2 If the police decide not to investigate your case, you will be given an explanation of this decision within 5 working days (1 working day under Enhanced Rights – see page 10 of this Code). The police will also offer you a referral to a support service.6.3 Where the police do investigate your case, they will discuss with you how often you would like to receive updates and your preferred method of contact. You can update your preferences at any time.6.4 The investigation and decision on whether the case should go to court can take a long time and there may be long periods between key decisions. The police will discuss with you if you would like contact during this time and provide you with contact details if you have any questions during the investigation.6.5 There may be times when a service provider is unable to provide you with updates and/or use your preferred method of contact, but in these instances, they will tell you why.6.6 In some cases, the police or the Crown Prosecution Service may decide to deal with the case without taking it to court. This is called an out of court disposal.31 This enables the incident to be dealt with relatively quickly and may prove more effective in preventing further offences.6.7 Where the police or the Crown Prosecution Service are considering an out of court disposal you have the Right to be asked for your views and to have these views taken into account whena decision is made. Where this is not possible for practical reasons, the police or the Crown Prosecution Service will tell you why.31 Alternatives to prosecution, such as cautions, conditional cautions and penalty notices for disorder, intended for dealing with low- level, often first-time offending, where prosecution would not be in the public interest.1 
6.8 The police or the Crown Prosecution Service will take the final decision after considering the full circumstances of the offence and your views. You have the Right to be told the reasons for their decision within 5 working days (1 working day under Enhanced Rights – see page 10 of this Code) of an out of court disposal being given to the offender.6.9 When the police have finished their investigation, they may decide what should happen next or, for more serious crimes, pass the information to the Crown Prosecution Service, who will then decide if there is enough evidence to take the case to court.6.10 If the police or the Crown Prosecution Service decide not to prosecute the suspect, you have the Right to be told within 5 working days (1 working day under Enhanced Rights – see page 10 of this Code) of the decision of:? the reasons for the decision;? how you can get further information;? how to seek a review and make representations under the National Police Chiefs’ Council or the Crown Prosecution Service Victims’ Right to Review scheme;32 and? how to be referred to a support service.6.11 If you are unhappy with a police or a Crown Prosecution Service decision not to prosecute the suspect, you have the Right to ask for a review under the National Police Chiefs’ Council or Crown Prosecution Service Victims’ Right to Review schemes.32 Other service providers (listed on page 8 of this Code) will explain how to ask for a review through their own scheme.33 Victims’ Right to Review specifically relates to decisions not to prosecute. It doesn’t cover crime-recording decisions or decisions not to continue with enquiries.1 
6.12 If you are a victim in a specified case34 where the Crown Prosecution Service tells you of a decision not to charge a suspect, you have the Right to be offered a meeting unless the Crown Prosecution Service decides that a meeting should not take place. On the rare occasions where the Crown Prosecution Service decide that a meeting is not appropriate, this decision will be explained to you.6.13 If the suspect is charged with an offence(s), you have the Right to be told by the police within 5 working days (1 working day under Enhanced Rights – see page 10 of this Code) of:? the offence they are charged with;? the date, time and location of the first court hearing; and? where the suspect is released on police bail to appear in court, any bail conditions and any changes to these bail conditions.6.14 If you are a bereaved close relative in a qualifying case35 you have the Right to be offered a meeting with the Crown Prosecution Service prior to or following a decision about whether or not to charge a suspect. If a decision is made to charge, the Crown Prosecution Service will explain how the case is likely to progress and answer any questions that you may have. TheCrown Prosecution Service will also discuss your needs and jointly agree how regularly you will receive updates.6.15 If, after the suspect has been charged with an offence(s), the Crown Prosecution Service decides to stop a charge and proceed with another, make a big change to a charge or stop the case, you have the Right to be told the reason why and, where the decision is to stop the case, how to ask for a review under the Crown Prosecution Services’ Victims’ Right to Review Scheme, if you disagree with their decision.34 Specified cases where victims are entitled to meet with the Crown Prosecution Service are: child abuse; sexual offences; racially and religiously aggravated offences; offences with a homophobic or transphobic element; offences aggravated by hostility based on disability; and cases motivated by hostility based on age.35 The cases where bereaved families are entitled to meet with the Crown Prosecution Service are: murder, manslaughter, corporate manslaughter, familial homicide, causing death by dangerous driving, causing death by careless driving while unfit through drink or drugs, causing death by careless driving or through inconsiderate driving, causing death by driving whilst unlicensed, disqualified or uninsured and aggravated vehicle taking where death is caused.1 
Right 7: To make a Victim Personal Statement7.1 You have the Right to make a Victim Personal Statement to explain in your own words how a crime has affected you, whether physically, emotionally, financially or in any other way. This is different from a witness statement. The Victim Personal Statement is considered by the judge or magistrate when determining what sentence the defendant should receive and can also help service providers to consider what additional support you and/or your family may require.7.2 If you are a bereaved close relative, you have the Right to make a Victim Personal Statement and the Right to have someone with you when you do so, regardless of whether you have made a witness statement.7.3 To help you decide whether you wish to make one, you have the Right to be provided with information about the Victim Personal Statement process by the police when reporting a crime. If you decide to make a personal statement, you will be asked for your preference about whether you would like to read your statement aloud in court or to have it read on your behalf. You can also request a copy from the police and will be given an opportunity to make an additional personal statement to reflect the changing impact of the crime.7.4 If the defendant pleads guilty, or is found guilty, and you have asked that your statement is read aloud (or played) in court, the judge or magistrate will decide whether and what sections of your personal statement should be read aloud (or played), and who should read it. The judge or magistrate will always take your preference into account when making their decision, unless there is good reason not to do so. The Witness Care Unit will let you know the judge’s or magistrates’ decision.7.5 You do not have to read your Victim Personal Statement yourself or have it read on your behalf. If at first you choose to have your personal statement read aloud but later decide you do not want this, you can change your mind. Your personal statement will be considered by the judge or magistrate in the same way, whether or not it is read (or played) aloud in court.7.6 In addition to the named point of contact for a business being able to make a Victim Personal Statement, businesses of all sizes can make an Impact Statement for Business. This is similar to a Victim Personal Statement and will be used in the same way in court, but allows the business to explain how a crime has affected it, such as direct financial loss, operational disruption or reputational damage.7.7 The named point of contact has the Right to be provided information about the Impact Statement for Business process by the police when reporting the crime, to help them decide whether the business wishes to make one.7.8 Further information about the Victim Personal Statement and Business Impact Statement process is available from the police and at: www.gov.uk/government/publications/victim- personal-statement7.1 
When can I make a Victim Personal Statement?You can make a Victim Personal Statement at any time prior to sentencing of the offender, however you may not have an opportunity to make it once the court hearing has started, especially if the defendant pleads guilty.For many victims, the best time to make a Victim Personal Statement is when they are told that the suspect has been charged and the full impact of the crime may be clearer. The police may still ask for details of the initial impact when conducting your needs assessment or taking your witness statement.Can I change my mind or update my Victim Personal Statement?Once you have made a Victim Personal Statement, it becomes part of the court papers and you cannot withdraw or change it. However, if you remember something important, or feel that the impact of the crime on you has changed, you may make another statement.Will the defendant be able to see my Victim Personal Statement?If the case reaches court, the defendant will usually be allowed to read your personal statement. As with other evidence, if the court agrees it is relevant to the case, the defence can ask you questions about the contents of your personal statement. If your statement is read aloud in court, what is said could be reported by the media.Further questions or help recording your Victim Personal StatementIf you have questions about making a Victim Personal Statement, how it will be used or what to include, you can speak with the police, Witness Care Unit or a support service for victims of crime. They can also help you to record it.Victim Personal Statements in parole hearings or tariff review36 hearings7.9 You can ask that your original Victim Personal Statement be used at tariff review hearings and at Parole Board hearings. However, you are entitled to write a new Victim Personal Statement for these hearings, where you are able explain how the crime continues to affect you and/or your family, and the impact that any outcome at one of these hearings may have on you. Different rules apply to a Victim Personal Statement made to the Parole Board, (see Right 11).36 The minimum term of those offenders detained at Her Majesty’s Pleasure can be reviewed by the High Court once the offender has served half of their original minimum term, in light of progress and development made by the offender. This reflects the fact that young people change more rapidly than adults, in a way that may not have been fully apparent at the time of sentencing. Victims or the family of a deceased victim may submit a Victim Personal Statement to the High Court.1 
Right 8: To be given information about the trial, trial process and your role as a witness8.1 If the case goes to court, you have the Right to be told by the Witness Care Unit within 5 working days (1 working day under Enhanced Rights – see page 10 of this Code) of them receiving the information from the court, which will be within 5 working days of the outcome of the relevant hearing:? the time, date and location of any hearing (within 1 working day for all victims);? the outcome of any bail hearing (and relevant bail conditions, any relevant changes to these bail conditions and the reasons for those changes);? if an arrest warrant has been issued for the suspect and the outcome of a hearing if the suspect is re-arrested; and? the outcome of any hearing if the suspect has been re-arrested.8.2 If the suspect pleads not guilty and you are required to attend court, you have the Right to:? be told by the Witness Care Unit if you are required to give evidence within 1 working day (for all victims) of them receiving the information from the Crown Prosecution Service;? have your needs assessed and be offered a referral to a witness support service who can arrange a visit to the court before the trial date to familiarise yourself with the building, or another support service (see Right 4); and? be told of the outcome of any special measures application (see Right 4).8.3 If you are required to give evidence, you will be able to refresh your memory by reading (or watching where it has been recorded) your witness statement. Where possible, if the court allows, the prosecutor will meet you before you go into court to explain what will happen and answer any questions you may have.8.4 If you are a bereaved close relative, you have the Right to request, from your Family Liaison Officer or Witness Care Unit, a visit to the court before the trial date to familiarise yourself with the building, regardless of whether you are required to give evidence. You also have the Right to be offered a meeting with the Crown Prosecution Service prosecutor or advocate who will bepresenting the case in court. This meeting will usually take place shortly before the trial and is an opportunity for you to be introduced and to ask any questions that you may have.8.5 When attending court, and where possible, you will be able to enter through a different entrance to the defendant and wait in a separate waiting area before and after your case has beenheard. Some court buildings do not currently have separate entrances for victims, however, where informed, Her Majesty’s Courts and Tribunals Service staff will make arrangements to ensure that you do not have to see the defendant on arrival.
8.6 During the trial, you may have to wait to give evidence, Her Majesty’s Courts and Tribunals Service court staff will give you a contact point at the court (who may be a member of a witness support service) to keep you updated on the progress of the trial and they or the Crown Prosecution Service prosecutor or advocate will tell you how long you will likely need to wait.8.7 Sometimes you may need to come back to court on another day, if this happens, Her Majesty’s Courts and Tribunals Service court staff or the Crown Prosecution Service prosecutor or advocate will tell you why.Help when attending courtHaving to attend court can be a worrying experience for any victim. However, you will be contacted by the Witness Care Unit before the trial.As well as providing the Rights listed in paragraphs 8.1, 8.2 and 8.4, they can also provide practical guidance and advice to help you. This includes:? being told about what to expect in court and answer any questions you might have about the court process;? if the victim is under 18, being given information for young witnesses;? being offered help with directions to the court and planning and/or arranging travel or accommodation;? being offered help arranging child care or additional support to allow you to attend court;? being given information about claiming witness expenses and allowances;? being referred to the Crown Prosecution Service, who will answer any questions you may have about the sentence which the Witness Care Unit is not able to answer; and? being offered a referral to services that support victims before, during or after you have attended court.? 
Right 9: To be given information about the outcome of the case and any appeals9.1 At the end of the case, you have the Right to be told the outcome, including where available, a brief summary of reasons for the decision,37 by the Witness Care Unit, within 1 working day of them receiving the information from the court, which will be within 5 working days of the outcome of the case.9.2 If the defendant is convicted (found guilty), you have the Right to be told the sentence they received, including a short explanation about the meaning and effect of the sentence, by the Witness Care Unit, within 1 working day of them receiving the information from the court, which will be within 5 working days of the outcome of the case. If you have any questions about the sentence which the Witness Care Unit are unable to answer, you have the Right to be referred to the Crown Prosecution Service, who will answer any questions which the Witness Care Unit is not able to answer.9.3 If you are a bereaved close relative, you have the Right to be offered a meeting with the Crown Prosecution Service:? following conviction, but before the sentencing hearing of the defendant, to confirm that a Victim Personal Statement has been made or to confirm that it is up to date (this meeting will usually take place at court);? following the sentencing hearing to explain the sentence given (this meeting will usually take place at court);? in cases where the defendant is found not guilty or is convicted of a less serious charge the offer of a meeting will be made a few weeks after the case has concluded, unless the Crown Prosecution Service decide that this is inappropriate. On the rare occasions where they decide that a meeting is not appropriate, this decision will be explained to you. The actual timing of the meeting will be informed by the wishes of the family and you will be contacted to discuss when it should take place; and? in a murder case where all defendants are found not guilty of all charges, the police and Crown Prosecution Service will follow the process set out in the National Standards of Support for bereaved families. The National Standards of Support are available on the Crown Prosecution Service website at: www.cps.gov.uk and a copy is provided by the police to bereaved families as part of the police bereavement pack.37 The Witness Care Unit will be unable to provide an explanation if the offender has been found not guilty by a jury, because the jury do not have to provide reasons for their decision.1 
If you think the sentence given to the offender is far too low9.4 For some (but not all) cases sentenced in the Crown Court you can ask38 the Attorney General39 to refer the sentence to the Court of Appeal to reconsider it. This can only be done if the Attorney General thinks that the sentence was not just lenient but ‘unduly lenient’,40 such that the sentencing judge made a gross error or imposed a sentence outside the range of sentences reasonably available in the circumstances of the case.9.5 If the Attorney General considers that the sentence meets the standard of being ‘unduly lenient’, the case is referred to the Court of Appeal. The Attorney General must consider the matter as soon as possible after sentence and no later than the 28th calendar day after the sentence was imposed (in business hours and with sufficient time for consideration). If the Court of Appeal agrees, it may increase the sentence.9.6 The Witness Care Unit will tell you about the scheme, when you are told the sentence in the case.If the offender appeals9.7 Sometimes the offender will ask the court to look at the case or the sentence again. This is called an appeal. What will happen next will depend on whether the offender is allowed to appeal and if so, the outcome of that appeal.If an application is made to the Crown Court to appeal against a conviction or sentence in the Magistrates’ Court9.8 If the offender appeals to the Crown Court, you have the Right to be told by the Witness Care Unit within 1 working day of them receiving the information from the court, which will be within 5 working days of the outcome of the hearing:? that a notice of appeal has been made;? the date, time and location of any hearing; and? the outcome of the appeal, including any changes to the original sentence.9.9 If you wish to attend the appeal, you have the Right for court staff to arrange for you to:? wherever possible wait and be seated in court in an area separate from the offender and their family and friends;? be provided with a contact point at the Crown Court; and? receive information about services that support victims where appropriate and available.If an application is made to appeal against a conviction or sentence to the Court of Appeal, or an application or appeal is made to the UK Supreme Court in a criminal case on a point of law9.10 If the offender appeals to the Court of Appeal or UK Supreme Court, you have the Right to be told by the Witness Care Unit within 5 working days (1 working day under Enhanced Rights – see page 10 of this Code) of them receiving the information from the court, which will be within 5 working days of the outcome of the relevant hearing:38 The Crown Prosecution Service may also contact the Attorney General if they have concerns about the sentence.39 The Attorney General is chief legal adviser to the Crown and has a number of independent public interest functions, as well as overseeing the Law Officers’ departments.40 A sentence is ‘unduly lenient’ if it falls outside the normal range of sentences the judge could have reasonably considered appropriate.1 
? if the offender has been given permission to appeal against the conviction, sentence or point of law;? the date, time and location of any hearing, and any changes to this information (within 1 working day for all victims);? if the offender is to be released on bail pre-appeal or if the bail conditions have been changed (within 1 working day for all victims);? the name of a contact for the Criminal Appeal Office or UK Supreme Court staff;? the outcome of the appeal, including any changes to the original sentence, and? how to request a copy from the Criminal Appeal Office or UK Supreme Court staff of the court’s judgment in the case once it has been published.9.11 If you wish to attend the appeal, you have the Right for court staff or UK Supreme Court staff to arrange for:? wherever possible, to wait and be seated in court in an area separate from the offender and their family and friends; and? special arrangements to be made for you if the offender is present and you do not wish to sit in the courtroom (it is rare for the offender to attend hearings in the Supreme Court).9.12 Following a decision to give the offender permission to appeal, if you are a bereaved close relative, you have the Right to be offered a meeting with the Crown Prosecution Service to explain the nature of the appeal and the court processes.9.13 In determining an appeal against a sentence, the court will always take into account any Victim Personal Statement that was considered by the sentencing court.9.14 It is not normally necessary for a further personal statement to be provided to the Court of Appeal. However, if there is information that the court should know about the continuing impact the crime has had on you, a new or further Victim Personal Statement may be sent to the Court through the police or the Crown Prosecution Service.Criminal Cases Review Commission9.15 The Criminal Cases Review Commission investigates alleged miscarriages of criminal justice in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. An offender can apply to the Commission to review their convictions and/or sentence if there is some new information or new argument which might mean the conviction is unsafe or the sentence too long.9.16 The Commission, when reviewing a case, will assess the potential impact on you and decide if you should be notified.9.17 The Commission will not usually try to contact you just because they have received an application. This is because most reviews will not lead to a referral to the Court of Appeal, and therefore there is no need to warn you that the offender has applied. However, the Commission will tell you if they think there is a reasonable chance that you may find out that they are looking at a case though the media or through another source. The Commission will usually work with the police to notify you of an application and will contact you again when a decision has been made on whether they refer the case.9.18 If the Commission decides that it is not appropriate to contact you during the review, but subsequently decides to refer the conviction or sentence to the courts, the Commission will try their best to contact you before the case is referred for an appeal.9.1 
Right 10: To be paid expenses and have property returned10.1 If you attend court41 to give evidence, you have the Right to claim certain expenses from the Crown Prosecution Service,42 for example, for travel, child care, loss of earnings, refreshments and meals (further details are available on the Crown Prosecution Service website at: www. cps.gov.uk). The Witness Care Unit will be able to help if you have any questions about claiming expenses.10.2 The Crown Prosecution Service will pay any expenses due to you within 10 working days of receiving a correctly completed claim form.10.3 If the police took any of your property as evidence, you have the Right to get it back as soon as it is no longer required. The police will be able to help if you have any questions about the return of your property.41 If you attend a prison to present your Victim Personal Statement to the Parole Board panel you are eligible to claim certain expenses from the Parole Board, for example, for travel, or refreshments and meals. Your Victim Liaison Officer will be able to help if you have any questions about claiming these expenses.42 Other service providers responsible for prosecuting an offence must have rules under which victims have the possibility of reimbursement of expenses incurred from attending court to give evidence.1 
Right 11: To be given information about the offender following a convictionThe Victim Contact Scheme11.1 If you are the victim or a bereaved family relative and the offender was convicted of a specified violent or sexual offence,43 and sentenced to 12 months or more in prison44 (or detained in a hospital for treatment under the Mental Health Act 1983 with or without a restriction order45), you have the Right to be automatically referred within 10 working days of sentencing to the National Probation Service Victim Contact Scheme and be assigned a Victim Liaison Officer. The Victim Liaison Officer will contact you within 20 working days of the referral.11.2 Where you choose to receive the Victims Contact Scheme, you are entitled to receive information at key stages of the offender’s sentence (see 11.3). You may opt-out and opt back in to the Victims Contact Scheme at any time whilst the offender is serving their sentence/ hospital order.11.3 The Victim Liaison Officer will tell you:? what the sentence of the court means in terms of the offender’s detention in prison or hospital, and if there are any changes to their sentence;? when an offender in prison becomes eligible to be considered for a transfer to open conditions;? if a prisoner moves to open conditions;? when an offender is being considered for release or for conditional discharge;? when the offender is released, or discharged from hospital, and if they are recalled to prison or hospital;? how to make a Victim Personal Statement where it falls to the Parole Board to decide whether to direct the release of the offender from prison;? how to apply to read your Victim Personal Statement to the Parole Board, or have it read out on your behalf, or make a pre-recording in those cases where the Parole Board holds an oral hearing;? how to apply for licence/discharge conditions to reduce the chances of you encountering the offender in the community, or to prohibit them from contacting you;? about any licence/discharge conditions that relate to you and the date they will end or where a request to change or remove them has been made;? how to ask for a summary of the Parole Board’s decision and how to seek to make representations where the Parole Board decides the offender is safe to release;43 As defined in section 45(2) of the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004.44 Prison in this case can mean any place the person is liable to be detained, including for example a Young Offenders Institution.45 Restrictions will be placed on a patient if the court considers that this is necessary for the protection of others from serious harm. The Secretary of State is involved in the management of ‘Restricted patients’. This means that the Secretary of State will make decisions about the offender’s rehabilitation. ‘Non-Restricted patients’ are managed by clinicians, and hospital managers.1 
? if the offender escapes or absconds from custody;? how to ask for information should the offender be convicted of a most serious offence (see 11.18 – 11.19); and? how to make a reconsideration request (where eligible) (see 11.9 – 11.10).11.4 In addition to the statutory offences where the Victims Contact Scheme is offered, the National Probation Service will also offer victims access to the scheme where the offender is sentenced to 12 months or more in prison (or detained in a hospital for treatment under the Mental Health Act 1983 with or without a restriction order) for:? Causing Death by Careless or Inconsiderate Driving (Road Traffic Act 1988);? Causing Serious Injury by Dangerous Driving (Road Traffic Act 1988); or? Controlling or coercive behaviour in an intimate or family relationship (Serious Crime Act 2015).Victims of offenders who are under 18 years old11.5 If the offender in your case is under the age of 18 and you are not eligible for the Victims Contact Scheme, the Youth Offending Team may contact you directly. This is in cases where a young offender is sentenced to less than 12 months in custody, 12 months or more for a non-sexual or non-violent offence or a community-based order. A community-based order puts conditions on an offender serving a sentence in the community rather than prison.11.6 The Youth Offending Team may seek your views prior to sentencing and explore whether you want to get involved in any Restorative Justice initiatives (see Right 3), where appropriate and available.11.7 You have the Right to receive the following information from the Youth Offending Team:? information about the progress of the offender’s case upon request; and? information on appropriate services that support victims if you ask for additional support.The Parole Board11.8 The Parole Board46 must:? consider all representations that victims have made about licence conditions; where a victim has requested a licence condition which has not been included, or has been amended, and provide an explanation for this non-inclusion or amendment;? read a Victim Personal Statement if one is submitted;? consider any application by the victim to be permitted to attend the hearing and read their Victim Personal Statement or have it read by someone else on their behalf;? unless there is a good reason for not doing so, agree to the statement being read at the hearing by the victim or someone else on their behalf; and? provide a summary of the parole decision upon application, unless there is a good reason for not doing so.4746 The majority of prisoners are released automatically without any involvement from the Parole Board. The main categories of prisoner the Parole Board is responsible for considering the suitability for release of are: a), extended determinate sentence prisoners who can be released on licence after having served a specified part of their sentence in custody, b) indeterminate sentence prisoners such as those serving a life sentence or Imprisonment for Public Protection, and c) standard determinate sentence prisoners who have been recalled to custody after having breached their licence conditions.47 For example, where it might put someone – the offender, victim or other person, at risk.1 
The Parole Board and Victim Personal StatementsWhen can I make a Victim Personal Statement to the Parole Board?You can make a new Victim Personal Statement any time leading up to the parole review, but it must be submitted in good time in order for the Parole Board to read it. If there is to be a parole oral hearing the Victim Personal Statement should be submitted at least eight weeks in advance. A parole hearing is unlikely to be delayed to allow for a late Victim Personal Statement to be submitted.Can I change my mind or update my Victim Personal Statement?You can update your Victim Personal Statement or write a new one, but you will need to withdraw a previous version first. You can write a new statement for each parole review that may take place.Will the offender be able to see my Victim Personal Statement?The overriding principle is that the offender will see all information related to the parole review, unless in very exceptional circumstances the Parole Board agrees not to disclose it to the offender. This practice is consistent with the fundamental principles of our criminal justice system. However, if you do not wish the offender to read your statement you may ask your Victim Liaison Officer to apply for the statement to be withheld, under a non-disclosure application. There are rules about this which will need to be followed, including strict timeframes for making a request (eight weeks ahead of an oral hearing) and specific reasons for when information can be withheld, which are set out in the Parole Board Rules 2019.The final decision lies with the Parole Board. If the Board agrees not to disclose your Victim Personal Statement, the prisoner’s solicitor may still have sight of it, although he/she may be required not to disclose it to the prisoner.If you request non-disclosure and the Parole Board turns it down, you may withdraw your Victim Personal Statement.Further questions or help recording your Victim Personal StatementIf you have questions about making a Victim Personal Statement, how it will be used or what to include, you can speak to your Victim Liaison Officer. They can also help you to record your personal statement.
Asking for a parole decision to be reviewed48 (Reconsideration Mechanism)11.9 The Parole Board considers certain offenders for parole (release on licence) or re-release following recall and does so based on their risk of harm to the public.11.10 If the Parole Board decides it is safe to release an offender the decision is provisional for 2149 calendar days in the majority of cases (except standard determinate recalls50). The Secretary of State may ask the Parole Board to reconsider the decision during this period, if he has an arguable case that:? the correct process was not followed in the review of the offender for parole - for example, important evidence was not taken into account; or? the decision was irrational - the decision cannot be justified based on the evidence of risk that was considered.As a victim, you may submit a request to the Secretary of State asking that an application for reconsideration is made, if you believe that the decision meets either of these tests. Your request must be submitted within the 21-day provisional window. The Secretary of State will only do so where there is evidence the criteria is met. You will receive a letter informing you of whether the Secretary of State makes an application for reconsideration or not.Sexual Offender Notification Requirements Review Process11.11 Registered sex offenders are subject to ‘notification requirements’. This means they must tell the police about some of their personal details. The notification requirements are an automatic consequence of a conviction or caution, for a Schedule 3 offence under the Sexual Offences Act 2003, but the length of time an offender will be subject to the requirements will vary dependent upon the sentence they are given. A breach of the notification requirements is a criminal offence and is punishable by up to five years imprisonment.11.12 Offenders who are subject to notification requirements for life can apply to have this reviewed after a set period of time following their first notification, which usually takes place at release from prison. The set period of time is 15 years for adults and 8 years for juveniles. If the offender makes such an application, the police will then carry out a review, including a risk assessment to decide whether the offender’s notification requirements may be stopped. Sex offenders who are assessed as still being a risk will remain subject to notification requirements and will do so for life if necessary.11.13 If you are a victim of an offender who makes such an application, you have the Right to be contacted by the police to provide your views on the application as part their review. Your Victim Liaison Officer will provide you with further information about this process.Foreign National Offenders11.14 If you have been a victim of a crime committed by a foreign national and the offender:? has received a prison sentence of 12 months or more, or a hospital order, for an offence against you;48 https://www.gov.uk/guidance/challenge-a-parole-decision49 In exceptional circumstance requests can be made to shorten this period, if this happens victims will be informed.50 A determinate prison sentence is for a fixed length of time. The prisoner will spend the first half or two-thirds (depending on the overall length of the sentence and offence) of the sentence in prison and the remaining portion in the community ‘on licence’. If they breach any licence conditions, for example they demonstrate poor behaviour which increases their risk, they could be recalled back to prison to serve the remainder of the sentence.1 
? was recommended by a court for deportation for an offence against you; or? was sentenced to a period in prison for a violent or sexual offence.then you have the Right to receive information about the offender’s deportation. You can choose not to receive this information. The National Probation Service (Victim Liaison Officer and Offender Managers) must take all reasonable steps to work with the immigration authoritiesto ensure, as far as possible, that information about the prisoner’s immigration status and any deportation information is passed on to victims.11.15 If you have been the victim of a crime as set out in 11.14, your Victim Liaison Officer assigned by the Victims Contact Scheme (see 11.1) will be able to obtain updates from the Home Office on your behalf.11.16 If you are not eligible for the Victims Contact Scheme or have opted out of the scheme, but you meet the criteria (see 11.14) you have the Right to ask for updates regarding the immigration case of the Foreign National Offender directly from the Home Office’s Victim Support Team.11.17 The Home Office Victim Support Team can tell you:? whether the Home Office intends to take deportation action against the offender;? the final outcome of any appeal against deportation;? when the offender is going to be released from immigration detention;? when the offender has been deported; or? if the offender is not being deported and if possible, the reasons why.Serious Further Offence Reviews11.18 In the event that an offender commits a Serious Further Offence51 while they are under statutory supervision by the provider of probation services, or shortly after this supervision has ended, the provider of probation services will carry out a Serious Further Offence Review, to investigate how the case was managed and whether or not there are any improvements that need to be made to manage future cases.11.19 In the most serious cases, providers of probation services will offer to share the findings of a Serious Further Offence Review with the victim or their families following conviction of the offender. If this occurs you have the Right to be contacted by your Victim Liaison Officer, to be asked whether you would like to meet with a senior manager from the provider of probation services to talk about the findings of the Serious Further Offence Review, and if you would like a copy of the report.51 An offence listed in Annex C to Probation Instruction 15/2014 ‘Notification and review procedures for serious further offences’ (as amended from time to time). These are currently all serious violent or sexual offences which attract a maximum of 14 years imprisonment or an indeterminate sentence.1 
Right 12: To make a complaint about your Rights not being met12.1 If you believe that you have not received any of your Rights under this Code, you can make a complaint. In the first instance, and if you feel comfortable doing so, you should discuss your complaint with the person you have been dealing with at the relevant service provider.12.2 If you remain unhappy, or if you do not feel comfortable discussing the complaint with the person you have been dealing with, you can make a complaint through the service provider’s internal complaints’ procedure.52 They will provide you with information about their complaints procedure and respond within the timescales set out in this procedure.12.3 If you send your complaint to the wrong service provider or it needs to be dealt with by more than one service provider, they will let you know.12.4 If you are still not satisfied after you have finished the service provider’s complaints procedure, or they are taking too long to get back to you, you can ask your Member of Parliament to refer your complaint to the Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman. The Ombudsman will consider any complaints referred to them and, where appropriate, undertake an independent investigation.12.5 Further information about making a complaint to the Ombudsman can be found on their website at: www.ombudsman.org.uk or by calling their Customer Helpline on: 0345 015 4033.5352 Service providers must have a clearly identified complaints process through which victims can make a complaint if their Rights under this Code have not been met.53 Monday – Thursday, 8.30am - 5.00pm, and Friday, 8.30am – 12:00pm.1 
CCS 1120529734978-1-5286-2253-0
? Download webpage as a PDF	? ShareHow to recognise and respond to risks when working with vulnerable peopleFirst published 18 November 2021? VULNERABILITY-RELATED RISKS	2 mins readThese guidelines focus on supporting officers and staff to:recognise individuals at risk of harmbetter understand the vulnerabilities of all those they encounter, rather than thinking about risk in relation to individual forms of harm, such as child abuse or domestic violence in isolationinteract with vulnerable people in a way that maximises opportunities for disclosureThe guidelines consist of:one strategic-level guideline for chief o?cersthree practical guidelines for police respondersVulnerability-related risks guidelinesOverviewForeword, vulnerability-related risksIntroduction to vulnerability-related riskProfessional developmentCluesCommunicationCuriosityAppendix 1 – ActionsReferencesRelated reports and informationGuidelines – Recognising and responding to vulnerability-related risks (pdf) 457.73 KBScope of guidelines – Recognising and responding to vulnerability-related risks (pdf) 281.34 KBEvidence review part two – Recognising and responding to vulnerability-related risks (pdf) 1.38 MBRapid evidence assessment – Recognising and responding to vulnerability-related risks (pdf) 2.62 MBRefresh report – Recognising and responding to vulnerability-related risks (pdf) 737.33 KBSummary of practitioner evidence – Recognising and responding to vulnerability-related risks (pdf) 617.84 KB
24/03/2025 Wildlife crime https://www.college.police.uk/app/investigation/wildlife-crime PageWildlife crimeThis page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published26 September 2016 Updated9 December 2022Written by College of Policing Investigation2 mins readThis guidance is for all police officers and staff when investigating wildlife crime.These crimes should be investigated by a trained wildlife crime officer (WCO). Most forces will have at least one WCO whose role it is to carry out wildlife crime investigations. If a WCO is unavailable to carry out the initial investigation, then another officer should do so, liaising with a WCO at the earliest opportunity. The force should then decide who should continue the investigation.Wildlife offences are currently covered under a range of legislation. These briefing notes provide an investigator with advice on the more common offences which they may encounter and highlight issues they should consider during an investigation.The briefing notes are based on the UK government wildlife crime priorities that are identified through the National Wildlife Crime Unit (2022) Strategic Assessment (set every two years) and advice taken from the Wildlife Crime Conservation Advisory Group that supports that process.The National Wildlife Crime Unit (NWCU) can provide further advice and support, as can organisations that support particular plants or animals, such as the Bat Conservation Trust and Kew Gardens.In the majority of cases, the police service can enforce relevant legislation. In some cases, however, this power falls to other statutory agencies, such as Natural England and the Welsh Government (for poisoning incidents) or the Environment Agency (for unlicensed fishing).The following briefing notes will assist investigations from initial contact in call handling centres through to the completion of the court file: bats badgers poaching (deer, fish and hare coursing)
 freshwater pearl mussels CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna)  raptorsSee also the Crown Prosecution Service Wildlife Guidance for prosecutors.Some of the above resources are under development and will be made available as they are approved. Back to Investigation overviewTagsInvestigation
24/03/2025 Wildlife crime https://www.college.police.uk/app/investigation/wildlife-crime PageWildlife crimeThis page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published26 September 2016 Updated9 December 2022Written by College of Policing Investigation2 mins readThis guidance is for all police officers and staff when investigating wildlife crime.These crimes should be investigated by a trained wildlife crime officer (WCO). Most forces will have at least one WCO whose role it is to carry out wildlife crime investigations. If a WCO is unavailable to carry out the initial investigation, then another officer should do so, liaising with a WCO at the earliest opportunity. The force should then decide who should continue the investigation.Wildlife offences are currently covered under a range of legislation. These briefing notes provide an investigator with advice on the more common offences which they may encounter and highlight issues they should consider during an investigation.The briefing notes are based on the UK government wildlife crime priorities that are identified through the National Wildlife Crime Unit (2022) Strategic Assessment (set every two years) and advice taken from the Wildlife Crime Conservation Advisory Group that supports that process.The National Wildlife Crime Unit (NWCU) can provide further advice and support, as can organisations that support particular plants or animals, such as the Bat Conservation Trust and Kew Gardens.In the majority of cases, the police service can enforce relevant legislation. In some cases, however, this power falls to other statutory agencies, such as Natural England and the Welsh Government (for poisoning incidents) or the Environment Agency (for unlicensed fishing).The following briefing notes will assist investigations from initial contact in call handling centres through to the completion of the court file: bats badgers poaching (deer, fish and hare coursing)
 freshwater pearl mussels CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna)  raptorsSee also the Crown Prosecution Service Wildlife Guidance for prosecutors.Some of the above resources are under development and will be made available as they are approved. Back to Investigation overviewTagsInvestigation
24/03/2025 Working with suspects https://www.college.police.uk/app/investigation/working-suspects PageWorking with suspectsThis page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published23 October 2013 Updated30 November 2022Written by College of Policing Investigation20 mins readThe identification of suspects, the trace/interview/eliminate (TIE) strategy and the arrest strategy are explored in this module. In terms of the arrest strategy, considerations around timings, background checks, searches, planning, pre-arrest briefings and post-arrest issues are included.TIE strategyThe term trace/interview/eliminate (TIE) is taken from major incident investigation. Some forces use alternative terminology (trace/implicate/eliminate, trace/implicate/evaluate) but this does not affect the proceduresfor TIE enquiries.Steps:1. Constructing a TIE category2. Populating and prioritising a TIE category3. Setting TIE parameters for suspects and time4. Establishing elimination criteria5. Conducting TIE enquiries6. Managing not eliminated TIE subjectsInvestigative effort can be focused on those implicated, in order to identify the suspect(s).Investigators unfamiliar with this technique should seek assistance from experiencedcolleagues/supervisors. TIE strategies can be highly resource intensive and, unless managed effectively, have the potential to incorrectly eliminate the offender.Investigators may also consider using intelligence-led mass screening enquiries as part of the TIE strategy in major crime investigations.
TIE strategy exampleAn investigation into the assault of a man in a bar has failed to identify the suspect and the investigator decides to use a TIE strategy.ParametersThe suspect and time parameters, based on witness testimony, are set as:  white man 20–30 years 5’10” to 6’2” tall  dark hair gold earring in left ear  22.15–22.30CategoryAll the men in the bar at the time of the offence are included in the category. Populating the TIE category is difficult because it is not known who was in the bar at the time.ApproachThe investigator adopts a snowballing technique, starting with the witnesses who are already known. Twenty people are identified and four fit the suspect parameters. Three were with others who provide credible alibis. The fourth states that he did not visit the bar that evening and was home alone at the time of the assault. This generates further enquiries to test the sighting of him in the bar.Constructing a TIE categoryA TIE category is a group of people sharing a common characteristic which is likely to include the offender. TIE categories are typically based on those: with access to the scene at the time of the offence in the vicinity of the scene at the time of the offence living in, or associated with, a certain geographical area or relevant premises  related to, or associated with, the victim with previous convictions for similar offences (usually known as MO suspects)  with physical characteristics similar to the offender with access to certain types of vehicleThis is not an exhaustive list, and the more that is known about the circumstances of the crime, the greater the chances of constructing an accurate TIE category. Some pre-work may be required to determine the most suitable characteristics to use.As more material becomes available, the validity of TIE categories can be reassessed.
Populating and prioritising a TIE categoryHaving decided which groups are likely to include the offender, investigators must identify as many group members as possible. Sometimes this is known with a degree of certainty. For example, a check of company records could create a TIE category of ‘those employed in the named premises’. In other cases the exact membership of the group may be difficult to determine. Those in a TIE category are known as TIE subjects.SnowballingThis technique involves interviewing known members of a TIE category to identify other members of the group. Ways to populate TIE categories: official records, for example, membership lists, payrolls, electoral registers  police intelligence databases media appeals  snowballingFiltering TIE categories:Sometimes the population of a TIE category is large and it is not possible to carry out enquiries on everyone. Investigators may choose to start with those members most likely to be the offender. In such cases it is possible to apply filters according to priorities chosen by the investigator, for example: proximity to the scene date of last conviction of MO suspects age (where this is not known, investigators may wish to prioritise those who fall within the likely age range of offenders for that type of crime) sex (where the sex of the offender is not known, investigators may wish to prioritise those of the sex most likely to have committed the crime but should avoid stereotyping)TIE parametersSuspect parametersThese are the known characteristics of the offender that can be used to implicate or eliminate those within a TIE category. They can include: sex  age physical characteristics  fingerprints forensic characteristics such as DNA, fibres, footwear impressions  ownership of a particular make or colour of vehicle ownership of particular clothingThe value of these characteristics varies. A fingerprint or DNA is likely to eliminate all but the offender, whereas knowing only the sex of the offender is of limited assistance, although it still eliminates half the population.
Investigators should always consider setting parameters wider than those suggested by the material to allow for a degree of error in the descriptions given.Time parametersThe timeframe within which a crime was committed is a useful way of eliminating individuals fromthe TIE category. People may be able to prove that they were elsewhere when the crime was committed. Time parameters should be set as accurately as possible, based on the material available. When the exact time is not known, investigators should set the time parameters between the earliest and latest time at which the crime could have been committed.Elimination criteriaInvestigators need to establish the criteria by which they are prepared to eliminate members of the TIE category from the crime. The Home Office Large Major Enquiry System 2 (HOLMES2) database uses a tried and tested system of elimination codes. Investigators must decide which level of elimination to apply in each case. This depends on the material available, the nature of the offence and the characteristics of the TIE category.HOLMES2 elimination codes1. Forensic elimination, for example, DNA, footwear impressions, fingerprints.2. Description (suspect parameters).3. Independent witness (alibi).4. Associate or relative (alibi).5. Spouse or common law relationship (alibi).6. Not eliminated.Forensic eliminationWhere forensic material or a fingerprint that uniquely links an offender with the offence is available, the relevant samples are obtained from TIE subjects for comparison against it. This method can provide definitive evidence which eliminates the individual from the enquiry.A TIE subject can be considered as eliminated only if it can be shown with certainty that the forensic material or fingerprint must have been left by the offender and that no other person was involved. Where the offence has been planned, the offender may well have taken precautions to avoid leaving such evidence at the scene. In these circumstances the absence of such an evidential link does not confirm that the TIE subject was not involved.AlibiIn the absence of forensic evidence or a description, some TIE subjects can be eliminated through alibi enquiries. Alibi enquiries establish that a subject was not available to commit the offence because the person was in another location during the time that it was committed.The degree of reliance that can be placed on alibi elimination depends on the credibility of the person providing the alibi. The HOLMES2 elimination criteria distinguish between alibi witnesses who are independent of the nominal, those who are associated with them in some way and those who are in an intimate relationship with them. Clearly, the value of alibi enquiries depends, to a large extent, on knowing with some certainty the
location of the crime and the times during which it occurred. If it is not possible to set reasonably tight locations and alibi times, it is likely that many TIE subjects will remain not eliminated.Not eliminatedSomeone who cannot be eliminated using codes 1–5 must be recorded as not eliminated. This does not mean that they are a suspect in the case. Where the elimination criteria are broad, it is likely that fewer TIE subjects will be eliminated than where the criteria are more narrowly defined.Implication and elimination testingAn important principle of TIE strategies is that implication and elimination are always provisional and should be rigorously tested against the material to hand and any new material that becomes available. It is good practice to regard TIE subjects as being either implicated or eliminated from the TIE category, not as being implicated or eliminated as the offender. For example, someone who has been eliminated against code 5, an alibi supported by a spouse, can always be re-examined if new material comes to light which allows forensic elimination criteria to be set.ConsentFingerprints, footwear impressions and samples given voluntarily for the purposes of elimination play an important part in many investigations. It is important to make sure that innocent volunteers are not deterred from participating. They must be fully informed of the reasons for requesting fingerprints, footwear impressions and DNA samples, and consent voluntarily to their being used for the purposes of a specific investigation. If the police or volunteer seeks to have the fingerprints, footwear impressions or samples retained for use after the specific investigation ends, the volunteer’s additional consent must also be fully informed and voluntary.For further information see Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) (Code D Annex F).TIE enquiriesWhen carrying out TIE enquiries, investigators should be mindful that TIE subjects may also be potential witnesses. This applies particularly where they were present at the scene or are in a group which may know the victim or offender.Interviewing TIE subjectsEach subject of the TIE category should be interviewed using the PEACE model of investigative interviewing to gather information on the characteristics that are of interest to the investigation. This could be a description, ownership of vehicles and their whereabouts at the time of the crime, together with the details of those who can verify this.Where the elimination criterion is an alibi, investigators must thoroughly check the alibi with those who can verify it. This should enable some subjects of the TIE category to be eliminated from the investigation.Where the elimination criteria include forensic material or fingerprints, these should be obtained and arrangements made to have the material tested. The results should be communicated to the investigator as soon as possible.
Treating TIE subjects as suspectsWhere there is forensic evidence or other compelling material linking a TIE subject to the offence, or where their alibi is shown to be false, it is likely that they will be treated as suspects. People should not be considered to be suspects just because their alibi cannot be verified. Further enquiries should be carried out to gather material that may implicate or eliminate them.Mass screening enquiriesThis involves taking DNA samples or fingerprints from a selected part of the population and submitting those samples to the force forensic provider. This attempts to match a sample found at the scene of a crime to a member of the population. It is generally used in major investigations.ConsiderationsSuch enquiries can be long-running and expensive, both in terms of human and financial resources, and may have a significant impact on the community. It is, therefore, essential that careful consideration is given to the likely benefits for the investigation. The use of this technique should be restricted to when more routine enquiries are yielding little or no information, or are proving more costly and time-consuming than conducting a mass screening.For further information see: NPCC (2021) Major Crime Investigation Manual (MCIM)Not eliminated TIE subjectsIt is likely that some TIE subjects will be eliminated from the investigation. This enables decisions to be made about how to progress enquiries in relation to those who are not eliminated. The unique circumstances of the case and any new material available should direct enquiries. It is not appropriate to simply reissue the investigative action with the instruction to ‘continue enquiries’ as this is unlikely, on its own, to advance the investigation.Large numbersWhere there are a large number of not eliminated TIE subjects in a particular category, it may be necessary to accept that little can be done until more material can be gathered. In these circumstances it may be more productive to put resources into locating and gathering material, rather than to continue to focus on individuals.Small numbersWhere there are a smaller number of not eliminated TIE subjects, it may be possible to carry out further research into them, or to raise actions to implicate or clear them by more intrusive investigative methods such as searches of property, surveillance, interview or identification enquiries.Arrest strategy
An investigator must decide whether the suspect can or should be arrested. The decision to deprive an individual of their freedom should not be taken lightly, and advice should be sought from the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) if needed. Once a suspect has been identified, a strategy development approach can be adopted to gather material that will either implicate them in the offence or eliminate them. Every individual who falls within the suspect category must be treated in the same way. If there are specific reasons for not following the same procedure, these should be recorded in the crime report or policy file.Power of arrestPACE s 24 (as substituted by the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (SOCPA) s 110) provides the statutory power of arrest for a person involved in a criminal offence. To make an arrest, an officer must first have grounds for believing that it is necessary, as detailed in PACE Code G. This may involve considering the intelligence case and/or evidential material. Before making an arrest, investigators must consider when and how the arrest should take place.Timing an arrestThe way in which the identity of the suspect is discovered has a bearing on how and when an arrest should be made. If there is a choice, it is usually between making an early arrest and conducting a planned arrest. The decision about timing depends on a number of factors, which should be kept under continuous review. If the circumstances alter, the decision to make an immediate arrest or to delay it may have to be amended and the reasons for this recorded.Factors to consider Does the suspect pose a serious risk to the safety of the victim, witnesses or the general public?  Is there a likelihood that the suspect will commit further or more serious offences? Is the suspect likely to destroy, conceal or falsify evidence that will obstruct the investigation? Is further surveillance or other covert means of surveillance required? (This will need authorisation under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000.)For further information see Necessity to arrest.Background checksWhen a suspect has been identified, checks should be conducted into their background and lifestyle. These checks can strengthen and assist the case.Considerations: Is the suspect violent? Does the suspect possess any known firearms and/or is there a history of use of firearms?  Does the suspect have or use any other premises? Does the suspect have access to any vehicles? Does the suspect have any previous criminal convictions, arrests?  What is their MO? Are there any known associates?
 Is there any habitual behaviour associated with the suspect, for example, are they a known gambler or a known drug addict? Is there any intelligence regarding their previous behaviour in interviews?In volume crime investigations, research into a suspect’s background and previous offending behaviour may reveal similarities to the offence currently under investigation. It may also lead to the identification of a particular MO which can assist investigators to identify other linked offences and to plan for subsequent searches and/or suspect interviews.SearchesThe timing of an arrest provides the investigator with an opportunity to plan a search of the suspect’s home address (or other premises linked to the suspect) and their vehicles (see Search Strategy). It may also provide opportunities to recover incriminating or corroborating material before it is altered, disposed of or destroyed. A search of a suspect’s premises may also identify property from other offences, or intelligence which can be used to identify other offenders or associates. Searches of the suspect’s premises should be carried out in accordance with PACE Code B.Locard’s principle of exchangeWhen conducting searches or arrests, the investigator should be aware that evidential material may have been transferred from the victim or crime scene onto the clothing of the suspect. The suspect is, therefore, a potential crime scene which can be harvested, particularly if arrests and searches take place shortly after the commission of an offence. The possibility of cross-contamination must be considered and, wherever practicable, investigators who have visited the crime scene, or who have been in close contact with a victim, should not be deployed to search or arrest the suspect unless they have changed their clothing. Similar considerations should be applied to the use of vehicles used to convey victims and suspects.Planning an arrestThe arrest should be planned, where circumstances allow. The formulation of a plan should take into account resources and logistics. If several suspects are involved, investigators must decide if the arrests need to be coordinated. They must also consider the most appropriate method of searching to use and whether search warrants are required.Custody arrangementsSpecific arrangements may be required in some cases. For example, if several suspects are going to be arrested simultaneously, it must first be decided if they should be held at the same or separate police stations, and whether sufficient facilities are available for this.Other considerationsThe vulnerability of the suspect, for example, age, disability, and the possibility that the suspect may have caring responsibilities for other vulnerable individuals should be taken into account. If the suspect does not speak English, an interpreter should be arranged. See also APP on Police response to concern for a child – Arrest strategy.
The timing of an arrest should be planned to make best use of the time the suspect spends in custody. Likely defences should be considered and catered for in interview plans (see investigative interviewing). Preparing an initial interview plan at this stage helps to maximise the detention time available to the investigator post arrest. Prior to arrest in serious or complex investigations, specialist interview advisers should be used or consulted to develop an initial interview strategy, especially where there are multiple suspects or unusual features associated with the commission of the offence.Pre-arrest briefingsArrest and search teams should receive a briefing prior to both the arrest and search phases, to ensure that all personnel are aware of each officer’s role and the reasons for the arrest.Information to consider during a briefingThe following list is not exhaustive but covers some of the areas that may have to be considered:  circumstances of the offence authority for search nominated officer in charge of the arrest team  nominated officer in charge of the search team  communications method of entry items to be searched for (for example, clothing, footwear, weapons, trophies)  recording significant statements or silences methods of recovery and cross-contamination  exhibits officer loggist health and safety transport of suspects and location of the custody suite  interview teams debrief – time and locationPost arrestOnce in custody, the suspect’s detention is controlled by PACE. At the time of arrest and before the suspect is delivered to the police station, anything that the suspect says must be fully recorded. In particular, any significant statements, for example, ‘I don’t know what you’re talking about’, made by the suspect post arrest and before formal interview should be recorded.Where a suspect is released under Investigation (RUI’d), or no further action is taken, relevant information must be passed to the suspect. See custody for further information.BriefingArrest teams should be specifically briefed not to question or interview suspects further – unless there are imminent threats to life or property. All questioning of a suspect must be conducted in accordance with PACE.For further information see APP on briefing.
DebriefingAt the conclusion of the arrest and search phases, a nominated officer should debrief the teams to ensure that all relevant material has been identified and documented.Significant statementsA significant statement is defined in PACE Code C as:One which appears capable of being used in evidence against the suspect, in particular a direct admission of guilt.Identification of suspectsInternet and social mediaWhere information suggests that a victim or witness may have searched the internet or social media sites to assist them in identifying a potential suspect see ACPO (2014) Internet Social Media and Identification ProceduresIn some investigations the suspect is identified beyond reasonable doubt from the outset. They may have been caught red-handed, arrested during the initial response or identified from material gathered during the investigation. Whenever a suspect’s identity becomes known, consideration must be given to formal identification procedures.Points to considerWhere investigators are conducting interviews with witnesses and identification is likely to be an issue, guidelines contained in R v Turnbull (1977) QB 224 and captured in the mnemonic ADVOKATE will help to secure best evidence.Descriptions should be obtained while the recollection is fresh in the mind of the witness. In some cases the suspect may still be in the locality and may not have had the opportunity to alter their appearance or conceal/dispose of evidence.The first principle of identification evidence is that failure to accurately record the description of a suspect as soon as it is available, and failure to use the description during the identification process, can seriously undermine the chances of a conviction. Investigators should bear in mind the difference between identification and recognition and that, where a witness claims to recognise a suspect, identification procedures must still be followed.ADVOKATEA Amount or length of time the witness had the suspect under observation.D Distance between the witness and the suspect during the observation.V Visibility conditions during the observation.
O Obstructions to the observations - whether they temporarily or partially inhibited the observations.K Whether the suspect is known to the witness in any way.A Any particular reason the witness has for remembering the suspect or event.T Time the witness had the suspect under observation and the amount of time elapsed since the event.E Errors in the description provided by the witness compared with the actual appearance.Identification and recognitionIdentificationThis is a formal legal procedure that draws on a combination of established procedures, including the use of competent eyewitnesses who are likely to become key witnesses for the prosecution. It tests their ability to identify a person suspected of committing the offence under investigation as the same person they saw on a previous occasionRecognitionThis is where someone who is not an eyewitness to the offence under investigation claims to recognise a person, depicted in an image, for example, a CCTV image. A successful recognition process can trigger other investigative options which may result in a chain of evidence leading to, and in support of, a formal identification procedure. In the absence of other supporting evidence, evidence of recognition can be adduced providing it is gathered in a robust manner that is open to scrutiny. R v Smith and others [2008] EWCA Crim 1342 illustrates recognition.Identification procedureAn identification procedure must be held whenever: a witness has identified a suspect or purported to have identified a suspect prior to any formal procedures being held or there is a witness available who expresses an ability to identify a suspect or there is a reasonable chance they will be able to identify a suspect or    the suspect disputes being the person the witness says he or she has seen An identification procedure is not required: when it is not practicable when it would serve no useful purpose in proving or disproving that the suspect committed the offence, for example, when it is not disputed that the suspect is already well known to the witness who claims to have seen them commit the crime if the witness could describe clothing only or would not be able to recognise the suspect again.The identification officer should be consulted when deciding on which identification procedure to adopt during an investigation. Due consideration must be given to the procedure most suited to the witness. PACE Code D provides guidance to investigators.Suspect not known
The following identification procedures should be used where the suspect is not known: street identification – when a witness can be taken to the particular location to see whether an identification of a suspect can be made showing photographs to a witness showing video footage or photographs of an incident to a witness using facial imaging techniques, which may include artists’ impressions, composites and electronic facial imaging technique (E-FIT™)For further information see ACPO (2009) Facial Identification Guidance.Suspect knownIn this sense ‘known’ means that the police have sufficient information to justify the arrest of a particular person as a suspect for an offence.Where the suspect is known and the witness is available to take part in an identification parade, the identification procedures should be used in the following sequence: formal identification parade or one of the approved video ID techniques group identification a videofilm a confrontationFailure to ensure that the procedures set out in PACE Code D are followed can seriously undermine the strength of the prosecution case or give the defendant grounds for appeal against a conviction. However, there may be circumstances where, following the judgment in the case of R v Long [1991] Crim LR 453, the court will accept identification evidence that has not been gathered in accordance with PACE Code D, for example, where the witness recognises the suspect when they meet accidentally in the street.Video identification techniquesUsing video identification procedures means that the suspect does not need to attend. This reduces the time required to arrange formal identification procedures and gives witnesses an early opportunity to view the parade. Witnesses may also feel less intimidated when picking out an image from a computer screen than by attending a formal identification parade at a police station. However, video identification procedures preclude the witness from seeing the suspect walk, move or use a particular phrase or words.Voice identificationIn some cases this can be used to support other identification evidence, for example, where the suspect’s facial features are obscured, but they speak clearly to the victim or witness. It should not, however, be regarded as proof of identity in its own right.Categories of voice identification: where the witness identifies the voice of someone they know recognition where the witness does not know the voice of the suspect, but would be able to pick out the voice as being distinct from other voicesBack to Investigation overview
TagsInvestigation
24/03/2025 Working with victims and witnesses https://www.college.police.uk/app/investigation/working-victims-and-witnesses PageWorking with victims and witnessesThis page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing. First published23 October 2013 Updated16 February 2023Written by College of Policing Investigation30 mins readA witness is a person, other than a defendant, who is likely to give evidence in court. All victims are also witnesses and should be treated as such. All victims have ‘Rights’ set out in the Code of Practice for Victims of Crime.The success of any investigation depends largely on the accuracy and detail of the material obtained from witnesses. Investigators, whether tasked with a volume crime or major investigation, must recognise the individual needs and concerns of witnesses and treat them with dignity and respect. This can have a significant impact on how witnesses cooperate with the investigation and any subsequent prosecution.National support for law enforcement agenciesCall the NCA Major Crime Investigative Support on 0345 000 5463 and speak with an officer for advice and support regarding vulnerable and intimidated witnesses.The Vulnerability Knowledge and Practice Programme team has introduced a new resource for officers and staff who work with children and young people – see Voice of the child for information. The team produce reports drawing police practice lessons based on a variety of credible sources: see November 2022 – Voice of the Child Practice Briefing.Formal definitionsVictim
The Code of Practice for Victims of Crime in England and Wales, November 2020 defines a victim as: ‘a person who has suffered harm, including physical, mental or emotional harm or economic loss which was directly caused by a criminal offence; a close relative (or a nominated family spokesperson) of a person whose death was directly caused by a criminal offence.’A victim is also a witness.WitnessBlack’s Law dictionary defines a witness as ‘one who sees, knows or vouches for something. One who gives testimony under oath or affirmation, in person, by oral or written deposition or by affidavit’. A witness must be legally competent to testify.Significant witnessAccording to Ministry of Justice (2022) Achieving Best Evidence in Criminal Proceedings: Guidance on interviewing victims and witnesses, and guidance on using special measures, significant witnesses, sometimes referred to as ‘key’ witnesses, are those who: have or claim to have witnessed, visually or otherwise, an indictable offence, part of such an offence or events closely connected with it (including any incriminating comments made by the suspected offender either before or after the offence) and/or have a particular relationship to the victim or have a central position in an investigation into an indictable offenceWhile significant witnesses are usually defined with reference to indictable-only offences, investigating officers may consider designating witnesses as significant in any other serious case where it might be helpful.A police officer who has witnessed murder, manslaughter, road death, serious physical assault, sexual assault, kidnap, robberies in which firearms are involved or any criminal attempts or conspiracies in relation to these offences should also be considered a significant witness.Vulnerable or intimidated witnessThe Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999 (YJCE) allows special measures for certain groups of witnesses who may be vulnerable or intimidated.Section 16Section 16 allows special measures for witnesses who are under 18 years of age or in circumstances where the court considers their evidence may be diminished due to that witness experiencing mental ill health, a significant impairment of intelligence and social functioning or where the witness has a physical disability or is suffering from a physical disorder.Section 17
Section 17 allows special measures to be provided on grounds of fear or distress about testifying.Special measuresThese include the use of video-recorded interviews as evidence-in-chief. They are also eligible to use communication aids, such as computer-aided speech programs and symbols on boards or in books, where necessary.For further information see Ministry of Justice (2022) Achieving Best Evidence in Criminal Proceedings: Guidance on interviewing victims and witnesses, and guidance on using special measures.Witness management in an investigationInvestigators should consider Code of Practice for Victims of Crime in England and Wales, November 2020 when setting the victim and witness strategy.Three interdependent strategies make up the victim and witness strategy in an investigation:  witness identification strategy initial contact strategy witness interview strategyInvestigators should also consider the provision of information to victims and witnesses.Witness identification strategyThe detection of a large proportion of offences can be attributed to information, intelligence and evidence provided by the public. It is important that investigators recognise this and take action to identify and locate witnesses at the earliest available opportunity.Identifying and locating witnessesSome witnesses may self-present or be self-evident, whereas other witnesses may be more difficult to identify and/or locate. Investigating officers must, therefore, develop clear intelligence-led objectives for identifying witnesses. These will depend on the circumstances of the case but should include identifying settings and communities where witnesses are likely to be found. Communities may be cultural, religious, sporting, occupational, clubs, associations or societies. Resources can then be directed towards identifying witnesses.Methods for identifying and locating witnesses:  viewing CCTV media appeals house-to-house enquiries interviews with victims and other witnesses  suspect interviews financial investigation open-source internet search tools  social media
 anniversary appealsInitial contact strategyThe manner in which investigators approach witnesses, from the point of initial contact, during interviews and through to the conclusion of any subsequent prosecution case, can have a significant bearing on their perceptions of how the criminal justice system operates. Inappropriate or ill-considered methods of dealing with a witness may hamper the investigation and delay or prevent the supply of relevant material to the investigator.Investigating officers should set objectives to ensure that the members of the enquiry team, and any other police staff who could have initial contact with witnesses, understand the action expected of them when they encounter a potential witness.RewardsIf a reward for information has been made public, it should not be highlighted to any potential witness who comes forward. There is a risk that this could be considered an inducement to provide information. Where a witness asks an unsolicited question about a reward, a record should be made of it and the possibility of a subsequent challenge to the integrity of the witness taken into account as part of the overall investigative strategy.Witness as a sceneIn cases of physical or sexual assault, the investigator has an early opportunity to obtain forensic material from the victim or their clothing, and potentially other witnesses. This material may include body fluids or other cellular or fibre transfers. Early evidence kits ensure opportunities to capture forensic evidence are maximised in investigations into sexual offences.In such cases, the investigator must balance the victim’s medical and welfare needs with the recovery of uncontaminated material for the investigation. The victim may not recognise or understand the significance of the requests for this material.Support for investigatorsAssistance from specially trained officers (STOs) and using specialist centres, where available, enable the investigator to recover material, while ensuring that victims receive appropriate support and counselling.If a specialist officer is deployed to assist an investigator, an accurate record must be maintained on the crime report, policy log or file outlining the specific role of the specialist officer. The investigator and the specialist officer need to maintain close contact. This can be achieved by regular meetings to brief and debrief each other.Initial accountsAn initial account from a witness can provide material which is likely to progress the investigation and provide:  the early identification or arrest of a suspect the recovery of material connected with the offence prevention of the imminent disposal or destruction of material connected with the investigation
 prevention of the commission of other offences.An initial account can also help with the development of an overall witness interview strategy in terms of categorising witnesses as vulnerable, intimidated or significant, and prioritising formal interviews.ApproachBy adopting a calm, reassuring interview style, investigators can establish the main points of what witnesses know about the incident.The witness may require medical attention or the presence of a suitable adult and the investigator needs to address this. Common sense has to be applied and the initial account should be limited to obtaining sufficient information to progress the enquiry. The circumstances surrounding the initial account should be recorded, and if the witness is receiving non urgent attention, permission should be obtained from medical staff.Suitable care and support can then be provided prior to an in-depth interview. For further information see also: Obtaining initial accounts Ministry of Justice (2022) Achieving Best Evidence in Criminal Proceedings: Guidance on interviewing victims and witnesses, and guidance on using special measures, paragraphs 2.40 to 2.70Initial risk assessmentRisk assessment begins the moment that the circumstances of the crime are notified to the police and must continue throughout the investigation. Potential risks should be identified and decisions made about how to minimise and manage them throughout the investigation and criminal justice processes. Some of the early risk assessment can be conducted through call taker actions.The information provided to the call taker can be passed to the initial investigators so that they are fully informed and can continue assessing risk on arrival at the scene.The Code of Practice for Victims of Crime in England and Wales, November 2020 specifies that all victims have a right to be offered support when reporting a crime, this should include, and be linked to an initial needs assessment.Potential risks: the physical health and welfare of the victim or other witnesses the suspect(s), who may still be present or in the vicinity and posing a threat forensic or other relevant material which may be disposed of, destroyed or damaged risk to other potential victims or witnesses caused by the commission of further offencesManaging risksHaving identified the potential risks and assessed the needs of the victim (where appropriate), investigators must manage the identified risks and provide appropriate support. In the early stages of the investigation, this may include providing first aid or access to medical treatment, security and protection. These decisions should be
subject to continual review during the investigation. The initial management of risk depends on the scale and complexity of the investigation. In simple cases, risk may be managed by a single officer.Call taker actions: conduct an initial victims needs assessment where appropriate  prioritise the safety of the victim and any other witnesses keep the victim fully updated of the deployment of officers if the suspect is still present at the scene, keep the caller on the line as this is a means of monitoring the incident and any background noise will automatically be recorded and can be used as evidence if the suspect has left the scene, advise the caller to lock and secure the premises and to return to the telephone. Obtain a full description of the suspect and circulate it to officers in the areaWitness reluctance to attend an interview or provide a statementA victim/witness may be reluctant to attend an interview or provide a statement. Where this happens, investigators should sensitively try to establish why they are reluctant and, where possible, take steps to mitigate these reasons and provide reassurance. This may include explaining the investigative process and the offences under investigation and emphasising that, if at any time they change their mind, they should contact the officer in the case or named contact. It may also be appropriate to sensitively explain the impact that not attending an interview or providing a statement may have on the wider investigation. This may include not being able to proceed with the investigation or court proceedings.The investigating officer should agree a contact strategy with the victim/witness, or their nominated representative, to provide updates on the investigation and ongoing reassurance. Where appropriate, the victim/witness should be offered the opportunity to reconsider their decision not to provide an account and/or statement. They should not be put under any pressure to do so.The investigating officer should make a record of the reasons why the victim/witness is reluctant, and any mitigating action. They should also record all contact with the victim/witness and the content of any discussions.For further information, see Ministry of Justice (2022) Achieving Best Evidence in Criminal Proceedings: Guidance on interviewing victims and witnesses, and guidance on using special measures’Witness interviewsInterviews are a means by which an investigator can both obtain and impart information. Many witnesses fear the consequences of providing information. They, therefore, need to be confident that the investigator will deal with the information they provide appropriately. If the investigator establishes trust with the interviewee beforehand, they are more likely to give a full and accurate account.Witnesses should expect that they will be listened to and will receive fair treatment. It is the information provided by witnesses and victims that enables a suspect’s version of events to be validated or challenged.Under the Code of Practice for Victims of Crime, victims have a number of statutory Rights, including being told about their role as a witness, and it is important that investigators ensure these Rights are met.Witnesses should be interviewed in accordance with the PEACE model.
For further information see: Investigative interviewing NPCC Position Paper – Interviewing Child Witnesses in Major Crime Investigations  Identification of suspects Code of Practice for Victims of Crime in England and Wales, November 2020Where information suggests that a victim or witness may have searched the internet or social media sites to assist them in identifying a potential suspect see ACPO (2014) Internet Social Media and Identification Procedures.Witness assessmentThe investigator should assess the needs of the witness to support them to give their best evidence. This must be done prior to conducting an interview. This assessment is necessary to determine whether the witness needs additional support or the category of vulnerable or intimidated witness applies.Achieving best evidenceMinistry of Justice (2022) Achieving Best Evidence in Criminal Proceedings: Guidance on interviewing victims and witnesses, and guidance on using special measures provides advice on conducting a witness assessment, which should include their: availability to attend court  need for specific assistance need for support as a vulnerable or intimidated witnessIn addition, the assessment should include details of any information provided to the witness under local agreements.Witness interview strategyThis should be developed at an early stage in the investigation. An interview adviser can help the investigator to develop a witness interview strategy, which should be proportionate to the crime and the witness’s needs.Elements of the strategySetting objectives – these should be meaningful and realistic, particularity in the case of vulnerable, intimidated and significant witnesses.Selecting interviewers – staff selected should be competent and appropriate to undertake the interview taking into account the needs of the witness.Victim’s rights – ensure that the victim’s Rights under the Code of practice for victims of crime are met. Briefing interviewers – they should be informed of their roles as soon as possible and given time to plan and prepare.Supporting the interview.Debriefing the interviews – if required, they should be debriefed to establish the information obtained, how the account fits in with other available material, whether any action needs to be taken and what further enquiries are necessary.
 Supplementary interviews – these should only take place when they are essential for the purpose of eliciting additional information or clarifying contradictory information of significance to the investigation. Consideration should be given to whether holding such an interview would be in the witness’s best interest, and the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) should be consulted where appropriate. The reason for conducting supplementary interviews should be recorded. Continued risk and needs assessment.  Point of contact.Video of witness interviewVideo-recording key or significant witness interviews should be considered in cases of:  murder manslaughter  road death serious physical assault  sexual assault kidnap robberies in which firearms are involved any criminal attempts or conspiracies in relation to the above listed offencesFor further information see NPCC (2015) Advice on the Structure of Visually Recorded Witness Interviews (Third Edition).Welfare issuesInvestigators tasked with interviewing a witness should consider the welfare needs of the witness throughout. Factors to consider: age and mental capacity of the witness (legal requirements dictate how material can be obtained from individuals) the emotional health and welfare of the witness the language skills of the witness (interpreters should be used in accordance with local guidelines)  whether a witness intermediary is required through the witness intermediary scheme    how to prevent further offences from occurring, such as witness intimidation See also victim’s Rights under the Code of Practice for Victims of Crime.Third-party support may be beneficial to some witnesses, provided that the support is unconnected with the investigation.For additional advice when interviewing vulnerable witnesses with communication needs see Advocates Gateway toolkits.Witness intermediary schemeAll witnesses considered to be vulnerable can obtain help from an intermediary. An intermediary can be appointed at any stage (but should be appointed as early as possible before the interview) if it becomes apparent
that there is a communication issue, and appointing one will make the difference between a vulnerable witness giving their best evidence, or not communicating at all.An intermediary is likely to improve the quality of the witness’s evidence, and should be considered if the witness appears unlikely to be able to recognise a problematic question or, even if able to do so, may be reluctant to say so to a questioner in a position of authority.Intermediaries can provide advice to investigators to help achieve more productive interviews, including:  how a witness communicates their level of understanding how it would be best to question them to get the best evidence  types of questions to avoid how long the witness will need to answer a questionThey are impartial, and can help a witness to understand the questions they are asked and can communicate the witness’s responses, if required.The scheme provides access to registered intermediaries. It offers: access to the national vulnerable witness and intermediary adviser  a matching service to find the best intermediary for a witnessIt can be accessed via the NCA Major Crime Investigative Support. For further information see: Lexicon Limited (2014) Making the Most of Working with an Intermediary: Toolkit 9, November 2014  Code of Practice for Victims of Crime, Right 4 CPS (2020) Special measuresWitness intimidationMinistry of Justice (2011) Vulnerable and Intimidated Witnesses A Police Service Guide considers witness intimidation and the potential responses to it. Early identification of actual or potential intimidation means that witnesses can be offered a service tailored to their requirements, making it more likely that they will give evidence in court.Victims are also eligible for enhanced rights under the Code, where the service provider considers that the quality of evidence will be affected because of fear or distress about testifying in court.The table below lists a number of situations and potential actions to consider.
1. Life threatening intimidation2. Non-life threatening intimidation
Formal witness protection scheme, application for special measures in court – for example, screens and live television link.National witness mobility scheme, application for special measures in court.
3a. Low level intimidation Witness security and support, application for special measures in court.or harassment
3b. Fear of low level intimidation3c. Fear of the court system or procedure
Witness security and support, consider application for special measures in court.Explanation of court system/procedure (possibility of applying for special measures in court in some instances – for example, elderly and frail witnesses.
Whatever action is taken, officers should be careful to avoid any suggestion that inducements have been offered in return for the witness’s testimony.Witness protectionWhere there are fears that a witness may be intimidated, investigators, working in conjunction with the CPS, can develop a witness care strategy designed to protect the witness from intimidation or harassment. This can include protecting the identity of the witness during the investigation, the early stages of the prosecution process and, in certain exceptional circumstances, through the trial itself.Local measuresThere are a number of local measures which investigators can employ to improve security and provide protection. These include: providing a ‘Homelink’ alarm system  upgrading security at the home address  temporary relocation entries on briefing and intelligence systemsInvestigators can obtain assistance with these interim measures from local crime reduction advisers and neighbourhood policing teams. Some local authorities also provide access to resources to deal with witness protection issues.Reluctant witnessesThese are people who are believed to have witnessed an offence, part of an offence or events closely connected with it, but are reluctant to become involved in the investigative process. Initial actions should try to establish the reasons for the witness’s reluctance so that attempts to address the issue can be made.Reasons for reluctance: adverse perceptions of the police or criminal justice process  fear of an alleged perpetrator concern about the response from the community where they live  worries about their identity being released uncertainty about the processReluctant witnesses should be given an outline of the offence(s) being investigated. The specific details of the allegation, or particulars about what the witness may have seen, should not be discussed. In addition, no pressure should be applied to encourage the witness to talk to the police or to give evidence. The function of the investigator in these circumstances is simply to provide enough information to allow the potential witness to decide whether to assist or not. Records should be kept of any contact and anything said.
The investigator should liaise with the CPS once they are aware that the witness is reluctant to attend court to give evidence, as the prosecutor may be able to apply for a witness summons to secure their attendance.Hostile witnessesThese are people believed to have witnessed an offence, part of an offence or events closely connected with it, but who are opposed to the investigative process and/or biased against the examining party. The reasons for their opposition might include their lifestyle or they may have a close relationship with the alleged perpetrator and intend to appear in court as a defence witness.Some of these witnesses may simply refuse to cooperate with the police, others might provide false information intended to support the alleged perpetrator’s account.Records must be kept of all interactions with hostile witnesses, regardless of the reason for their hostility and the extent of their cooperation. Where hostile witnesses consent to an interview, it should be video-recorded, unless they object to this.Witness refusal to make a statementInvestigators should bring to the attention of the CPS details of any witnesses who have been interviewed but have refused to make a statement.The investigator should outline the details of the material the witness has provided and copies of any notes made or statements compiled which the witness has refused to sign. The investigator should also provide the CPS with all the information provided by the witness which may account for their refusal to provide a statement. This may become crucial if the witness is later called as a defence witness.Information to victims/witnessesInvestigators must support witnesses by providing them with relevant information about the progress of the investigation and of any key decisions or significant developments throughout the investigation. Victims must be provided with information within specific timescales set out under the Victim’s Code. Witnesses must always be provided with the following details: the name of the investigating officer contact details for the investigating officer  crime or incident reference numberThe Victims Code of Practice specifies that victims must be provided with information and where applicable explanations at each of the following key decision points within five working days (one working day under enhanced rights): suspect arrested suspect interviewed under caution  suspect released without charge suspect released on police bail or under investigation  bail conditions changed or cancelled suspect charged decision not to investigate
 decision not to prosecute decision to administer an out of court disposalVictim and witness supportInvestigators must recognise the impact that being a witness to a crime or event can have on an individual. They may feel shocked, traumatised, vulnerable or intimidated by the experience. Invariably, all witnesses will require a degree of help from sources of support during any investigation.Adopting a calm, reassuring approach and providing information about organisations that give support can assist in alleviating the witness’s anxiety and fears. As the case progresses, the witness may receive additional help and support from the Witness Service (which includes Victim Support). This is run by volunteers and offers: information on what takes place at court emotional support and confidential advice  a familiarisation visit to the court courtroom support for the witnessPolice officers who are witnesses are not immune to similar fears and anxieties, especially when they have witnessed traumatic or unusual events. Force welfare departments can provide advice and guidance to officers in these circumstances.For further information see: Victim Support (2011) Left in the Dark: Why Victims of Crime Need to Be Kept Informed  Getting support as a victim of crime Easy read victims' guidesVictim personal statementA victim personal statement explains, in a victims own words, how a crime has affected them, whether physically, emotionally, financially or in any other way. It can help service providers consider what additional support a victim and/or their family may require. A victim has the Right under the Victim’s Code to make a Victim Personal Statement. See Right 7 for further detail.Sources of supportIn some circumstances, this support may be provided by verbal reassurances from a named investigator, family members or close friends.In more serious investigations, support may also be provided by deploying specially trained officers, such as a:  family liaison officer (FLO) sexual offence liaison officer/specially trained officer domestic violence officer and/or coordinator neighbourhood policing officer and/or police community support officerThere are also a number of organisations that provide valuable services to witnesses, including:
 Victim Support schemes – including the witness service, victim focus scheme and victim support homicide service. sexual assault referral centres  social services health service race equality councils gay and lesbian support groups religious organisations or groups  Embrace child victims of crimeFor further information see: Provision of Therapy for Child Witnesses Prior to a Criminal Trial  CompensationWitness anonymityThe Coroners and Justice Act 2009 covers persons for whom anonymity is needed to protect their safety (including where intimidation is feared) or the safety of others, or to prevent serious damage to property, or in order to prevent real harm to public interest. It re-enacts the provisions of the Criminal Evidence (Witness Anonymity) Act 2008.The Act allows the courts to continue to grant anonymity to witnesses (where this is consistent with a defendant’s right to a fair trial and where certain conditions are met) through witness anonymity orders (WAOs). Further information is provided in CPS (2009) The Director’s Guidance on Witness Anonymity.It also allows the courts to grant investigation anonymity orders (IAOs) to persons from the early stages of the criminal justice process (where certain conditions are met).IAOs and WAOs serve different purposes at different stages of the criminal justice process.Investigation anonymity ordersEncouraging potential witnesses to come forward and provide a statement with a view to giving evidence at trial is widely acknowledged to be one of the most difficult aspects of successfully prosecuting crimes of murder/manslaughter, particularly where guns or knives have been used.IAOs can be used during an investigation of a gang-related death caused by a gun or knife where potential witnesses are actively being sought. These orders are designed to reassure witnesses that their identity will be protected during and after the investigation.For further information: ACPO (2010) Criminal use of Firearms Briefing Paper Anonymity in Investigations: Investigation Anonymity Orders Witness protection and anonymity: The Crown Prosecution ServiceFamily liaison
The Stephen Lawrence Inquiry was a catalyst for a change in how the police support bereaved families of victims. Family liaison has developed substantially since its inception, and there have been some defining and tragic cases. Reviews of such cases have allowed the police service to reflect and continually improve its service to bereaved families.Family liaison deployment is one of the most important aspects of an investigation. Family members should be engaged in a professional and compassionate way, with respect for their beliefs and customs, subject to the requirements of the investigation. Those performing family liaison roles should act with the highest degree of professionalism and integrity.The principles set out in the Code of Practice for Victims of Crime in England and Wales, November 2020 underpin the police service’s commitment to families.In this context, the word ‘family’ includes partners, parents, siblings, children, guardians and others who may not be related, but who have a direct and close relationship with the victim.See also College of Policing (2021) Charter for families bereaved through public tragedy. Family liaison can be used across a broad spectrum of investigations, including: murder and manslaughter  fatal road traffic collisions  mass fatality incidents rail fatalities critical incidents where family liaison might enhance the effectiveness of the police responseThe deployment of a family liaison officer (FLO) is determined by a police investigation, not because a crime has been definitively determined.Aims of family liaisonThe primary role of a FLO is as an investigator. The FLO will be responsible for gathering the evidence from the family that will assist the investigation.The key aims are: to secure the confidence and trust of the family, thereby enhancing their contribution to the investigation (this can positively impact the wider issues of community trust and confidence, as well as bringing positive benefits to the investigation) to gather material from the family in a manner that contributes to the investigation and preserves its integrity to work with the family in order to comply with their Rights to receive all relevant information connected with the enquiry, subject to the needs of the investigation, in a way that is proportionate to their fundamental right to respect for their privacy and family life to ensure that the family are given information about support agencies and that appropriate referrals are made to: the Homicide Service victim and witness support  the NHS and social services credible support charities, in accordance with the family’s consent and wishes
Family liaison strategyThe senior investigating officer (SIO) is responsible for setting the family liaison strategy. FLOs and family liaison coordinators (FLCs) should work to the strategy’s aims and objectives.In setting the strategy, the SIO should consider:  the requirements of the investigation the needs of the family the selection, deployment, supervision and management of the FLOsThe SIO is responsible for the risk assessment of all FLO deployments. For further information, see the NPCC (2021) Major Crime Investigation Manual (MCIM).Under the Victims Code, Right 4 bereaved close relatives have the right to a family liaison officer.Objectives for a family liaison strategyThe trauma associated with a sudden and violent death places the family of a victim under immense personal pressure at a time when the investigation could be making significant demands for detailed information. Family liaison is underpinned by sensitivity, compassion and respect for the family’s needs and requirements. It should be understood that the family may be dealing with a range of very challenging issues at this time as well as their bereavement.Initial priorities should be to establish the needs, requirements and communication channels with the family, to allow information to be gathered and to provide them with any information or help they require, taking the needs of the investigation into account.The following objectives should be considered as part of the FLO strategy. Gather evidence and information from the family in a manner that contributes to the investigation and preserves its integrity. Provide information to the family, subject to the needs of the investigation, and in a way that respects their human rights and the need for dignity. Provide the family with information about support that is available and, where appropriate, make referrals to relevant support services with the consent of the family, in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018 and General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). Explain coronial and victim identification procedures, and criminal justice processes, to the family. Explain the police communication and media strategy, and assist the family in managing the potential impact that the media may have on them and the investigation. Ensure the health and wellbeing of family liaison officers. Manage the conclusion or withdrawal of family liaison deploymentsThe SIO should ensure that FLOs remain focused on achieving the strategic objectives set for them. It is only when these objectives are met that the FLO will conclude their deployment.The FLO should meet the family at the earliest opportunity. They should clearly explain their role and introduce the most relevant agencies that can help a family, as early care is important. This will help to manage the family’s expectations, help them to understand the point at which the FLO will conclude their deployment, and give them a route to support that is relevant to their bereavement.
In murder cases that result in an acquittal at court, the police and the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) have agreed to comply with national standards of support to families and a review of the investigation (seethe CPS publication ‘Justice after acquittal – National standards of support’).VictimologyA key responsibility of the FLO will be to develop a full victimology or lifestyle information about the person who has died. Understanding the lifestyle of a victim may help the investigation to identify evidential opportunities, including any link between the suspect(s) and victim(s), and to establish the reason for their death. The level of detail required will determine the information sought from the family.The roles within family liaisonStrategic leadA senior leader in each force should take strategic leadership for family liaison. They should ensure an efficient and effective family liaison response, including the deployment of FLOs to bereaved families.Senior investigating officer (SIO)The SIO is responsible and accountable for all aspects of the investigation. This includes setting the family liaison strategy, the selection and deployment of FLOs, and supporting and supervising the FLOs.Senior identification manager (SIM) – In cases of mass fatalityThe SIM is responsible for overseeing the recovery and identification process. They will work closely with the coroner to prepare evidence for the Identification Commission and the SIO.Family liaison coordinator (FLC) and family liaison advisor (FLA)The FLC manages the deployments of FLOs and FLAs within a police service, and is responsible for providing or arranging support, guidance and development opportunities for those involved in family liaison.The FLA will be responsible for deploying FLOs and will report to an SIO, FLC or lead FLA.Family liaison officer (FLO)The primary purpose of an FLO is to be an investigator and to secure the confidence and trust of families of victims of murder or manslaughter, road fatality, mass disaster, rail fatality or another critical incident. A FLO’s role is to gather evidence and information from the family, to contribute to the investigation and preserve its integrity. The FLO also provides support in a sensitive and compassionate manner, ensuring that family members are given timely information in accordance with the needs of the investigation, including timely referrals to relevant support agencies.Professional role profiles for the FLC, FLA and FLO can be found on the College of Policing website.Information and support for families
The Code of Practice for Victims of Crime in England and Wales, November 2020 sets out the support and information that bereaved families should receive.FLOs should also ensure that they comply with the requirements of the Code when obtaining evidence from families, and that they act in compliance with Ministry of Justice (2011) Achieving Best Evidence in Criminal Proceedings: Guidance on interviewing victims and witnesses, and guidance on using special measures.When gathering information from the family, the FLO should consider the following questions. What is known? What do we want to know? Are the family entitled to enhanced rights under the Victim’s Code?  What special measures could the family be eligible for? How will the family be interviewed (for example, a statement, audio or visual)?  What support will the family need after the interview?Any interviews with a family member should be planned carefully. The plan should set out the objectives for the interview, who will conduct the interview, what support the interviewee will need during the interview and whether any supplementary interviews may be needed (see Ministry of Justice (2011) Achieving Best Evidence in Criminal Proceedings: Guidance on interviewing victims and witnesses, and guidance on using special measures).Families must be offered the opportunity to do the following. Make a victim personal statement, so that the court understands how the crime has affected them as a family. Meet the case lawyer from the CPS, in accordance with the Bereaved Families scheme. In cases of murder or manslaughter, bereaved families should be offered access to the Homicide Service to help them understand what to expect from the criminal justice system. This service is provided by Victim Support and is funded by the Ministry of Justice. The Homicide Service provides: assistance with the funeral, childcare and/or transportation help to access financial assistance, such as state benefits and compensation claims, and to inform other organisations that there has been a death the offer or commission of specialist services, such as trauma therapy and bereavement counsellingFurther victim support will be available through services commissioned by the local Police and Crime Commissioner. Please refer to the local police force website for further information.In cases of road death, whether it occurred in the UK or abroad, bereaved families should be given the National Road Victim Service (NRVS) Guide for bereaved families following a death on the road, which offers access to the NRVS through the helpline number referenced on the pack’s cover.Families should also be given additional information depending on their circumstances. These include the following. Explaining disaster victim identification – following a mass fatality incident, victim’s families should be provided with a copy of the NPCC leaflet, ‘Explaining disaster victim identification in major incidents’. Ministry of Justice Victim and witness information website – for victims and witnesses of crime in England and Wales. It provides information on what happens after a crime has been reported, the people they might meet, the support they should be given and how to complain if something goes wrong.
 Brake Road Safety Charity – in addition to the NRVS, Brake provides information and advice for bereaved families following death on the road. A Freephone, confidential support service providing emotional support, information and advocacy is also available for families bereaved by fatal road crashes (helpline: 0808 8000 401). RoadPeace – RoadPeace provides information and support services to people bereaved or seriously injured in road crashes (helpline: 0845 4500 355). Family Liaison and Co-ordination of Support Services (FLACSS) – FLACSS is a network of organisations who help those affected by murder and manslaughter, fatal road collisions, mass disasters and terrorism.Further informationNPCC have produced a range of practice advice notes to support FLO delivery:  The roles and structures of family liaison Strategies, briefings, tasking and withdrawal Evidence gathering, victimology and information sharing/working with the family  Identification, visiting, inquests, organ and tissue donation Risk management and assessment Supporting and welfare considerations  Deployment to reports of child death Deployment to reports of missing persons Family liaison and independent legal advice  Next of kin: glossary of terms Deaths abroadThe Crown Prosecution Service have published guidance on working with witnesses which provides further information on support.Back to Investigation overviewTagsInvestigation Victim care
Home  Employing people  Contracts of employment and working hoursWorkplace bullying and harassment
Bullying and harassment is behaviour that makes someone feel intimidated oro?ended. Harassment is unlawful under the Equality Act 2010. Examples of bullying or harassing behaviour include: spreading malicious rumours  unfair treatment picking on or regularly undermining someone denying someone’s training or promotion opportunities Bullying and harassment can happen: face-to-face  by letter by email  by phoneThe lawBullying itself is not against the law, but harassment is. This is when the unwanted behaviour is related to one of the following: age  sex disability gender reassignment marriage and civil partnership  pregnancy and maternity race religion or belief sexual orientationWhat employees should do if they’re bullied or harassedEmployees should see if they can sort out the problem informally first. If they cannot, they should talk to their: manager human resources (HR) department  trade union representativeIf this does not work, they can make a formal complaint using their employer’s grievance procedure. If this does not work and they’re still being harassed, they can take legal action at an employment tribunal.They could also call the Acas (Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service) helpline for advice:Acas helplineTelephone: 0300 123 1100Textphone: 18001 0300 123 1100 Monday to Friday, 8am to 6pm Find out about call charges
Related contentBeing taken to an employment tribunal Employers: preventing discrimination Solve a workplace disputeMake a claim to an employment tribunal
You can also read Acas guidance on discrimination and bullying.Employers’ responsibilitiesEmployers are responsible for preventing bullying and harassment - they’re liable for any harassment su?ered by their employees.Anti-bullying and harassment policies can help prevent problems. Acas has produced g uidance for employers on preventing and handling bullying and harassment.Explore the topicYour rights and legal supportContracts of employment and working hours Trade unions and workers rightsYour contract and working hours Your rights at work and trade unionsServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Home  Housing , local and community  Land registration  Land registration searches, fees and formsYour property boundaries
OverviewIf you live in England or Wales, there’s usually no record of:  the exact boundary between two properties who owns the hedge, wall, tree or fence between 2 properties This guide is also available in Welsh (Cymraeg).You can get an idea of where the boundaries for your property are by looking at its title plan. Most title plans do not show exact boundaries - you usually do not need to have the exact boundaries recorded anywhere.The rules are di?erent in Scotland and Northern Ireland.You can apply to get the title plan corrected if you think there’s a mistake on it.Record the boundary more preciselyYou can do this by: making a boundary agreement with your neighbour  applying for a determined boundary
Related contentRegistering land or property with HM Land RegistryResolving neighbour disputesSearch for land and property information
 NextMake a boundary agreement with your neighbourView a printable version of the whole guideExplore the topicPlanning permission and building regulationsServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking, jobs and pensionsGet involved
Getting legal support and adviceFind legal advice and informationLegal aidCheck if you can get legal aidCivil Legal Advice (CLA)Consumer advice and complaintsConsumer rightsConsumer adviceComplain about a limited companyComplain about a financial service or productComplain about a claims companyReport a loan sharkReport a problem with a medicine or medical deviceReporting an accessibility problem on a public sector websiteCheck if a website can legally sell medicines online in Northern IrelandCheck if a claims company is registeredSelling , buying and carrying knives and weaponsData protection and accessing informationData protectionHow to make a freedom of information (FOI) requestRequest CCTV footage of yourselfBiometric data recordsDiscrimination and disability rightsDisability rightsDiscrimination: your rightsDefinition of disability under the Equality Act 2010Problems at work, disciplinary and grievance proceduresWorkplace bullying and harassmentRaise a grievance at workSolve a workplace disputeDisciplinary procedures and action against you at workCheck if you need to tell someone about your criminal recordResidential property and neighbour disputesResolving neighbour disputesSolve a residential property disputeUsing reasonable force against intrudersBaili? powers when they visit your homeServices and informationGovernment activityBenefitsEducation and learningDepartmentsBirths, death, marriages and careEmploying peopleNewsBusiness and self-employedEnvironment and countrysideGuidance and regulationChildcare and parentingHousing and local servicesResearch and statisticsCitizenship and living in the UKMoney and taxPolicy papers and consultationsCrime, justice and the lawPassports, travel and living abroadTransparencyDisabled peopleVisas and immigrationHow government worksDriving and transportWorking , jobs and pensionsGet involved
Template v5       WILTSHIRE POLICE & POLICE AND CRIME COMMISSIONERAcceptable Use Policy(Force Assets, Systems, Email and Telephone)Date of Publication: June 2021 Version:	3.0Next Review Date:	June 2023
TABLE OF CONTENTS1. ACCEPTABLE USE POLICY STATEMENT	4APPLICABILITY	42. ACCEPTABLE USE OF FORCE SYSTEMS	43. GENERAL PRINCIPLES	54. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES	55. ACCEPTABLE USE OF ASSETS	56. USER IDENTIFICATION, ACCESS AND MONITORING	67. INFORMATION CLASSIFICATION, LABELLING AND HANDLING	68. SECURE HANDLING OF MEDIA AND DOCUMENTATION	69. DATA PROTECTION LEGISLATION AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL INFORMATION	710. COMPUTER MISUSE LEGISLATION	711. SITE SECURITY	712. REMOVAL OF PROPERTY AND SECURITY OF EQUIPMENT OFF-PREMISES	713. PASSWORD SECURITY	714. CLEAR DESK AND CLEAR SCREEN POLICY	815. REMOTE WORKING	816. REPORTING INFORMATION SECURITY INCIDENTS	817. SECURE DISPOSAL AND RE-USE OF EQUIPMENT	918. PROTECTION AGAINST MALICIOUS CODE	919. SECURITY EDUCATION AWARENESS & TRAINING	1020. SECURITY OPERATING PROCEDURES (SYOPS)	1021. INCIDENT REPORTING	1022. USE OF SPECIFIC SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT	1022.1 Law Enforcement Applications (PNC, NICHE, Storm etc.)	1022.2 E-Mail/Messaging Security and Secure Internet Access	1122.3 Information Security in Conversations and with the Use of (Mobile and Fixed) Telephone and recording Equipment	1322.4 Airwave Radios	1323. ACCESS CONTROL LEVEL (ACL) OF NICHE AND OTHER RECORDS	1424. MONITORING, INTERCEPTION AND AUDIT	1525. BREACH OF POLICY ESCALATION PROCEDURES	1626. AUTOMATED RESTRICTIONS	17POLICY AIM	17LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCE	17
RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTS	18AUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE	18DATA PROTECTION	18FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000	18MONITORING AND REVIEW OF THIS POLICY	18WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICY	18DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATION	19
1. ACCEPTABLE USE POLICY STATEMENTThis policy is required to assist all Wiltshire Police Officers, Police and OPCC Staff, Special Constables, Volunteers and all contracted third parties identify what they can and cannot do when accessing Wiltshire Police/OPCC systems, and to provide clear guidance around what constitutes Law Enforcement Purposes.This policy supports the organisations values and behaviours, in particular acting with impartiality, integrity, public service and transparency at all times.This policy sits alongside the Microsoft Office 365 Acceptable Use Procedure which governs and provides advice on the use of Microsoft Office 365, Teams and One Note.What is Information Security? Information security is the preservation of the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information:a. Confidentiality - Protecting sensitive or personal information from unauthorised disclosure, both to outsiders, and to staff who have no requirement to access such information in the course of their duties;b. Integrity - Safeguarding the accuracy and completeness of information and information processing methods;c. Availability - Ensuring that information and associated services are available to meet the needs of the Force.Information security is required during the entire lifecycle of a piece of information, from the moment it is collected or created, throughout its usage, through to ultimate disposal. Appropriate measures need to be applied to ensure that information security is maintained. Information security promotes trust and confidence in the Force’s services, practices and IT infrastructure and systems.The achievement of information security needs a combination of policies, standards, procedures, guidelines, appropriate organisational structure, physical security considerations, and measures to safeguard the ICT network infrastructure and information systems. This policy contains a summary of the expectations from all users of the Force’s systems and applications. Where relevant, links to more detailed guidance will be provided. This Acceptable Use Policy (AUP) is part of a wider Information Security Policy Framework (ISPF) which governs the security principles that applies to the use of the Force’s systems and the ISPF should be read in conjunction with this document.APPLICABILITYThis policy is applicable to all systems and applications used by Wiltshire Police and the OPCC and applies to all Police Officers, Police and OPCC Staff, Special Constables, Volunteers and all contracted third parties, whether they are working from Wiltshire Police/OPCC premises, Shared (Partner) premises, any office, remote location, home address, or whilst working remotely.2. ACCEPTABLE USE OF FORCE SYSTEMSThe standards of behaviour and the integrity of those who work within the police service are constantly under close scrutiny. It is imperative that Wiltshire Police Officers and Wiltshire Police/OPCC Staff conduct their business in a way which maintains public confidence. Information is provided to Wiltshire Police and the OPCC via a number of sources and there is a legal requirement that this information will be treated confidentially and only accessed for a legitimate reason: Law Enforcement Purposes or purposes covered by other policies or legal requirements.Law Enforcement Purposes are defined as: prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security.
Where police officers or Wiltshire Police/OPCC staff abuse their position and view confidential information without a legitimate Law Enforcement Purpose, this serves not only to undermine the trust of the public, but could also be a breach of the Data Protection Act 2018, the Computer Misuse Act 1990, the Code of Ethics, Standards of Professional Behaviour, and Force Policy.3. GENERAL PRINCIPLESPersonnel are able to use the Wiltshire Police/OPCC IT and telephony systems for Wiltshire Police and OPCC business use and appropriate personal use as described throughout this document.The general principles are that users must:ï Use the facility in a responsible manner by adhering to the Code of Ethics, the Standards of Professional Behaviour;ï Comply with all existing Information Systems and Information Security policies;ï Ensure they are aware of their personal responsibilities;ï Not access unsuitable material;ï Not use the systems for non-work related issues during working time, except during refreshment or other authorised breaks.Permission to use the systems for personal use may be withdrawn if personal use adversely affects official use. This will be determined by Line Managers measured against any adverse impact on official use.4. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIESThe Force Information Security Policy Framework (ISPF) contains detailed information of the various role and responsibilities that are associated with the management of information security within the Force.5. ACCEPTABLE USE OF ASSETSAll IT devices to be used in connection with the Wiltshire Police/OPCC information must be formally configured and authorised by the ICT Department and approved by relevant information asset owners or line managers before use.Staff must follow the Agile Working and Mobile Computing Policy and must not use personally owned (e.g. bring your own devices) electronic devices to process the Force’s information or process force Information on non-police endorsed systems or software.All of the ICT equipment and software that you have been assigned remains the property of the Force/OPCC. You have an obligation to ensure that this equipment and software is safeguarded and only used as intended:a) You must not remove any ICT equipment from the Force’s premises without Line Managers approval;b) You must always take care of ICT equipment allocated for your use, and treat it as if it is your own;c) You must protect your ICT equipment against theft and unauthorised access;d) Where at all possible, you must not expose your IT equipment to any environmental hazard, such as extremes of temperature;e) You must not install any software or attempt to use any USB device that has not been authorised by the ICT Department. If you require any software or other devices for your work, you must consult your line manager and the ICT Department;f) You must not modify your IT equipment in any way; this includes any amendments to the hardware and software configuration;g) You must always report any IT problems to the ICT Service Desk.a) 
6. USER IDENTIFICATION, ACCESS AND MONITORINGYou must only access and use the Police/OPCC IT network, systems and applications if you are authorised to do so. If you are granted access, it is so that you are able to perform your duties efficiently.You must remember that access has been granted for your sole use by means of a unique user account and password. This applies to the different user accounts that may be granted to you for access to the Police/OPCC network, information systems and applications.You must not give details of your user account and password to anyone, including your line manager; you must not share any user account allocated to you with anyone else. Wiltshire Police and OPCC (within its legal rights) is able to track the activities of each user via their user account, and identify exactly what they have accessed and what actions have been taken. If it is your user account that is logged as attempting an unauthorised or illegal action, you may be held responsible. It is in your interests to ensure that you safeguard your user account and password details at all times.In order to ensure compliance with legislation, regulations, contracts and its information security policies, the Force reserves the right to monitor user activities.7. INFORMATION CLASSIFICATION, LABELLING AND HANDLINGThe Force’s Information Classification and Handling Policy provides you with the guidance you require to be able to do your job in a secure and responsible manner. The Information Management Policy applies to all information irrespective of its form, including electronic information, e.g. databases and files, computer media based information, e.g. stored on CDs, DVDs and USB devices, and paper based documents.All information that is handled by the Wiltshire Police and OPCC has a classification to determine the level of security it requires and the way in which it must be handled.For every document you produce, you are personally responsible for defining its classification on behalf of the Force. When you are classifying information, you must consider its sensitivity and how much protection it needs.Appropriate safeguards must be put in place to protect personal, sensitive and/or information classified under the Government Security Classification Scheme (GSC) (see Government Security Classification Guidance Handout for details). The extent of the safeguards should be in proportion to the degree of risk posed.When using the Wiltshire Police and OPCC information, you must handle it in a secure manner based upon its classification.8. SECURE HANDLING OF MEDIA AND DOCUMENTATIONCare must be taken to protect all documentation and computer media, e.g. DVDs, CDs and USB storage devices, containing sensitive and critical information, and measures must be taken to ensure secure storage, transit, copying, reuse and disposal of computer media and documentation.When exchanging information within the Force or between other Forces/trusted organisations, it is vital to assess the sensitivity of the information and handle it in accordance with any security classification and handling requirements and the Force’s Information Management Policy.When dealing with hard copy documents, always ensure that you are aware of their security classification and handling requirements. Sensitive documents should not be left unattended on desks, printers and other equipment where they are vulnerable to unauthorised access and theft.
You must always lock sensitive computer media and documents away when left unattended.With the global messaging opportunities presented by Internet based email, users are specifically reminded that they must adhere to the Data Protection Act 2018 and UK General Data Protection Regulations (UK-GDPR) when transferring/sending personal data to a country or territory outside the European Economic Area.Personal data shall not be transmitted to a country or territory outside the UK unless that country or territory ensures an adequate level of protection for the rights and freedoms of data subjects in relation to the processing of personal data. The Force Data Protection Officer should be contacted if further information is required.9. DATA PROTECTION LEGISLATION AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL INFORMATIONAll Wiltshire Police officers/police and OPCC staff and 3rd parties must have a clear understanding of their personal responsibilities under the data protection legislation and how this affects the processing of personal data. Reference should be made to the Data Protection Policy.Wiltshire Police and OPCC will take criminal and/or disciplinary action against any category of person mentioned above who wilfully, without authority or defined policing purpose or other statutory or business purpose, accesses and/or misuses personal data held by either the Force or PCC. Any use of personal data that does not have a defined policing or other statutory or business purpose is likely to constitute a misuse.10. COMPUTER MISUSE LEGISLATIONAll users must comply with the Computer Misuse Act 1990. The Computer Misuse Act, generally aimed at computer ‘hacking’, specifies offences for any unauthorised access to internal organisational systems. The Act introduces three basic criminal acts:ï Unauthorised access;ï Unauthorised access with intent to commit a further serious offence;ï Unauthorised modification of computer material.Staff (and other authorised users) must only access systems they are authorised to use. It is an offence to knowingly gain unauthorised access to a computer system, and this could result in a fine or imprisonment.11. SITE SECURITYPhysical security involves protecting Wiltshire Police & OPCC premises, staff, information and ICT assets from unauthorised physical access and physical security threats, e.g. fire and wilful damage. All Wiltshire Police & OPCC staff must support site security requirements and adhere to the Physical Security Policy.12. REMOVAL OF PROPERTY AND SECURITY OF EQUIPMENT OFF-PREMISESAll staff are responsible for protecting authorised off-site equipment (allocated to them) against physical security threats and unauthorised access. Staff must also ensure that off-site Force information is securely handled in line with the Force’s Information Management Policy.13. PASSWORD SECURITYPasswords are a key control to maintain information security. They help ensure that only authorised persons have access to the Force’s IT network and systems.
Passwords MUST NOT be easily identifiable/guessable or contain personal information that could be easily identified by hackers (e.g. names, dates, sports teams, pet names, vehicle registration numbers). In order for your password to be effective and remain secure, you must comply with the Password Policy which details the length and composition requirements for Force passwords.You should avoid writing your passwords down, whether it’s in your mobile phone or on a post-it note. It might seem like a helpful way to remember them, but if they get into the wrong hands it could put you and your account at risk. This is even more important when working from home as the risks are greater in the family home, for example they could be seen by family members or stolen in a burglary.14. CLEAR DESK AND CLEAR SCREEN POLICYMeasures must be taken to adequately protect against unauthorised physical access to the Police and OPCC information hosted on PCs, laptops, handheld devices (e.g. tablets, mobile telephones etc.), computer media (e.g. DVDs, CDs and USB storage devices), and paper documentation. Staff must adhere to the Force’s Information Management Policy and Records Management Policy.All staff must ensure that access to their user accounts is password protected when their computer devices are left unattended, even for a small amount of time, e.g. 1 minute by locking their workstation.All staff must ensure that all mobile equipment, e.g. laptops and tablets, sensitive computer media and sensitive documentation are not left unattended and insecure, but are appropriately stored in locked areas or facilities, e.g. locked cabinets, and that access to relevant keys is controlled.At the end of a working day, you must:ï Logoff your PC or laptop;ï Clear your desk, and lock all sensitive computer media and documents away in a drawer or cabinet with suitably restricted access;ï If you are a user of a laptop or handheld device, and you are not taking it with you, you must lock it away in a drawer or cabinet with suitably restricted access.15. REMOTE WORKINGRemote workers include all users who use the Force’s information and information processing facilities whilst not located on the Force’s premises, e.g. workers who are located in other organisations’ offices, working remotely and travelling. Home workers are users who have been authorised to use the Force’s information and information processing facilities whilst based at home. All remote/home working must comply with the Agile Working and Remote Computing Policy.16. REPORTING INFORMATION SECURITY INCIDENTSIn order for Wiltshire Police and OPCC to be able to manage and deal with security incidents successfully, they must be captured and logged.If you suspect or have knowledge of a security incident or security event, or a breach of the Force’s information security policies or procedures, or a software malfunction, or a security weakness in any Force building, network or information system, you must report the concern immediately to the Information Security Officer or ICT Security Officer and/or your line manager. If out of office hours and urgent, i.e. theft of ICT device, notify the FIM immediately.Examples of a security incident include:ï Physical damage to the Force’s IT equipment;ï Compromise/loss of sensitive documents and information, e.g. personal data;ï Unauthorised use of another user’s account (masquerading of user identity);ï 
ï Divulging a password to another user without authority;ï Improper use of e-mail or the Internet, e.g. harassing e-mails, downloading or distribution of pornographic images;ï Unauthorised copying of the Force’s information;ï Damage to the Force’s property that could impact information security;ï Access to the Force’s premises without authority; andï Theft of the Force’s IT equipment.It is vital that you report all security incidents. Withholding information and failing to report an incident could result in you being held personally liable. Staff must not attempt to deal with the security incident (other than reporting the incident). If in doubt, please contact the Information Security Officer, ICT Security Officer or your line manager for advice.17. SECURE DISPOSAL AND RE-USE OF EQUIPMENTAll of the Force’s information and software must be securely wiped from Force’s IT equipment before disposal or re-use of the equipment. All equipment intended for disposal and re-use must be returned to the ICT Department who shall securely wipe Force’s information and software from the equipment.18. PROTECTION AGAINST MALICIOUS CODEComputer viruses, spyware and other forms of malicious code exploit vulnerabilities in software programs and can cause loss and damage to the Force’s and OPCC information, software and IT equipment.Wiltshire Police and OPCC use a variety of products, e.g. anti-virus and software security patches, which are constantly updated to minimise the threat from viruses and other malicious code. PCs and laptops are also protected by these controls. You must not change or remove these controls on your Police/OPCC device, otherwise the ICT network and systems will become more vulnerable to the threat from viruses and other malicious code.In addition to these controls, Wiltshire Police and the OPCC is also dependent on its staff, who must remain vigilant to protect it from malicious code. You must ensure that:ï You do not introduce a virus or malicious code into the Force’s network, by downloading unauthorised or suspect software from the Internet or from computer media, e.g. DVDs, CDs and USB storage devices onto your PC, laptop or any Police/OPCC system;ï All software and data which originates from outside the Police or OPCC must be checked for viruses and malicious software prior to it being opened or used – if you need help, contact the ICT Helpdesk;ï If you are suspicious of a virus or malicious code, you must stop using your PC or laptop immediately and contact the ICT Helpdesk;ï If you receive a suspicious e-mail, you should not open it or the attachment or any hypertext link, as this may well activate a virus or other form of malicious code. Wiltshire Police and OPCC use an enhanced filtering system which will identify and tag ‘suspect spam’ emails with either SPAM or CAUTION. If you receive an email tagged with ‘CAUTION’ it may well be a valid email. If you feel that it is not or the email is tagged with ‘SPAM’ forward it to spam@wiltshire.police.uk for evaluation / confirmation.There may also be ‘hoax’ virus messages in circulation which are not actually viruses at all, but plain e-mail messages asking you to take some sort of action, such as deleting files on your computer and forwarding the message. These messages themselves are not infected with a virus, and are spread by playing on people’s fears, and fooling them into following the instructions. If you receive a message warning you of a virus, you must immediately contact the ICT Service Desk.
19. SECURITY EDUCATION AWARENESS & TRAININGAll personnel will receive appropriate instruction with regard to information security. At present this is covered by a mandatory NCALT MLE IM - IS training course.20. SECURITY OPERATING PROCEDURES (SYOPS)SyOPs, designed to assist in the efficient operation of Information Security detail the security standard against which all Information Security will be operated, define roles and responsibilities and notify users what they can and cannot do. All Users of Information Systems are required to comply with SyOPs at all times.21. INCIDENT REPORTINGIf you believe that you have accessed any record incorrectly it is your responsibility to report this to your supervisor and to make a note of the access and time it was reported. At this point, any further access of the relevant record(s) must cease.Supervisors must then determine whether the access was necessary for Law Enforcement Purposes.If you, as a supervisor, receive a report that any record has been accessed incorrectly (i.e. not for Law Enforcement Purposes) it is your responsibility to assess whether you believe the record was accessed incorrectly and if so, to report this to PSD or CCU.If you believe that a colleague has accessed any record without a legitimate purpose it is your responsibility to report this to either your supervisor, PSD or CCU.22. USE OF SPECIFIC SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT22.1 Law Enforcement Applications (PNC, NICHE, Storm etc.)The following conditions apply to the use of the Police National Computer (PNC), Police National Database (PND), NICHE, STORM, Tasking & Briefing Portal (TAB) and Force Data Search (FDS) but also applies to any other Wiltshire Police database or system.ï Any search or enquiry of PNC, NICHE, STORM, TAB or FDS must be justified as being for Law Enforcement Purposes; namely the investigation, prevention and detection of crime. This includes the legitimate accessing of information to supply to other agencies such as details of vulnerable victims or witnesses etc.ï The access must also be a part of your normal role. Conducting an enquiry in relation to a reported crime or incident clearly falls within the prevention and detection of crime.ï Researching PNC, NICHE, STORM or FDS out of curiosity, particularly where it involves looking at information regarding yourself, family, friends, acquaintances, neighbours or ‘celebrities’ is not permitted in any circumstances.ï If you believe you have a legitimate Law Enforcement Purpose to access details of a relative or acquaintance, then you must seek prior approval from a supervisor who will make a record of your request and make a decision as to whether it is appropriate for you to continue. You should also make a record of this request and the decision reached by your supervisor. Remember it is your responsibility to maintain your integrity.ï If you inadvertently accessed information regarding a relation or acquaintance, you have not done anything wrong, but you must cease any further research and draw this to the attention of a supervisor who may authorise your continued use providing it is for a Law Enforcement Purpose or ask for another officer or colleague to conduct the research. You should also make a record of this request, and the decision made by your supervisor.ï 
ï It is accepted that Local Crime Investigators may take an initial look at custody records relating to their assigned area at the start of their shift. This is in order to ascertain what work may be allocated to them and to assist them in organising workload priorities. Accessing custody records beyond the minimum to ascertain allocation (unless that record has been allocated to that LCI) is not permitted without prior approval from a supervisor who will make a record of that approval detailing why it is appropriate for the LCI to continue. The LCI should also make a record of this request, and the decision made by the supervisor.ï If you are a Reporting Person or Victim accessing any record on a force system (e.g. PNC, Niche RMS, Storm, FDS etc.) containing information relating to that report or incident is not permitted. If you inadvertently access information regarding or relating to that report or incident you must cease any further research, make a record of what has occurred and inform your supervisor immediately.ï Where you are a Reporting Person or Victim and a witness statement is required, it should be obtained by Investigating Officers. If you create a self-written statement it should be submitted to the Investigating Officer. Under no circumstances should you attach a statement, exhibit or any other document to the investigation.ï Where supervisors are approached to authorise a search of a Data System, the supervisor must make a considered decision as to whether it is appropriate for the staff member to continue with their enquiry. If necessary they should seek advice from CCU or PSD. A record must be made of the decision taken by the supervisor and the member of staff.ï If you are asked to search any confidential system on behalf of someone else you need to make a record of the request. This is to ensure that you can respond adequately to any later question regarding the justification for the search.All records of requests should be made in a Pocket Note Book (PNB), or some other suitable auditable system, so that if necessary it can be produced at a later date. See Pocket Notebooks and Other Notebooks Procedure.22.2 E-Mail/Messaging Security and Secure Internet AccessE-mail and the Internet are provided to you as a means of improving your communications, knowledge and effectiveness at work. Wiltshire Police/OPCC e-mail and Internet facilities are intended for business use, although limited personal use may be permitted, subject to approval by your line manager. Regardless, all usage of e-mail and Internet facilities is treated as the property of the Wiltshire Police/OPCC and must not be regarded as private.All staff must be aware that the Wiltshire Police and OPCC reserves the right to use monitoring tools to enforce Force policies and to produce periodic reports detailing use of its e-mail and Internet access facilities.Use of e-mail and Internet access introduces security threats such as malicious code attacks, e.g. viruses, unsolicited or undesirable e-mail, fraudulent attempts to acquire sensitive information such as passwords, police matters, unauthorised content, and breaches of legislation, e.g. computer misuse and copyright legislation. If you accidentally access any material which is not permitted, you must report this to your line manager and the ICT Service Desk immediately.E-mail is an insecure method of communication and messages may well be read by those who have no authority to do so. Before sending information via e-mail, you must first assess the classification and handling requirements of that information as detailed in the Government Security Classification Scheme (GSC) (see Government Security Classification Guidance Handout for details).
The following guidelines should be considered when using e-mail, the Internet and social media applications:ï Obtain confirmation of receipt of important e-mails, particularly those containing personal data;ï Wherever possible check e-mail accounts each working day;ï Reply promptly to e-mail messages requiring a response. Where prompt response is not practicable, an acknowledgement should be sent;ï When sending emails, authors should be mindful that the content of their email is consistent with the Standards of Professional Behaviour. Specifically they must demonstrate respect and courtesy towards the public and colleagues and they must treat all information with respect and disclose it only in the proper course of police duties;ï The sending of whole force email must be approved by an authorised personï Be mindful of the lines between professional and private/personal matters and the importance of keeping these separate;ï Remember that emails are records and any content containing personal opinion should be professional. Emails can be retrieved and discussed and you could be identified as the author of said opinion;ï When on annual leave or away from the office for a substantial period, the “Out of Office Assistant? should be activated. OOO messages should be succinct and should not include information detailing the reason for physical absence, duration of absence, your job title, contact information or detailed alternative contact information. Consider having one message for internal use and one for external use (see Mailbox Management Procedure).ï It is not acceptable to send emails to personal email accounts or home computers that relate to Wiltshire Police the OPCC or criminal investigations. The use of Wiltshire Police email and social media accounts should be for work purposes only;ï Regularly weed e-mail folders to ensure messages and attachments are retained no longer than necessary in line with the Mailbox Management Procedure;ï Ensure outgoing e-mail is accurately addressed;ï Unless authorised, software must not be downloaded and you must not access or use on-line computer games;ï You must not download or copy material in breach of copyright licensing;ï You must not seek, retrieve, display or download data in any format which is indecent, offensive, subversive, illegal or otherwise inappropriate and inconsistent with Force Professional Standards;ï It is not acceptable to register Force email addresses or telephone numbers with commercial websites for personal purposes;ï You must not transmit unencrypted information classified Official-Sensitive or above over the Internet, unless in line with the Government Security Classification Scheme (GSC) and the Force’s Information Management Policy;ï Excessive personal use of Internet browsing or email messaging facilities is not permitted. (To be determined by Line Managers measured against any adverse impact on official use).ï 
The above points relating to e-mail are also applicable to mobile applications and SMS messaging. Mobile applications must not be used to communicate Police/OPCC information unless these have been approved by the ICT Department.When using Social Networking Sites (either for personal or Police/OPCC business use) the Standards of Professional Behaviour for Police Officers and Police Staff should be taken into consideration.Advice and Guidance on the use of Social Networking Sites will be issued from time to time and can be found in the Force Social Media Policy.22.3 Information Security in Conversations and with the Use of (Mobile and Fixed) Telephone and recording EquipmentDue care must be taken when using telephones, voicemail, answering machines, facsimiles and recording equipment (e.g. photographic, video and audio equipment) to ensure the protection of sensitive information. All telephone users must be aware that any speech over the telephone is at risk of interception by unauthorised persons or groups. All staff must comply with the Force’s Information Management Policy and Data Protection Policy.It is important that before you conduct a telephone conversation in an open plan office area or outside of the Force’s premises, you must consider the nature of the topic you are about to discuss. If the conversation is of a sensitive nature, you must ensure that there is no possibility of eavesdropping. Remember to always be aware of who is around you when holding a confidential conversation. In addition, messages containing sensitive Policing information must not be left on voicemail and answering machines.When sending or receiving sensitive information by facsimile, you must ensure that the information is not compromised. Always check the recipient facsimile number to ensure that it is correct before sending information. Ensure that the information is collected immediately from the facsimile. Ensure that all sensitive information sent by facsimile is destroyed when no longer needed.With regard to mobile phones, the following measures must be adopted:ï The business use of mobile phones is regulated in line with this policy and the Wiltshire Police Force Laptop, Tablet and Mobile Phone Acceptable Use Agreement;ï Force issued mobile phones are provided for Wiltshire Police and OPCC business use. Excessive personal use of Force mobile phones is not permitted (to be determined by Line Managers measured against any adverse impact on official use);ï Telephones should not be left unattended and insecure;ï Mobile Phones unused for 90 days will be wiped. If the mobile phone is still required following this provision the officer/member of staff must request a new phone;ï Telephones should not be used for sensitive conversations. Where practicable, work and personal mobile telephones are forbidden from areas where highly sensitive information is discussed on a regular basis.22.4 Airwave RadiosThe conditions of use for Airwave radios is detailed in the Airwave Security Operating Procedure (SyOPs). No departure from or amendment to the SyOPs is permitted.All authorised users of Airwave radios have a personal responsibility for the preservation of the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information and information / communications systems / devices entrusted to them.
Once issued, whether on a long or short-term basis, users of Airwave radios become directly responsible for the for the physical security of the radio and any ancillary equipment. Equipment loss / compromise has the potential to endanger Wiltshire Police communications and the communications of other Airwave Service subscribers.22.4.1 User ResponsibilitiesOnce issued with an Airwave Radio, the following key responsibilities are transferred:ï In the event of a radio being lost, stolen or showing evidence of tampering, it must be reported as soon as is practicable to the Divisional Radio Custodian, or out of normal duty hours, to the Force Critical Incident Manager or Force Operations Room Supervisor. In addition to this, a 232 report must be submitted to Line Manager outlining the exact circumstances of the loss for further investigation.ï Holders must ensure that when the radio is not in use it is powered down, returned to secure storage at the end of each duty period, never left unattended and if unserviceable, returned directly to the Divisional Radio Custodian.ï Annual audits will be conducted on all personally issued radios and when requested to do so, holders must confirm they are still in possession of the asset. Failure to do so may result in the radio being disabled on the network as a security precaution.22.4.2 Supervisory ResponsibilitiesSupervisors and managers have a responsibility for ensuring all authorised users of Airwave Services comply with Infosec and other complementary policies and procedures. A proactive approach should be taken to ensure compliance with SyOPs including reporting actual or suspected instances of non-compliance or other breaches of security.Supervisors are responsible for the security and oversight of the Temporary Pool booking out process. The key to the Temporary Pool radio cabinet must be kept secure at all times and only accessible to authorised personnel.23. ACCESS CONTROL LEVEL (ACL) OF NICHE AND OTHER RECORDSRestricting access to Police databases may cause potential risk to individuals and the organisation as previous history and intelligence may not be visible to parts of the workforce. The request to restrict records will therefore need to be justified with a documented rationale balanced against the requirement to protect the integrity of an investigation.For guidance on the application/review/removal of ACL please refer to the Procedural Guide to the Application / Review / Removal of Access Control List (ACL) in NICHE RMS.23.1 Authorisation to Apply ACLAuthorisation to ACL a Niche record or entry on another type of database is to be authorised by the Senior Investigating Officer (Inspector / Police Staff equivalent or above). Such authorisation will only be given when certain circumstances apply. These will be as follows:ï A record relating to a matter which is currently subject of a covert policing operation;ï A record relating to a criminal offence where a member of a UK police force, (officer or staff) are implicated as a suspect and are currently subject of a criminal investigation;ï Exceptional circumstances – What constitutes an exceptional circumstance will be judged on a case by case basis by the SIO considering authorisation of ACL, but would need to be more serious and sensitive than the above.ï 
23.2 ACL ReviewsIt is the responsibility of the supervisor responsible for an investigation to review the decision and rationale for the ACL in line with the Hierarchical Crime Review Procedure. If the ACL is still required the rationale for continuing the ACL must be recorded on the Occurrence Enquiry Log (investigation log).If the ACL is no longer required the supervisor must notify CCU who will inform the Data Quality Team (DQT) accordingly.On closing an occurrence the supervisor must ensure that the ACL is removed by notifying CCU who will inform DQT accordingly (See Access Control Lists (ACL) in Niche RMS Procedural Guide).23.3 ACL For IntelligenceFor information on authorizing the use of intelligence ACLs, understanding the hierarchy of access to intelligence between departments, auditing access to ensure information security and the process for review and removal of intelligence ACLs please refer to the Access Control Lists (ACL) for Intelligence Policy.24. MONITORING, INTERCEPTION AND AUDITWiltshire Police and OPCC reserves the right to monitor all communications (including telecommunications) using Force communications systems and where appropriate inspect the content of Email transmissions, text messages, Internet browsing sessions and smartphone application use. Such activity is considered necessary for the purposes of:ï Protecting the network from malicious software, denial of service attacks and other external threats;ï To investigate or detect use of computers contrary to legislation, policy or procedure;ï Investigating and detecting improper use - preventing and detecting crime;ï Monitoring compliance with legal and regulatory requirements - ensuring that Staff comply with rules governing the use of communications systems;ï Quality control and training;ï Monitoring load level activity to ensure adequate technical provision of the service;ï In the interests of national security.AS SERVICES ARE PRIMARILY FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES, USERS MUST UNDERSTAND THAT THERE IS NO EXPECTATION OF PRIVACY.The Investigatory Powers Act 2016 (IPA) establishes a basic principle that communications may not be intercepted without consent and ensures compliance with ECHR and fundamental freedoms.The Investigatory Powers (Interception by Businesses etc. for Monitoring and Record-keeping Purposes) Regulations 2018 make an exception to IPA and allow businesses (including public authorities) to intercept communications transmitted across their systems without consent for certain purposes.The monitoring and recording of communications will be considered on a case by case basis and will be used:ï to ascertain compliance with regulatory or self-regulatory practices or procedures;ï for an appropriate method of ascertaining standards;ï to prevent or detect crime;ï to investigate or detect unauthorised use.ï 
Wiltshire Police Counter Corruption Unit is authorised to carry out the appropriate auditing of system use.On application, an authority to Intercept or record specific communications utilising Force communication systems must be given by the Deputy Chief Constable or the Chief Constable in their absence.Commanders and Departmental Heads are responsible for ensuring that all personnel who may use Force information and communication systems within their area of responsibility are aware of this authority and notice.In all cases, regulations require the Force to make all reasonable efforts to inform every person using or who may use the system that interception, monitoring and auditing may take place.Accordingly, all potential users of Force communication systems are informed that:ï You work within an organisation that deals with sensitive matters and information, much of which is protectively marked;ï You are required to maintain the highest professional and ethical standards;ï To ensure that these sensitivities and high standards are maintained, communications by all users using Force information and communications systems (including but not limited to telephone, radio, communications & messaging applications and E-mail) may be intercepted, monitored and recorded;ï Conversations conducted by all staff, contract employees and others who may use Force information and communication systems may not be considered to be private;ï When appropriate, recorded communications will be used in administrative, misconduct and criminal proceedings.25. BREACH OF POLICY ESCALATION PROCEDURES25.1 Purpose of ProceduresThe purpose of these procedures is to ensure proportional and uniform action is taken in response to all breaches of Force Information Security Policies and associated Security Operating Procedures. They apply to both routine random monitoring and user specific monitoring requests. All breaches will be dealt with under the Police Regulations or Police Staff Discipline Procedure.25.2 Roles and ResponsibilitiesThe Counter Corruption Unit is responsible for conducting activity and audit of Force information systems and stored data. The ICT Department will provide technical assistance as appropriate for activities requiring additional technical support.Potential policy breaches discovered by ICT Department staff during normal system administration must be reported to the Head of Information Management and Assurance in the first instance.Line managers are responsible for ensuring compliance with Force polices through routine supervision of staff use of Force information systems.The Chief Constable has authorised the Professional Standards Department to undertake routine Intelligence lead and random audit of Force systems to ensure that appropriate and proportionate compliance is in place.Requests for specific additional audit of activity of an individual member of staff’s use of Force systems must be made through formal application (Form 840).
Before the Counter Corruption Unit undertake specific auditing requests they must be authorised by the Head of the Counter Corruption Unit. Audits concerning the recovery and review of stored/Archived data are not subject to provisions under The Investigatory Powers (Interception by Businesses etc. for Monitoring and Record-keeping Purposes) Regulations 2018. See Para 2 for Monitoring and Intercept provisions and authority level.The results of audits undertaken in respect of authorised specific requests will be supplied to the requesting individual in the first instance. It is incumbent on that individual to take advice from the Head of Professional Standards or Head of Human Resources before proceeding with any form of administrative or disciplinary action.25.3 RecordsIn cases where criminal conduct is being investigated, Professional Standards will maintain monitoring records.26. AUTOMATED RESTRICTIONSTo enable the Head of ICT to provide an efficient service, automated restrictions are deployed on the network. These will include virus scanning and content checking of electronic data received from external sources and denying access to some Internet web sites. A small number of key post holders have unrestricted Internet access to fulfil intelligence gathering or other operational requirements.POLICY AIMThe primary aim of this policy is to set out the rules and conditions regulating the use of Wiltshire Police and OPCC systems including the use of the Police/OPCC telephone network and issued mobile telephones.In keeping with the objectives to inspire public confidence in the Forces ability to protect the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information assets and demonstrate commitment to maintaining professional standards, these rules and conditions are considered appropriate and necessary measures to:ï Minimise the risk of information assets being compromised;ï Minimise the risk of damage or disruption to the Force Wide Area Network;ï Ensure compliance with legislative, regulatory, contractual, organisational and ethical requirements;ï Maintain professional standards with regard to the content of electronic mail transmitted across or from the Force Wide System;ï Maintain professional standards with regard to Internet browsing;ï Maintain security and professional standards with regards to the use of the force telephone system.This Policy is issued to complement other Wiltshire Police/OPCC information security policy documents.LEGAL BASIS AND DRIVING FORCEExternal threats have the potential to disrupt the designed functionality of all or parts of the Force Wide System and present onward transmission risk to other users of the Criminal Justice Extranet. The following are the main references that mandate the provisions of this policy:ï HMG Security Policy Framework Tier 1-3ï Security Policy and Code of Connection for the CJXï The ACPO/ACPOS Information Systems Community Security Policyï 
ï The Data Protection Act 2018 / UK General Data Protection Regulations (UK-GDPR)ï The Computer Misuse Act 1990ï The Official Secrets Act 1911 – 1989ï The Telecommunications (Lawful Business Practice) (Interception of Communications) Regulations 2000ï The Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (RIPA)ï Investigatory Powers Act 2016ï The Investigatory Powers (Interception by Businesses etc. for Monitoring and Record- keeping Purposes) Regulations 2018RELATED POLICIES, PROCEDURES and OTHER DOCUMENTSAccess Control Lists (ACL) for Intelligence Policy Agile Working and Mobile Computing PolicyGovernment Security Classification Guidance Handout Hierarchical Crime Review ProcedureInformation Management PolicyInformation Security Policy Framework (ISPF)Microsoft Teams Meetings Recordings Acceptable Use Procedure Password PolicyPhysical Security PolicyPocket Notebooks and Other Notebooks ProcedureProcedural Guide to the Application / Review / Removal of Access Control List (ACL) in NICHE RMSRecords Management Policy Records Retention Schedule Social Media PolicyAUTHORISED PROFESSIONAL PRACTICEProfessional Standards Information ManagementDATA PROTECTIONAny information relating to an identified or identifiable living individual recorded as a consequence of this policy will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018, General Data Protection Regulations and the Force Data Protection Policy.FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT 2000This document has been assessed as suitable for public release.MONITORING AND REVIEW OF THIS POLICYThe Head of Information Management and Assurance will ensure that this policy is reviewed every two years.Regular proactive and reactive audits together with analysis of staff misconduct trends will be conducted by the Professional Standards Department to establish compliance with this policy. Non- compliance will be reflected in future policy reviews.WHO TO CONTACT ABOUT THIS POLICYThe Head of Information Management and Assurance for this policy.All queries relating to this policy should be directed to the Information Security Officer or the Force Policy Officer.
DOCUMENT ADMINISTRATIONOwnership:Department Responsible:	Information Management and Assurance Policy Owner/Author:	Keith LEWIS / NCC GroupTechnical Author:	Neil COWLING, Andrew IRVING Senior Officer/Manager Sponsor:	Deputy Chief ConstableRevision HistoryRevision DateVersionSummary of Changes07.06.20213.0Policy rewritten as part of the NEP.Text on: User identification, information classification, secure handling, Data Protection, site security, removal of property & security of equipment, password security, clear desk policy, remote working, reporting information security incidents, use of specific systems (including PNC, Niche, Email Telephone, mobiles & Airwave), ACL,monitoring interception and audit, breach of policy escalation and automated restictions added.17.03.20223.0Section 22.2: requirement for emails relating to on-going Inquiries into Child Sexual Abuse / Undercover Policing to be retained removed.ApprovalsThis document requires the following approvals:Name & TitleDate of ApprovalVersionContinuous Improvement Team07.06.20213.0JNCC (via email)07.06.20213.0DistributionThis document has been distributed via:Name & TitleDate of IssueVersionE-BriefEmail to relevant affected Staff/OfficersEquality Impact AssessmentHas an EIA been completed?If no, please indicate the date by which it will be completed. If yes, please send a copy of the EIA with the policy.  Yes	No Date:ConsultationList below who you have consulted with on this policy (incl. committees, groups, etc.):Name & TitleDate ConsultedVersionKeith LEWIS, Mark LEVITT, Laura NORTH, Neil COWLING, Jonathon JONES, Matt GIRDLESTONE11.03.20210.8Police Federation16.02.20210.8UNISON03.02.20210.8Implications of the PolicyTraining RequirementsThere are no additional training requirements for the implementation of this Policy.IT InfrastructureNo new IT infrastructure is required for the implementation of this Policy.