ACPO Position Statement: How to use DNA/Fingerprints in the Interview.National Investigative Interviewing Strategic Steering Group (NIISSG)
HOW TO USE DNA/FINGERPRINTS IN THE INTERVIEW.IntroductionThe matter of how investigators and interviewers deal with evidence of a forensic nature, generally fingerprints and DNA identifications, within the investigative interview particularly in respect of moveable objects1 is subject of a project called ODIS (Optimising Detections in Science). This has identified a number of process issues all of which have an impact on the interview itself2.BackgroundThere are many examples of effective working practices to maximise forensic detections in forces, particularly where dedicated ‘converter’ teams that contain the right mix of people are in place. Research suggests, however, that in other areas interviewers regularly do not plan and prepare sufficiently for the disclosure of forensic material both in interview and in pre-interview briefings with legal advisers.Forces with dedicated converter teams in particular do not have issues around selection of interviewing officers who have the necessary knowledge and expertise to maximise the forensic product in interview. Other areas, particularly those where Investigating Officers from a non-police background are being utilised, report the selection of interviewing officers as being problematic due to insufficient operational experience and training.THE ACPO POSITIONIn order to ensure the effective use of limited time and resources including the availability of interview rooms in busy custody areas it is essential that whilst recognising each case has its own individual issues a general straightforward approach to dealing with forensic identifications in a timely manner is developed1 Statistics on the current national situation in the UK regarding forensic identifications have identified that 25% related to people who had legitimate access, 18% were marks found on moveable objects and 13% of identifications were not actioned.2 The wider processes regarding the actioning and tracking of forensic identification packages are a separate issue that is not within the scope of this document.
and trained at the volume and priority investigations’ level (PIP level 1) for junior investigators.To begin with, the content and the quality of the information and packages that are supplied to officers should be to a minimum standard that is sufficient to maximise the product in the interview. For example, the information should contain enough detail regarding the exact location of the fingerprint/DNA identification, including the angle of any mark, it should indicate which finger the print came from, and should provide an interpretation from an expert explaining matters such as inverted marks found at scenes including photographic entirety shots. All of this information is essential to an interviewing officer to effectively challenge a suspect’s account if necessary.With regard to the interview itself, during the planning and preparation phase consideration should be given to the witness strategy particularly with regard to legitimate access to premises and marks found on moveable objects. This information from witnesses may be very important to the suspect interview and should be obtained prior to arrest.Bad character in the form of the suspect’s propensity to behave in certain ways can be useful supporting evidence for decision makers and interviewers and should also be researched during the planning phase for use in the interview.Another process issue of importance that has been identified by ODIS is detailed information being asked for and supplied to Custody Officers in the presence of suspects. The provision of such detailed information is not a requirement of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) but the custody officer needs to be aware of the grounds to authorise detention. On occasion this has included the exact nature of the forensic material being discussed which defeats the objective of planned staged disclosure. This is a wider issue for consideration of inclusion in Custody Officer training.A further issue includes supplying complainants with information about forensic identifications before suspects have been arrested, which has been communicated back to them and has a negative impact on the interview strategy
because the suspect is given the opportunity to concoct a legitimate access account as a result of the leaked information.The suspect interview strategy requires careful consideration and should be thought through and adapted to each individual case so the interview can be correctly phased. The decision on what to disclose and when is entirely a matter for the investigator and this position supported by case law.3The strategy should basically divide the interview and the pre-interview briefing for the legal adviser into two parts, this will differ on whether the evidence in the case is solely a scientific identification or whether there is other supporting evidence that can be tactically used. In cases where there is additional evidence to scientific material consideration should be given to withholding the existence of a fingerprint/DNA identification from the first pre-interview briefing and revealing it later in the process. In the cases where there is no additional evidence the pre-interview briefing should only reveal the offence under investigation, it’s location, identified time parameters and other very basic details; details of what the scientific material is and its location should not be disclosed during this first phase. This should provide adequate information to elicit a response regarding any legitimate explanation that can be explored allowing the interviewer to get to the heart of the matter. Suspects who do not respond or who offer untruthful explanations should be interviewed to develop potential adverse inference before revealing further information regarding the scientific material.This methodology should ensure suspects do not construct untruthful but plausible explanations for DNA/Fingerprint identifications claiming legitimate contact from information supplied too early in the disclosure process.It is possible that this approach may elicit a no comment interview but this should never be automatically assumed. In any event a no comment response can be advantageous to the prosecution when supported by scientific evidence.3 R v Imran & Hussain (1997), R v Nottle (2004), Ward v PSNI (2007).
At the conclusion of the first phase further information should be revealed with more specific information concerning the nature of the DNA/Fingerprint identification which can be developed and used in the challenge phase.AcknowledgementThis position statement was prepared by DCI Steve Hibbitt, an ACPO Approved Interview Adviser from Humberside Police.In the event of any queries about this position statement please contact either Gary Shaw at gary.shaw@npia.pnn.police.uk or Kevin Smith at kev.smith@npia.pnn.police.uk
ACPO Position Statement: The Presence of Supporters during Interviews with WitnessesNational Investigative Interviewing Strategic Steering Group (NIISSG)
THE	PRESENCE	OF	SUPPORTERS	DURING	INTERVIEWS	WITHWITNESSESIntroductionThe purpose of this position paper is to clarify the role of interview supporters for witnesses and to dispel the enduring myth that suggests that an appropriate adult is required during vulnerable witness interviews.BackgroundBefore the 1st April 2003 Code C of the Codes of Practice to the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) suggested that the presence of an appropriate adult was required during interviews with children and vulnerable adult witnesses. Specifically, paragraph 11.14 said:A juvenile or a person who is mentally disordered or mentally handicapped, whether suspected or not, must not be interviewed or asked to provide or sign a written statement in the absence of an appropriate adult unless paragraph 11.1 or Annex C applies.Over the years this paragraph led to a number of instances in which video- recorded interviews with child witnesses conducted in accordance with the Memorandum of Good Practice on Video-Recorded Interviews for Child Witnesses in Criminal Proceedings (Home Office 1992) were ruled to be inadmissible as a result of the absence of an appropriate adult even though there was no requirement in the Memorandum of Good Practice for one to be present. In response to this the ACPO portfolio holder for child abuse investigations of the day, Chief Constable Tony Butler of Gloucestershire, pressed the Home Office to clarify the rules around the presence of an appropriate adult during interviews with witnesses and this become more urgent as the provisions for video- recorded evidence-in-chief were extended to vulnerable adult witnesses in 2002.The question of whether or not an appropriate adult should be present during interviews with witnesses was finally resolved when the revised PACE Codes of Practice were published on 1st April 2003. The paragraphs of Code C have been
re-numbered a little so that what used to be 11.14 became 11.15. The revised paragraph in the most recent edition (2008) of the Codes now says:A juvenile or person who is mentally disordered or otherwise mentally vulnerable must not be interviewed regarding their involvement or suspected involvement in a criminal offence or offences, or asked to provide or sign a written statement under caution or record of interview, in the absence of the appropriate adult unless paragraphs 11.1, 11.18 to11.20 apply. See Note 11CThe effect of this is that appropriate adults are no longer required in interviews with witnesses.The ACPO PositionWhile appropriate adults are no longer required, witnesses who fall within the scope of the interview guidance that succeeded the Memorandum of Good Practice, Achieving Best Evidence in Criminal Proceeding: Guidance on Interviewing Victims and Witnesses, and Using Special Measures (Office for Criminal Justice Reform 2007) are entitled to an interview supporter if they want one. It is important to note that, unlike the Memorandum of Good Practice, Achieving Best Evidence refers to all investigative interviews with vulnerable, intimidated or significant witnesses they are recorded on video or not (Introduction, page 1, paragraph 1).The role of an interview supporter is quite different to that of an appropriate adult. The role of an interviewer supporter is effectively defined by Achieving Best Evidence in the instructions that should be given to them as follows:The supporter must be clearly instructed not to participate in the interview itself, whether by instructing or correcting the child, answering the interviewer’s questions, head nodding or facial expressions (paragraph 2.103).Interview supporters must be clearly told that their role is limited to providing emotional support and that they must not prompt or speak for
the witness, especially on any matters relevant to the investigation (paragraph 3.124 and 4.75).These extracts from Achieving Best Evidence suggest that the role of an interview supporter is a rather passive one confined to providing emotional support to the witness. In contrast, the role of an appropriate adult is far more active as suggested by the information that they should be given:If an appropriate adult is present at an interview, they shall be informed:ï they are not expected to act simply as an observer; andï the purpose of their presence is to:- advise the person being interviewed;- observe whether the interview is being conducted properly and fairly;       - facilitate communication with the person being interviewed. (Code C, paragraph 11.17 and Annex E).Given that there is no role for an appropriate adult in a witness interview, there is a risk that the witness’s evidence may be ruled inadmissible where a third party present during an interview with a witness behaves in manner more consistent with the role of an appropriate adult than an interview supporter and interrupts the interview process.The presence of an interview supporter is optional and there is no requirement in Achieving Best Evidence to inform witnesses as a matter of routine of their entitlement to one. It is rather a matter of common sense, where the witness may benefit from the presence of an interview supporter such as may be the case if they are young, disabled or very distressed it may be appropriate to solicit their views or those of their carers as to the presence of an interview supporter.It is important to preserve a degree of independence from the investigation when considering who might fulfil the role of an interview supporter. Other witnesses in the case, including those giving evidence of an early complaint, cannot act as interview supporters. Interpreters and intermediaries should also
not act as supporters; these different functions should not be vested in one person.AcknowledgementThis position statement was prepared by Dr. Kevin Smith, an ACPO Approved Interview Adviser and the National Vulnerable Witness Adviser from the Specialist Operations Centre of the National Policing Improvement AgencyIn the event of any queries about this position statement please contact either Gary Shaw at gary.shaw@npia.pnn.police.uk or Kevin Smith at kev.smith@npia.pnn.police.uk
ACPO Position Statement: Interviewing Child Witnesses in Major Crime InvestigationsNational Investigative Interviewing Strategic Steering Group (NIISSG)
INTERVIEWING	CHILD	WITNESSES	IN	MAJOR	CRIME INVESTIGATIONSIntroductionChild witnesses feature in many major crime investigations. The purpose of this positional statement is to give bullet-point guidance to Senior Investigating Officers (SIOs) on the recommended approach to assessing and interviewng child witnesses. It is not a comprehensive guide and is not intended to replace a detailed interview strategy.BackgroundA child witness is defined as being under 18 by Section 16 Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999 (YJCEA) as amended by Section 98 Coroners and Justice Act 2009. All child witness are defined as ‘vulnerable’ and as such are eligible for special measures1 by virtue of Part 2 YJCEA. Investigative interviews with child witnesses fall within the scope of Achieving Best Evidence in Criminal Proceedings: Guidance on Interviewing Victims and Witnesses, and Using Special Measures (Ministry of Justice 2011).The ACPO PositionChild Witness WelfareSIOs should not to assume that an interview would be too distressing for a child. It is quite possible that children who have witnessed a horrific crime make excellent and robust witnesses. The decision whether to interview or not should be considered in light of all available information and the reccomendations of a multi-agency strategy meeting if one is held. Where a muliti-agency strategy endorses a decision to interview a child it will usually be conducted jointly by approrpiately trained police officers and social workers.Interview AdviserAs with all major crime enquiries it is recommened that an interview adviser is deployed to the investigation.
Each child witness, their respective standing in the enquiry, and their specific communication needs should be considered individually within the interview strategy for the investigation.2 A child witness may also be a significant witness.Multi-Agency Strategy MeetingsWhenever consideration is given to interviewing a child witness, contact should be made with Children’s Social Services and the matter discussed. A multi- agency startegy meeting may be called by social services in order to assess any ongoing risk to the child.3 Whether a strategy meeting is held or not, a clear interview plan for the child must be recorded. It is often beneficial for the SIO to utilise local child protection officers in such situations, working at the direction of the SIO and in consultation with the interview adviser.4Additional Communication NeedsSome children may have additional vulnerabilities. An intermediary should always be considered, prior to any interview taking place, if there are communication issues with the child, such as with very young children, or children with any mental or physical disorder or disability which affects their ability to communicate.5UrgencyOn occasions there may be significant investigative necessity for an early, if not immediate, approach to a child, especially in time-critical cases where the child’s information can fuel fast track actions. In these circumstances there will not be time to hold a strategy meeting. In such cases the officers attending should ideally be child protection trained officers and be clearly briefed that a full investigative interview will follow in due course and that their immediate remit2 If the enquiry concerns the apparent organised abuse of numerous children by multiple suspects the local complex abuse protocols should be followed when approaching and interviewing potential victims and witnesses.3 Strategy Meeting protocols are laid out in the government publication ‘Working Together to Safeguard Children’. http://www.education.gov.uk/publications/standard/publicationdetail/page1/DCSF-00305-20104 Such strategy meetings are NOT confined to office hours only – all social services departments with a responsibility for child protection must provide a 24 hour duty service, seven days a week.
is to capture the key information only, by means of question and answer, using appropriate open questions.6 The officers should seek the consent of the child’s parent or guardian before the child is approached.7 Detailed notes of the location, time, date, who was present and exactly what was said must be recorded at the time.SuggestibilityChildren are especially vulnerable to suggestibility, and the SIO should be aware of contamination by either inappropriate questioning or by the influence of others. The logistics of interviewing several children and/or their carers who have witnessed the same event will need detailed planning so the risk of contamination can be minimized.ConsentWhere the witness is under 188 the consideration should be given to the guidelines set out by Lord Fraser in Gillick v West Norfolk and Wisbech AHA [1985] 3 All ER 402. The effect of these guidelines is that a child can consent in their own right if they are capable of understanding the implications of being interviewed as witness9. If a child cannot understand these implications the consent of a parent or guardian is required. It is important to note that Achieving Best Evidence deals with the issue of informing a child’s parents/guardians separately to consent: other than in wholly exceptional circumstances parents/guardians should be informed even where the child has the capacity to consent.If parental consent is not forthcoming consideration may be given to obtaining an Emergency Protection Order that includes a direction in respect of interviewing under Section 44 Children Act 1989 provided that circumstances are such that the child may be at risk of ‘significant harm’ In situations where an6 See 2.29 of ABE 2007 Initial Contact with Child Witnesses7 However there will be limited occasions where it appropriate to approach the child without parental consent – see the section on Consent below.8 The Mental Capacity Act 2005 also applies where the witness is over 16.
approach to the child without first obtaining parental consent is being considered, or where parental consent has, or is anticipated will be, declined then it is strongly recommended that a multi-agency stratgey meeting with social services takes place.10Further InterviewsIt is permissible to conduct additional interviews with child witnesses, but this should only be done where the SIO considers significant further information will be of considerable benefit to the investigation without any detrimental effect to the witness. Consideration should be given to consulting the Crown Prosecution Service before conducting a further interview with a child witness.Further GuidanceFurther guidance can be obtained from your local interview adviser, Child Abuse Investigation Team supervisor, the ACPO Approved Interview advisor for your area or the National Vulnerable Witness Adviser for the NPIA Specialist Operations Centre.AcknowledgementThis position statement was prepared by DS Jez Prior, an ACPO Approved Interview Adviser from Sussex Police.In the event of any queries about this position statement please contact either Gary Shaw at gary.shaw@npia.pnn.police.uk or Kevin Smith at kev.smith@npia.pnn.police.uk10 Local Authority Legal Services will usually apply to the court for such orders.
ACPO Position Statement: Necessity to ArrestNational Investigative Interviewing Strategic Steering Group (NIISSG)November 2012
IntroductionThe revised Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE), Code G (implementation date 12th November 2012) demands more detailed consideration by arresting officers of the necessity to arrest than has previously been the case. Increased emphasis is placed on the use of alternatives to arrest, such as the use of street bail and, specifically from an interview perspective, the use of voluntary interviews under caution.This document is intended to provide practical guidance to officers considering the necessity to arrest criteria from an investigative interviewing perspective. The subject of voluntary interviews under caution is contained in a separate ACPO Investigative Interviewing Steering Group positional statement.BackgroundThe implications of arrest on an individual even if no prosecution follows can be significant, including loss of reputation and reduced employment opportunities as a result of the arrest record appearing on enhanced Criminal Records Bureau (CRB) checks. The revision of PACE Code G was driven by a desire to prevent the unnecessary arrest of persons such as householders and others who use reasonable force in self defence and concerns about the position of teachers/school staff facing allegations connected with their employment. Case law1 has also evolved surrounding the necessity to arrest criteria which the revised Code G consolidates. Further drivers to increase the use of alternatives to arrest have come from within the UK police service itself. Austerity measures have led to forces reviewing policy and procedure seeking to identify efficiency savings, including reducing demand on custody centres.While the impact of PACE Code G on the decision to arrest is significant, it is essential for effective investigation that, while complying with the legislative requirements, an unintended consequence of operational officers become fearful1 Wren v CC Northumbria (2009, Farrelly and others v CC PSNI (2009), Richardson v CC West Midlands (2011), O’Hara v CC RUC (1997), Rollins v CC West Midlands (2010), Shields v CC Merseyside (2010), Hayes v CC Merseyside (2010).
of exercising lawful powers is not established, with a resulting negative impact on investigative interviewing and investigation in general. Investigating officers must not see a decision not to arrest as the default position even when suspects voluntarily attend the police station and should judge each case on its own merits after carefully considering all of the information available.The elements of a lawful arrest are that the arresting officer must have:(1) Reasonable grounds to suspect an offence has been committed and that the person has committed it; AND(2) Reasonable grounds to believe that arrest is necessary for one or more of the specified reasons toa) Ascertain the persons nameb) Ascertain the persons addressc) Prevent physical harm to self or another or suffering physical injuryd) Prevent loss of or damage to propertye) Prevent an offence against public decencyf) Prevent an unlawful obstruction of the highwayg) Protect a child or vulnerable personh) Prevent any prosecution being hindered by the disappearance of the person in questioni) Allow a prompt and effective investigation of the offence or of the conduct of the person in question.Each case must be considered on its own merits balancing the necessity and proportionality of the individual’s right to liberty with the situation of the victim, the circumstances of the suspect, the nature of the offence and the needs of the investigation.Officers must consider facts and information which tend to indicate the person’s innocence as well as their guilt. For an offence involving the use of force this should include the circumstances in which the law allows the use of reasonable force in defence of persons or property.
The ACPO NIISSG PositionAn officer conducting an arrest is responsible for making and justifying the decision to exercise their powers, the case of O’Hara v CC RUC (1997) decided that where an arrest is made solely on the order of a senior officer, the arresting officer must form the required reasonable grounds in their own mind before making the arrest. This should not be interpreted as meaning officers cannot conduct arrests when instructed to do so, it merely reinforces the need for arresting officers to form their own judgement of necessity based on the information supplied to them when briefed and directed by others.Code G requires officers to consider other practical alternatives to arrest such as use of street bail to compel the suspected person to attend a police station at a later time and date for interview or the use of voluntary attendance to conduct the interview. Specifically the Code states an officer who believes it is necessary to interview a person suspected of committing an offence must consider whether their arrest is necessary to carry out the interview.2 The use of the word ‘consider’ is important and does not suggest that a decision not to arrest should automatically be taken.Interviewing a suspect is a main line of enquiry and is rarely unnecessary in any investigation. Not only does an interview allow the gathering of material/evidence by questioning the suspect (including developing adverse inference from no comment responses and lies), it also allows the interviewee an opportunity to put forward any defence and offer an explanation including any admissions and mitigation.Nothing in Code G reduces the significance of a suspect’s interview as forming part of a prompt and effective investigation; the necessity to arrest to conduct the interview is a separate issue that could be influenced by a number of factors according to the circumstances of each individual case. Each case must be considered on the circumstances as they exist to the officer at the time and be decided on a case by case basis using professional judgement and discretion2 PACE, Code G Note for Guidance 2F.
concerning necessity and proportionality. The importance of documenting the decision making process for future scrutiny if necessary should not be under estimated.On many occasions a voluntary interview or an alternative course of action to arrest will be the most appropriate course of action, particularly when dealing with minor offences where the actions of the suspect if at liberty cannot influence the outcome of other enquiries.Officers considering the necessity to arrest to conduct a prompt and effective investigation from an interview perspective should consider the following which is not an exhaustive list:ï It is thought unlikely that the person would attend the police station voluntarily to be interviewed;ï It is necessary to interview the suspect about the outcome of other investigative action for which their arrest is necessary;ï Arrest would enable the anticipated delivery of special warnings which can only be given to persons under arrest and, therefore, cannot be used in a voluntary interview;ï The person has made false statements and/or presented false evidence;ï It is thought likely the person may steal or destroy evidence, collude or make contact with co-suspects or conspirators or may intimidate or threaten to make contact with witnesses;ï The complexity of the interview strategy, such as whether it involves only a single issue requiring interview (e.g. the lawful use of self defence), or whether other investigative activity which could be influenced by the suspect if not in custody is to be conducted, e.g. checking alibis, comparing accounts with other material, and gathering supporting evidence of the provable lie for future challenge;ï 
ï Whether it is necessary to detain the suspect at the police station to conduct other enquiries either during or following the interview, e.g. checking alibis, comparing accounts with other material, and gathering supporting evidence for further interview;ï The likely length of the detention period required to conduct such interviews and enquiries (including whether this is likely to be over 24 hours for indictable offences);ï Effective management of the interview process for multiple suspects without allowing them the opportunity to collude;ï The impact of the pre-interview disclosure briefing (PIB) to a legal representative and any tactics to be used such as phased or staged disclosure necessitating a series of interviews;ï Whether the suspect is already on bail for other offences which may trigger the necessity to arrest to prevent further offences or minimise the risk of harm to others;ï What considerations are required concerning disposal of the suspect e.g. necessity to remand in custody or impose bail conditions to prevent further offences, minimise the risk they present to others or secure their attendance at court;ï Whether any of the other grounds (a) to (h) above apply;ï Management of bail issues to ensure proper attendance by a suspect during an ongoing investigation;ï Where it is anticipated that bail is likely to be refused should the suspect be charged;ï 
ï The necessity to arrest should be kept under continuous review during the actual interview, as the conduct of the interviewee including their response to questioning could trigger any of the criteria and make arrest necessary, for example issuing threats or implicating other previously unknown suspects. This contingency needs consideration by supervisors deploying single interviewers or interview teams with non warranted powers.For a constable to have reasonable grounds for believing arrest is necessary, they are not required to be satisfied there is no viable alternative. However in all cases the officer should consider that arrest is the practical, sensible and proportionate option in all the circumstances at the time the decision is made. This applies equally to a person in police detention after being arrested for an offence who is suspected of involvement in a further offence and the necessity to arrest them for that offence is being considered.3Code G does not draw any distinction between dynamic decisions such as those made by incident response officers without the benefit of all available information and decisions on necessity to arrest based on the result of further investigation. The emphasis is on the circumstances existing at the time of the decision and the application of sensible and proportionate use of powers as judged on a case by case basis. In some situations officers considering arrest may not be involved in any later interview with the suspect and may lack expertise and knowledge of the detail and potential complexities of an interview strategy. For this reason it is difficult to provide definitive guidance for all circumstances other than the broad areas for consideration set out above which offer a wide variety of options.An area concerning arrest which directly impacts on a subsequent interview under caution is the information supplied to the suspect at the time of arrest and afterwards when presented to the custody officer. Code G4 clarifies that an arrested person must be given sufficient information to enable them to3 PACE, Code G, Note for Guidance 2C.4 PACE, Code G, Note for Guidance 3.
understand they have been deprived of their liberty and the reason they have been arrested as soon as practicable after arrest, including being informed of the nature of the suspected offence and when and where it was committed.The Code states suspects must also be informed of the reasons why arrest is considered necessary avoiding vague or technical language and helpfully includes ‘When explaining why one or more of the arrest criteria apply, it is not necessary to disclose any specific details that might undermine or otherwise adversely affect any investigative processes. An example might be the conduct of a formal interview when prior disclosure of such details might give the suspect an opportunity to fabricate an innocent explanation or to otherwise conceal lies from the interviewer’.This revision clarifies the position of Custody Officers receiving briefings to consider authorising detention. Arresting officers should repeat the same information to the Custody Officer in the presence of the suspect that was provided to the suspect when they were arrested. The Custody Officers’ role in authorising detention does not extend to investigating the rationale underpinning the reasons for which an arrest was considered necessary. Custody Officers will, however, need to be satisfied that ongoing detention should be authorised. Any further detail requested by Custody Officers concerning material in the case for the purposes of authorising detention should not be provided in the presence and hearing of the suspect because this might undermine the investigation.In conclusion the impact of Code G does not reduce the significance of a suspect’s interview in the investigation process; in fact it specifically recognises and includes reference to special warnings, information to be supplied to suspects prior to interview and other processes such as the management of multiple suspects. The emphasis is that necessity to arrest and the necessity to interview are entirely separate matters of professional judgement to be exercised on a case by case basis, if applied properly with defensible non-risk averse decision making the impact on the quality of the investigative interview should be minimal.
AcknowledgementThis position statement was prepared by DCI Steve Hibbitt, an ACPO Approved Interview Adviser from Humberside Police.In the event of any queries about this position statement please contact either Alan Greene (ACPO Custody) at alan.greene@gmp.pnn.police.uk or Gary Shaw at gary.shaw@npia.pnn.police.uk.
ACPO Position Statement:The Remote Monitoring of Suspect InterviewsNational Investigative Interviewing Strategic Steering Group (NIISSG)
IntroductionThe purpose of this position paper is to set out some guidance on the remote monitoring of interviews with suspects.Remote monitoring can improve the quality of an investigative interview with a suspect by ensuring that all the issues are covered, appropriate techniques are used at the right time and any investigative opportunities are thoroughly explored. It can also help with the quality control of interviews and with the training and development of interviewers.Its use should be viewed as essential when investigating major crime and it should be seen as an integral component part of any suspect interview strategy.BackgroundHome Office Circular 50/1995 describes the procedural requirements involved in remotely monitoring interviews with suspects. Even though it refers exclusively to the monitoring of tape-recorded interviews, it is still relevant today regardless of the increased use of digital technology.The ACPO PositionDecision MakingThe decision to remotely monitor an interview should be made by a Senior Investigating Officer or an Investigating Officer in consultation with, where appropriate, an Interview Adviser.1Custody RecordsCareful consideration should be given as to the staffing involved in remotely monitoring the interview.1 The role of an interview adviser is described in the National Investigative Interviewing Strategy, ACPO 2009).
The fact that an interview or part of an interview is to be remotely monitored should be recorded in the suspect’s custody record. The record should cover the purpose of monitoring the interview (e.g. to assist with the investigation) and should include the names of everybody monitoring it.Those involved in remote monitoring should not usually try to communicate with the interviewers during the interview because it is likely to disrupt the interview process. The need for interruptions can be reduced by having regular breaks between the interview sessions to give interviewers and those monitoring the interview an opportunity to consult each other.Equipment and Facilities Fixed EquipmentWherever possible any private consultations between the suspect and their legal adviser should take place in a separate room.Remote monitoring equipment must only operate when recording equipment in the interview room is switched on and the interview has commenced. This ensures that any privileged conversations between the suspect and their legal representative in the interview room remain confidential.A warning light should automatically illuminate when the remote monitor is activated. The light must be clearly visible to everybody in the interview room.A notice must be displayed in a prominent position in all interview rooms where remote monitoring equipment is fitted. The notice must cover the following points:ï That the room has the capacity for remote monitoring;ï That a warning light will be illuminated when the remote monitoring equipment is switched on;ï That the details of those monitoring the interview will be recorded on the suspect’s custody record.ï 
Portable EquipmentPortable equipment may be used to monitor interviews with suspects. If it is fitted with a warning light that illuminates when the remote monitor is activated a notice containing the same information referred to above should be displayed in the interview room. If it is not fitted with a warning light it is important that a separate room that is not fitted with recording equipment is set aside for privileged consultations between the suspect and their legal adviser; in these circumstances a modified notice should be displayed omitting any reference to a warning light.Interview ProcessThe interview process should proceed in accordance with PACE and current guidance. The contents of the warning notice should be explained to the suspect at the beginning of the interview and recorded on the recording media.AcknowledgementThis position statement was prepared by DS Andy Smith, an ACPO Approved Interview Adviser from Durham Police.In the event of any queries about this position statement please contact either Gary Shaw at gary.shaw@npia.pnn.police.uk or Kevin Smith at kev.smith@npia.pnn.police.uk
ACPO Position Statement:The Self Administered Interview (SAI) ToolNational Investigative Interviewing Strategic Steering Group (NIISSG)
IntroductionThe Self Administered Interview (SAI) tool was developed to obtain initial accounts from eyewitnesses to an event for which there may be multiple witnesses when resources are so restricted that traditional interviews are not immediately possible. The SAI tool aims to “facilitate an investigation by obtaining critical information quickly and effectively” (Gabbert and Hope, 2012).BackgroundFollowing successful laboratory-based trials of the SAI tool, the ACPO National Investigative Interviewing Steering Group (NIISG) supported field trials. These field trials related to the application of the SAI tool in an investigative context to determine the practical and evidential benefits that could be derived from its use. An evaluation of the SAI was carried out with participating forces and a report submitted to ACPO in January 2012.The evaluation report demonstrates some positive emerging results from the field trials. Feedback from participating forces has reported that the SAI tool has resulted in the identification of additional significant witnesses to an event and that it has been of assistance when subsequently obtaining more detailed accounts. The evaluation includes two case studies involving the use of the SAI tool that have progressed to Court. Challenges to the use of the SAI tool were made in one of these cases but were later dropped when further information was provided concerning the tool and the rationale for its use was fully accepted by the Court.There was agreement in the evaluation that the SAI tool appears suited for use in situations where there are multiple witnesses and limited police resources. In such cases, its use helps to determine which individuals should be prioritised for an investigative interview.The ACPO PositionDespite this positive feedback it must be acknowledged that these findings can only be seen as suggestive to date due to the limited nature of the evaluation. It
is only based upon four case studies from UK forces and a survey from one force where eight respondents had used the tool in an investigative context.The current evaluation of the SAI tool lacks sufficient detail for the NIISG to endorse its application with confidence in an investigative setting. A more thorough empirically-based and in-depth evaluation needs to be conducted against each of the three objectives set down in the original proposal for the field trials. It is particularly important that any further evaluation includes the implications for the use of the tool in the Court process; the incidents to which it is best applied; the procedures that would need to be developed to ensure its appropriate use within the investigative context; and, the financial implications for Forces associated with its use.It is important to note that the SAI is not intended to replace an investigative interview; it is simply a tool that supports the interview process.AcknowledgementThis position statement was prepared by Dr. Nicky Miller, Principal Research Officer (Knowledge), National Policing Improvement Agency (NPIA).In the event of any queries about this position statement please contact Dr. Nicky Miller at nicky.miller@npia.pnn.police.uk, Gary Shaw (the National Interview Adviser) at gary.shaw@soca.pnn.police.uk or Kevin Smith (the National Vulnerable Witness Adviser) at kev.smith@soca.pnn.police.uk
ACPO Position Statement: Maximising the Sentencing Guidelines within a Suspect InterviewNational Investigative Interviewing Strategic Steering Group (NIISSG)
MAXIMISING	THE	SENTENCING	GUIDELINES	WITHIN	A	SUSPECT INTERVIEWIntroductionThe use Sentencing Guidelines during the interview process with suspects has been the subject of considerable debate and divided opinion amongst investigative interviewers. Responses range from not mentioning the guidelines at all at any stage in the interview process to reference within the pre interview briefing to solicitors and alluding to them in the engage and explain phase within the interview itself. At the present time there is no consistent approach to such use.BackgroundThe use of a sliding scale of judicial credit when sentencing taking into account the stage at which a guilty plea is entered is a statutory obligation1 and the subject of guidance by the Sentencing Guidelines Council. The critical time for determining the reduction for a guilty plea is the first reasonable opportunity for the defendant to have indicated a willingness to plead guilty. This may vary with a wide range of factors and should be judged on each individual case including:(a) The first reasonable opportunity may be the first time that a defendant appears before the court and has the opportunity to plead guilty;(b) But the court may consider that it would be reasonable to have expected an indication of willingness even earlier, perhaps whilst under interview.For (a) and (b) to apply the court will need to be satisfied that the defendant (and any legal adviser) would have had sufficient information about the allegations.21 Criminal Justice Act 20032 Reduction in Sentence for a Guilty Plea – Sentencing Guidelines Council, Definitive Guideline 2007.
A core issue is whether the use of Sentencing Guidelines to initiate an early admission could be a potential breach of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act (PACE) 1984 by being construed as an inducement, or whether such use may unduly influence an innocent or suggestible person to make false admissions rendering the interview unreliable and inadmissible. It is important to recognise the danger of formulating a prescriptive “one size fits all” process for this reason.In addition sentencing is ultimately at the discretion of the court and can be a complex issue including consideration regarding the dangerousness of the offender, their overall criminality, the weight of evidence balanced against the guilty plea and a range of other factors including whether the sentence is fixed by law..Balanced against this is the duty of the solicitor to act in the best interests of their client as well as their role as defined in PACE i.e. “The solicitor’s only role in the police station is to protect and advance the legal rights of their client. On occasions this may require the solicitor to give advice which has the effect of their client avoiding giving evidence which strengthens a prosecution case” (extract from PACE Code C, note 6D).Acting in the best interest of their client includes looking for the most favourable outcome regarding disposal, such a consideration should include obtaining maximum discount for any guilty plea and providing realistic advice based on the information provided by the police, this includes factors such as remorse and assistance provided by the suspect.Due to legal privilege it is difficult to assess whether legal advisers (with varying experience) are fulfilling these obligations based on the pre interview briefing supplied to them without raising this in interview with the interviewee.The ACPO PositionBased on these issues a uniformed approach should be established in each force including the following points:
ï That while they may be considered during the planning stage of the interview, the use of Sentencing Guidelines use should be tailored to each particular interviewee and the circumstances of their case. The blanket use of Sentencing Guidelines should be avoided.ï Sentencing Guidelines should only be discussed during the pre-interview briefing with the suspect’s legal adviser which should be delivered in written format and preferably tape recorded to preserve the integrity of the process.ï A suitable form of words should be formulated for use in the briefing to the legal representative, this should not be able to be misconstrued as an inducement but be short and simple enough to serve as a reminder for the legal representative to discuss the subject in their consultation.ï Consideration should be given in the planning stage to the interviewee’s vulnerability to suggestion, compliance or acquiescence. Sentencing Guidelines should not be used where there is a risk or suspicion of such vulnerability.ï Sentencing Guidelines should not be used with unrepresented suspects.ï Sentencing Guidelines may be considered for use with legally represented juveniles subject to a suitable assessment regarding vulnerability to suggestion.ï Consideration should be given to when in the pre-interview briefing phase Sentencing Guidelines should be referred to i.e. before the first interview or after final disclosure if this has been phased.ï Any admissions should be explored in detail to provide corroborating information.ï 
AcknowledgementThis position statement was prepared by DCI Steve Hibbitt, an ACPO Approved Interview Adviser from Humberside Police.In the event of any queries about this position statement please contact either Gary Shaw at gary.shaw@npia.pnn.police.uk or Kevin Smith at kev.smith@npia.pnn.police.uk
ACPO Position Statement: The Use of ‘Truth and Lies’, Declarations and Oaths in Video-Recorded Interviews with WitnessesNational Investigative Interviewing Strategic Steering Group (NIISSG)
THE USE OF ‘TRUTH AND LIES’, DECLARATIONS AND OATHS INVIDEO-RECORDED INTERVIEWS WITH WITNESSESIntroductionOver recent years it has become apparent that interviewers are sometimes asking adult witnesses to demonstrate their understanding of truth and lies when it is not appropriate to do so. In addition, some interviewers have erroneously been asking witnesses to read out the declaration at the start of a section 9 Criminal Justice Act 1967 statement (MG11) or to take something akin to an oath before the commencement of a video-recorded interview. The purpose of this paper is to address these misunderstandings.BackgroundTruth and LiesIt seems likely that interviewers who ask adult witnesses to demonstrate their understanding of the concepts of truth and lies do so because they are confused as to the limitations of this requirement as set out in Achieving Best Evidence in Criminal Proceeding: Guidance on Interviewing Victims and Witnesses, and Using Special Measures (Office for Criminal Justice Reform 2007). It may possibly be the case that some interviewers who were originally trained to interview children do not realise that it is not applicable to most adult witnesses1. It may also be the case that some interviewers have misread the section about truth and lies in the vulnerable witnesses’ chapter of Achieving Best Evidence (chapter 3, paragraphs 3.175 to 3.177) and wrongly concluded that it is applicable to all vulnerable witnesses.Criminal Justice Act DeclarationsInterviewers who ask adult witnesses to read out the declaration at the start of an MG11 may be confused about the difference between conducting an interview and preparing a statement. They may also believe that the requirement for a1 For example, The Stern Review (Home Office 2010) claims that some that some interviewers who are trained to interview children use the same techniques when interviewing adult complainants in rape cases.
written statement to include such a declaration also applies to a video-recorded interview when it is to be played as evidence-in-chief2. It is also possible that some interviewers believe that if a witness is subsequently found to be lying that the only way in which a charge of perjury, wasting police time or attempting to pervert the course of justice can be pursued is for a declaration to be made at the beginning of the recording. All of these beliefs are incorrect.OathsInterviewers who have attempted to administer the oath are probably mistakenly assuming that the requirement for doing this when the evidence is given live also applies to pre-recorded evidence-in-chief.The ACPO PositionTruth and LiesThe requirement to cover truth and lies in witness interviews stems from assumptions made about the competency of certain witnesses prior to the implementation of the Criminal Justice Act 1991. In essence, it was assumed that children and some witnesses with learning disabilities may not be competent because they might not have sufficiently developed the concepts of truth and lies.While the legal requirement to discuss truth and lies was removed as a result of the Criminal Justice Act 1991 it was nevertheless seen to be a matter of good practice in the Memorandum of Good Practice on Video-Recorded Interviews for Child Witnesses in Criminal Proceedings (Home Office 1992) and in the Achieving Best Evidence guidance that succeeded it in 2002 (revised in 2007). Achieving Best Evidence has, however, always been clear that a discussion of truth and lies is only applicable the children3 and to vulnerable adult witnesses “where there is an issue as to whether the vulnerable witness understands the value and importance of telling the truth” (paragraph 3.176, Achieving Best Evidence 2007). Vulnerable adult witnesses are defined as those with a mental disorder,2 For example, page 1, paragraph 1 of Achieving Best Evidence.3 Currently under 17, will be under 18 when section 98 Coroners and Justice Act 2009 is implemented.
significant impairment of intelligence and social functioning (commonly interpreted as meaning learning disability) or a physical disability or disorder having an impact on the person’s ability to communicate (Section 16 Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999). In practice, the issue of whether or not a vulnerable adult understands truth and lies is only usually linked to adults with a learning disability. Achieving Best Evidence goes on to make it clear that “this is not an issue for all adult witnesses who have disabilities or a mental disorder” (paragraph 3.176). Truth and lies should certainly not feature in interviews with intimidated adult or significant witness interviews.Criminal Justice Act DeclarationsNational guidance has consistently drawn a distinction between conducting an interview and preparing a statement (see for example, The Practical Guide to Investigative Interviewing, ACPO 2004). A statement is invariably the product of the process of interviewing. It may be that some interviewers who ask witnesses to read out the declaration at the beginning of Criminal Justice Act statement do so because they do not fully comprehend the distinction between the process of interviewing and what is often its product, an MG11.Interviewers who ask witnesses to read out the declaration at the beginning of Criminal Justice Act statement because they think it is necessary to do so either to render the evidence on the video-recording admissible or so that a prosecution can proceed if the witness is subsequently found to be lying may have an incomplete grasp of the legislation that underpins witness interviewing. Section 9 Criminal Justice Act 1967 provides for the admissibility of a written statement in lieu of oral evidence provided that certain conditions apply; these conditions include the requirement that the statement contains a declaration along the lines of the one featured on an MG11. Section 9 only applies to written statements; it does not apply to video-recordings. Interviews with witnesses are video-recorded for two reasons; with a view to playing them as evidence-in-chief as is the case for vulnerable or intimidated witnesses or for accuracy and integrity purposes as is the case with significant witnesses. Where a video is made for evidence in chief purposes the application for the admit the recording as evidence-in-chief is made under section 19 Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999, NOT under section 9 Criminal Justice Act 1967. There is no
requirement in Section 19 Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act for a declaration. Where the witness is significant and the interview is video-recorded for accuracy and integrity purposes an MG11 is subsequently prepared from it and signed by the witness. In these circumstances, the MG11 is the witness’s evidence and the video-recording is unused material. The witness signs the declaration on the MG11 when the statement has been prepared after the interview; there is no requirement for a declaration on the video-recording. In any event it is not usual practice to ask a witness to sign a declaration at the beginning of any interview, whether video recorded or not, before a statement is prepared; the declaration is usually signed when the statement is prepared after the interview has been concluded.Interviewers who believe that the only way in which a charge of perjury, wasting police time or perverting the course of justice can be pursued in the event that the witness is subsequently found to have been deliberately engaging in falsehoods is for a declaration to be made at the beginning of the recording are quite simply incorrect. Charges of perjury, wasting police time and perverting the course of justice have never been contingent on section 9 Criminal Justice Act 1967 declarations.OathsInterviewers who attempt to administer an oath are mistaken because the witness is sworn retrospectively in court when the video-recorded interview is played as evidence-in-chief (paragraph 3.175 Achieving Best Evidence). Indeed Achieving Best Evidence quite emphatically states that “there should be no attempt to get the witness to swear an oath, either before or after an interview” (ibid).AcknowledgementThis position statement was prepared by Dr. Kevin Smith, an ACPO Approved Interview Adviser and the National Vulnerable Witness Adviser from the Specialist Operations Centre of the National Policing Improvement Agency.
In the event of any queries about this position statement please contact either Gary Shaw at gary.shaw@npia.pnn.police.uk or Kevin Smith at kev.smith@npia.pnn.police.uk
ACPO Position Statement: Voluntary InterviewsNational Investigative Interviewing Strategic Steering Group (NIISSG) November 2012
IntroductionThe revised Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE), Code G (implementation date 12th November 2012) demands more detailed consideration of the ‘necessity criteria’ by arresting officers than has previously been the case. This represents a cultural shift in policing that places more emphasis on the use of alternatives to arrest and, specifically, on increasing the use of voluntary interviews under caution.This document provides practical guidance to officers planning and conducting a voluntary interview under caution. The necessity to arrest criteria is the subject of a separate ACPO Investigative Interviewing Steering Group positional statement.The ACPO NIISSG PositionCode G requires officers to consider whether the suspect’s voluntary attendance is a practical alternative to arrest, but nothing in the revised Code reduces the significance of a suspect’s interview in the conduct of an effective investigation. Once a decision has been taken under Code G that a Voluntary Interview is appropriate rather than arrest the issues that follow should be considered.Voluntary InterviewsThere will be many occasions where a voluntary interview under caution is the most sensible and proportionate course of action. Voluntary interviews should be planned and conducted as thoroughly as they would for a suspect under arrest including:ï The explanation of the reason for the interview to be given to the suspect, ensuring no questioning about the offence is conducted outside of the formal interview;ï The explanation of why arrest is not considered necessary, ensuring there is no suggestion of coercion or misunderstanding that could lead to allegations of oppression or unfairness;ï 
ï The arrangements for obtaining legal advice;ï Identifying any vulnerability and facilitating any special requirements for the interview which would be considered if the suspect was under arrest, such as the use of an appropriate adult or an interpreter;ï Identifying the purpose of the interview with clear aims and objectives, these are an important point of reference should the suspect later withdraw their consent to be interviewed;ï Carefully planning the interview with a comprehensive strategy and a planned release of information that will assist the process. Decisions on what evidence and/or information to give to the suspect and their legal advisor before interview are still relevant to voluntary attendance.Information Supplied to the SuspectWhile balancing the need to supply sufficient information for a person to make an informed decision, when arranging a voluntary interview investigators must confine themselves to a factual exchange of information and avoid entering into a dialogue which could be construed as coercive or an interview outside the safeguards of PACE. Answering questions about the logistics and practicalities of the proposed interview does not amount to questioning for the purpose of ascertaining the person’s involvement or suspected involvement in the offence but asking questions about the evidence would amount to questioning for such a purpose.Suspects should be informed:ï Of the nature of the alleged offence including when and where it was committed;ï That to properly investigate their suspected involvement they must be interviewed under caution;ï 
ï That, in the circumstances, their arrest may not be necessary if they attend at the police station voluntarily to be interviewed;ï That if they attend voluntarily they will be entitled to free legal advice before the interview and to have a solicitor present during the interview;ï The date and time of the interview will take account of their circumstances and the needs of the investigation; andï If they do not agree to attend voluntarily at a time which meets the needs of the investigation, or having so agreed they fail to attend, or having attended they fail to remain for the interview to be completed, their arrest may be necessary to enable them to be interviewed.Information supplied to the person on the reasons for the interview must be sufficient for them to make an informed decision and should be consistent with what would be supplied to a person on arrest. This does not, however, extend to supplying detailed information about the investigation that has given rise to the reasonable suspicion.1Legal AdviceA person interviewed voluntary under caution is entitled to legal advice. No effort should be made to dissuade the person from seeking such advice2 and arrangements may be made prior to the interview if practical.Code G is clear that when legal advice has been requested, for a voluntary interview conducted at a police station or elsewhere, the interviewer is responsible for securing its provision without delay by contacting the Defence Solicitors Call Centre (DSCC).3 This means, therefore, that suspects are entitled to legal advice if they are interviewed at home and interviewers should comply1 PACE Code G, (Note 3).2 PACE Code C, paragraph 6.4.3 PACE Code C, paragraph 3.21.
with their individual force policy regarding allocation of unique reference numbers for voluntary interviews conducted elsewhere than at a police station.Conducting the InterviewAn accurate record should be made of the time a voluntary attendee arrives at the police station as this may impact upon custody procedures should their later arrest be necessary during the interview process.When a person attends the police station voluntarily to be interviewed by arrangement, their arrest on arrival at the station prior to interview would only be justified if new information has come to light after the arrangements were made which indicates voluntary attendance has ceased to be a practical alternative, their arrest is necessary and it was not reasonably practicable for the person to be arrested before they attended at the station.4The revised Code G clarifies the necessity to arrest versus necessity to interview debate which was often influenced by what action to take should the suspect leave the interview before its completion. In these circumstances the police are entitled to consider whether arrest is necessary to carry out or to complete the interview, this is a matter of judgement and will depend on whether the objectives of the interview have already been achieved.As with persons under arrest a pre-interview disclosure briefing (PIB) should be provided to any legal representative prior to interview. The content of the briefing remains a matter for the interviewing officer to be decided on a case-by- case basis. Pre-interview briefings should not be provided to unrepresented suspects at any time, including when making arrangements with suspects for voluntary interviews.The timing of the interview and its objectives in the context of the investigation should significantly influence decision making concerning the status of the interviewee. For example, if the decision is taken not to arrest but to obtain an early voluntary account under caution from the suspect (to focus the enquiry)4 PACE, Code G, (Note 2G).
there may be limited information available to disclose to the suspect, possibly little more than the offence under investigation, the purpose of the interview and there being no necessity to arrest. 5The conduct of a voluntary interview (with the exception of special warnings) is no different to that of a person under arrest and should be completed accordingly to achieve clear relevant objectives.In conclusion the impact of Code G does not reduce the significance of a suspect’s interview nor should it reduce its quality. The necessity to arrest and the necessity to interview are entirely separate and matters of professional judgement to be exercised on a case-by-case basis.AcknowledgementThis position statement was prepared by DCI Steve Hibbitt, an ACPO Approved Interview Adviser from Humberside Police.In the event of any queries about this position statement please contact either Gary Shaw at gary.shaw@npia.pnn.police.uk or Kevin Smith at kev.smith@npia.pnn.police.uk5 PACE Code G, (Note 3).